At four in the afternoon, nine miles had been easily accomplished.
According to the map which Paganel constantly referred to, the confluence of
the Waipa and Waikato ought to be reached about five miles further on, and there
the night halt could be made. Two or three days would then suffice for the fifty
miles which lay between them and the capital; and if Glenarvan happened to fall
in with the mail coach that plies between Hawkes' Bay and Auckland twice a
month, eight hours would be sufficient.

"Therefore," said Glenarvan, "we shall be obliged to camp during the night
once more."


"Yes," said Paganel, "but I hope for the last time."

"IT am very glad to think so, for it is very trying for Lady Helena and Mary
Grant."

"And they never utter a murmur," added John Mangles. "But I think I heard
you mention a village at the confluence of these rivers."

"Yes," said the geographer, "here it is, marked on Johnston's map. It is
Ngarnavahia, two miles below the junction."

"Well, could we not stay there for the night? Lady Helena and Miss Grant
would not grudge two miles more to find a hotel even of a humble character."

"A hotel!" cried Paganel, "a hotel in a Maori village! you would not find an
inn, not a tavern! This village will be a mere cluster of huts, and so far from
seeking rest there, my advice is that you give it a wide berth."

"Your old fears, Paganel!" retorted Glenarvan.

"My dear Lord, where Maories are concerned, distrust is safer than
confidence. I do not know on what terms they are with the English, whether the
insurrection is suppressed or successful, or whether indeed the war may not be
going on with full vigor. Modesty apart, people like us would be a prize, and I
must say, I would rather forego a taste of Maori hospitality. I think it certainly
more prudent to avoid this village of Ngarnavahia, to skirt it at a distance, so as
to avoid all encounters with the natives. When we reach Drury it will be another
thing, and there our brave ladies will be able to recruit their strength at their
leisure."

This advice prevailed. Lady Helena preferred to pass another night in the
open air, and not to expose her companions to danger. Neither Mary Grant or she
wished to halt, and they continued their march along the river.

Two hours later, the first shades of evening began to fall. The sun, before
disappearing below the western horizon, darted some bright rays through an
opening in the clouds. The distant eastern summits were empurpled with the
parting glories of the day. It was like a flying salute addressed to the way-worn
travelers.

Glenarvan and his friends hastened their steps, they knew how short the
twilight is in this high latitude, and how quickly the night follows it. They were
very anxious to reach the confluence of the two rivers before the darkness
overtook them. But a thick fog rose from the ground, and made it very difficult
to see the way.

Fortunately hearing stood them in the stead of sight; shortly a nearer sound
of water indicated that the confluence was at hand. At eight o'clock the little
troop arrived at the point where the Waipa loses itself in the Waikato, with a
moaning sound of meeting waves.


"There is the Waikato!" cried Paganel, "and the road to Auckland is along its
right bank."

"We shall see that to-morrow," said the Major, "Let us camp here. It seems to
me that that dark shadow is that of a little clump of trees grown expressly to
shelter us. Let us have supper and then get some sleep."

"Supper by all means," said Paganel, "but no fire; nothing but biscuit and
dried meat. We have reached this spot incognito, let us try and get away in the
same manner. By good luck, the fog is in our favor."

The clump of trees was reached and all concurred in the wish of the
geographer. The cold supper was eaten without a sound, and presently a
profound sleep overcame the travelers, who were tolerably fatigued with their
fifteen miles' march.


CHAPTER IX INTRODUCTION TO THE
CANNIBALS


THE next morning at daybreak a thick fog was clinging to the surface of the
river. A portion of the vapors that saturated the air were condensed by the cold,
and lay as a dense cloud on the water. But the rays of the sun soon broke through
the watery mass and melted it away.

A tongue of land, sharply pointed and bristling with bushes, projected into
the uniting streams. The swifter waters of the Waipa rushed against the current
of the Waikato for a quarter of a mile before they mingled with it; but the calm
and majestic river soon quieted the noisy stream and carried it off quietly in its
course to the Pacific Ocean.

When the vapor disappeared, a boat was seen ascending the current of the
Waikato. It was a canoe seventy feet long, five broad, and three deep; the prow
raised like that of a Venetian gondola, and the whole hollowed out of a trunk of a
kahikatea. A bed of dry fern was laid at the bottom. It was swiftly rowed by eight
oars, and steered with a paddle by a man seated in the stern.

This man was a tall Maori, about forty-five years of age, broad-chested,
muscular, with powerfully developed hands and feet. His prominent and deeply-
furrowed brow, his fierce look, and sinister expression, gave him a formidable
aspect.

Tattooing, or "moko," as the New Zealanders call it, is a mark of great
distinction. None is worthy of these honorary lines, who has not distinguished
himself in repeated fights. The slaves and the lower class can not obtain this
decoration. Chiefs of high position may be known by the finish and precision
and truth of the design, which sometimes covers their whole bodies with the
figures of animals. Some are found to undergo the painful operation of "moko"
five times. The more illustrious, the more illustrated, is the rule of New Zealand.

Dumont D'Urville has given some curious details as to this custom. He justly
observes that "moko" is the counterpart of the armorial bearings of which many
families in Europe are so vain. But he remarks that there is this difference: the
armorial bearings of Europe are frequently a proof only of the merits of the first
who bore them, and are no certificate of the merits of his descendants; while the
individual coat-of-arms of the Maori is an irrefragible proof that it was earned by
the display of extraordinary personal courage.

The practice of tattooing, independently of the consideration it procures, has
also a useful aspect. It gives the cu-taneous system an increased thickness,


enabling it to resist the inclemency of the season and the incessant attacks of the
mosquito.

As to the chief who was steering the canoe, there could be no mistake. The
sharpened albatross bone used by the Maori tattooer, had five times scored his
countenance. He was in his fifth edition, and betrayed it in his haughty bearing.

His figure, draped in a large mat woven of "phormium" trimmed with
dogskins, was clothed with a pair of cotton drawers, blood-stained from recent
combats. From the pendant lobe of his ears hung earrings of green jade, and
round his neck a quivering necklace of "pounamous," a kind of jade stone sacred
among the New Zealanders. At his side lay an English rifle, and a "patou-patou,"
a kind of two-headed ax of an emerald color, and eighteen inches long. Beside
him sat nine armed warriors of inferior rank, ferocious-looking fellows, some of
them suffering from recent wounds. They sat quite motionless, wrapped in their
flax mantles. Three savage-looking dogs lay at their feet. The eight rowers in the
prow seemed to be servants or slaves of the chief. They rowed vigorously, and
propelled the boat against the not very rapid current of the Waikato, with
extraordinary velocity.

In the center of this long canoe, with their feet tied together, sat ten European
prisoners closely packed together.

It was Glenarvan and Lady Helena, Mary Grant, Robert, Paganel, the Major,
John Mangles, the steward, and the two sailors.

The night before, the little band had unwittingly, owing to the mist,
encamped in the midst of a numerous party of natives. Toward the middle of the
night they were surprised in their sleep, were made prisoners, and carried on
board the canoe. They had not been ill-treated, so far, but all attempts at
resistance had been vain. Their arms and ammunition were in the hands of the
savages, and they would soon have been targets for their own balls.

They were soon aware, from a few English words used by the natives, that
they were a retreating party of the tribe who had been beaten and decimated by
the English troops, and were on their way back to the Upper Waikato. The Maori
chief, whose principal warriors had been picked off by the soldiers of the 42nd
Regiment, was returning to make a final appeal to the tribes of the Waikato
district, so that he might go to the aid of the indomitable William Thompson,
who was still holding his own against the conquerors. The chief's name was
"Kai-Koumou," a name of evil boding in the native language, meaning "He who
eats the limbs of his enemy." He was bold and brave, but his cruelty was equally
remarkable. No pity was to be expected at his hands. His name was well known
to the English soldiers, and a price had been set on his head by the governor of
New Zealand.


This terrible blow befell Glenarvan at the very moment when he was about
to reach the long-desired haven of Auckland, and so regain his own country; but
no one who looked at his cool, calm features, could have guessed the anguish he
endured. Glenarvan always rose to his misfortunes. He felt that his part was to be
the strength and the example of his wife and companions; that he was the head
and chief; ready to die for the rest if circumstances required it. He was of a
deeply religious turn of mind, and never lost his trust in Providence nor his
belief in the sacred character of his enterprise. In the midst of this crowning peril
he did not give way to any feeling of regret at having been induced to venture
into this country of savages.

His companions were worthy of him; they entered into his lofty views; and
judging by their haughty demeanor, it would scarcely have been supposed that
they were hurrying to the final catastrophe. With one accord, and by Glenarvan's
advice, they resolved to affect utter indifference before the natives. It was the
only way to impress these ferocious natures. Savages in general, and particularly
the Maories, have a notion of dignity from which they never derogate. They
respect, above all things, coolness and courage. Glenarvan was aware that by
this mode of procedure, he and his companions would spare themselves needless
humiliation.

From the moment of embarking, the natives, who were very taciturn, like all
savages, had scarcely exchanged a word, but from the few sentences they did
utter, Glenarvan felt certain that the English language was familiar to them. He
therefore made up his mind to question the chief on the fate that awaited them.
Addressing himself to Kai-Koumou, he said in a perfectly unconcerned voice:

"Where are we going, chief?"

Kai-Koumou looked coolly at him and made no answer.

"What are you going to do with us?" pursued Glenarvan.

A sudden gleam flashed into the eyes of Kai-Koumou, and he said in a deep
voice:

"Exchange you, if your own people care to have you; eat you if they don't."

Glenarvan asked no further questions; but hope revived in his heart. He
concluded that some Maori chiefs had fallen into the hands of the English, and
that the natives would try to get them exchanged. So they had a chance of
salvation, and the case was not quite so desperate.

The canoe was speeding rapidly up the river. Paganel, whose excitable
temperament always rebounded from one extreme to the other, had quite
regained his spirits. He consoled himself that the natives were saving them the
trouble of the journey to the English outposts, and that was so much gain. So he
took it quite quietly and followed on the map the course of the Waikato across


the plains and valleys of the province. Lady Helena and Mary Grant, concealing
their alarm, conversed in a low voice with Glenarvan, and the keenest
physiognomists would have failed to see any anxiety in their faces.

The Waikato is the national river in New Zealand. It is to the Maories what
the Rhine is to the Germans, and the Danube to the Slavs. In its course of 200
miles it waters the finest lands of the North Island, from the province of
Wellington to the province of Auckland. It gave its name to all those indomitable
tribes of the river district, which rose en masse against the invaders.

The waters of this river are still almost strangers to any craft but the native
canoe. The most audacious tourist will scarcely venture to invade these sacred
shores; in fact, the Upper Waikato is sealed against profane Europeans.

Paganel was aware of the feelings of veneration with which the natives
regard this great arterial stream. He knew that the English and German
naturalists had never penetrated further than its junction with the Waipa. He
wondered how far the good pleasure of Kai-Koumou would carry his captives?
He could not have guessed, but for hearing the word "Taupo" repeatedly uttered
between the chief and his warriors. He consulted his map and saw that "Taupo"
was the name of a lake celebrated in geographical annals, and lying in the most
mountainous part of the island, at the southern extremity of Auckland province.
The Waikato passes through this lake and then flows on for 120 miles.


CHAPTER X A MOMENTOUS INTERVIEW


AN unfathomable gulf twenty-five miles long, and twenty miles broad was
produced, but long before historic times, by the falling in of caverns among the
trachytic lavas of the center of the island. And these waters falling from the
surrounding heights have taken possession of this vast basin. The gulf has
become a lake, but it is also an abyss, and no lead-line has yet sounded its
depths.

Such is the wondrous lake of Taupo, lying 1,250 feet above the level of the
sea, and in view of an amphitheater of mountains 2,400 feet high. On the west
are rocky peaks of great size; on the north lofty summits clothed with low trees;
on the east a broad beach with a road track, and covered with pumice stones,
which shimmer through the leafy screen of the bushes; on the southern side rise
volcanic cones behind a forest flat. Such is the majestic frame that incloses this
vast sheet of water whose roaring tempests rival the cyclones of Ocean.

The whole region boils like an immense cauldron hung over subterranean
fires. The ground vibrates from the agitation of the central furnace. Hot springs
filter out everywhere. The crust of the earth cracks in great rifts like a cake, too
quickly baked.

About a quarter of a mile off, on a craggy spur of the mountain stood a
"pah," or Maori fortress. The prisoners, whose feet and hands were liberated,
were landed one by one, and conducted into it by the warriors. The path which
led up to the intrenchment, lay across fields of "phormium" and a grove of
beautiful trees, the "kai-kateas" with persistent leaves and red berries; "dracaenas
australis," the "ti-trees" of the natives, whose crown is a graceful counterpart of
the cabbage-palm, and "huious," which are used to give a black dye to cloth.
Large doves with metallic sheen on their plumage, and a world of starlings with
reddish carmeles, flew away at the approach of the natives.

After a rather circuitous walk, Glenarvan and his party arrived at the "pah."

The fortress was defended by an outer inclosure of strong palisades, fifteen
feet high; a second line of stakes; then a fence composed of osiers, with loop-
holes, inclosed

V. IV. Verne the inner space, that is the plateau of the "pah," on which were
erected the Maori buildings, and about forty huts arranged symmetrically.

When the captives approached they were horror-struck at the sight of the
heads which adorned the posts of the inner circle. Lady Helena and Mary Grant
turned away their eyes more with disgust than with terror. These heads were


those of hostile chiefs who had fallen in battle, and whose bodies had served to
feed the conquerors. The geographer recognized that it was so, from their eye
sockets being hollow and deprived of eye-balls.

Glenarvan and his companions had taken in all this scene at a glance. They
stood near an empty house, waiting the pleasure of the chief, and exposed to the
abuse of a crowd of old crones. This troop of harpies surrounded them, shaking
their fists, howling and vociferating. Some English words that escaped their
coarse mouths left no doubt that they were clamoring for immediate vengeance.

In the midst of all these cries and threats, Lady Helena, tranquil to all
outward seeming, affected an indifference she was far from feeling. This
courageous woman made heroic efforts to restrain herself, lest she should disturb
Glenarvan's coolness. Poor Mary Grant felt her heart sink within her, and John
Mangles stood by ready to die in her behalf. His companions bore the deluge of
invectives each according to his disposition; the Major with utter indifference,
Paganel with exasperation that increased every moment.

Glenarvan, to spare Lady Helena the attacks of these witches, walked
straight up to Kai-Koumou, and pointing to the hideous group:

"Send them away," said he.

The Maori chief stared fixedly at his prisoner without speaking; and then,
with a nod, he silenced the noisy horde. Glenarvan bowed, as a sign of thanks,
and went slowly back to his place.

At this moment a hundred Maories were assembled in the "pah," old men,
full grown men, youths; the former were calm, but gloomy, awaiting the orders
of Kai-Koumou; the others gave themselves up to the most violent sorrow,
bewailing their parents and friends who had fallen in the late engagements.

Kai-Koumou was the only one of all the chiefs that obeyed the call of
William Thompson, who had returned to the lake district, and he was the first to
announce to his tribe the defeat of the national insurrection, beaten on the plains
of the lower Waikato. Of the two hundred warriors who, under his orders,
hastened to the defence of the soil, one hundred and fifty were missing on his
return. Allowing for a number being made prisoners by the invaders, how many
must be lying on the field of battle, never to return to the country of their
ancestors!

This was the secret of the outburst of grief with which the tribe saluted the
arrival of Kai-Koumou. Up to that moment nothing had been known of the last
defeat, and the fatal news fell on them like a thunder clap.

Among the savages, sorrow is always manifested by physical signs; the
parents and friends of deceased warriors, the women especially, lacerated their
faces and shoulders with sharpened shells. The blood spurted out and blended


with their tears. Deep wounds denoted great despair. The unhappy Maories,
bleeding and excited, were hideous to look upon.

There was another serious element in their grief. Not only had they lost the
relative or friend they mourned, but his bones would be missing in the family
mausoleum. In the Maori religion the possession of these relics is regarded as
indispensable to the destinies of the future life; not the perishable flesh, but the
bones, which are collected with the greatest care, cleaned, scraped, polished,
even varnished, and then deposited in the "oudoupa," that is the "house of glory."
These tombs are adorned with wooden statues, representing with perfect
exactness the tattoo of the deceased. But now their tombs would be left empty,
the religious rites would be unsolemnized, and the bones that escaped the teeth
of the wild dog would whiten without burial on the field of battle.

Then the sorrowful chorus redoubled. The menaces of the women were
intensified by the imprecations of the men against the Europeans. Abusive
epithets were lavished, the accompanying gestures became more violent. The
howl was about to end in brutal action.

Kai-Koumou, fearing that he might be overpowered by the fanatics of his
tribe, conducted his prisoners to a sacred place, on an abruptly raised plateau at
the other end of the "pah." This hut rested against a mound elevated a hundred
feet above it, which formed the steep outer buttress of the entrenchment. In this
"Ware-Atoua," sacred house, the priests or arikis taught the Maories about a
Triune God, father, son, and bird, or spirit. The large, well constructed hut,
contained the sacred and choice food which Maoui-Ranga-Rangui eats by the
mouths of his priests.

In this place, and safe for the moment from the frenzied natives, the captives
lay down on the flax mats. Lady Helena was quite exhausted, her moral energies
prostrate, and she fell helpless into her husband's arms.

Glenarvan pressed her to his bosom and said:

"Courage, my dear Helena; Heaven will not forsake us!"

Robert was scarcely in when he jumped on Wilson's shoulders, and squeezed
his head through a crevice left between the roof and the walls, from which
chaplets of amulets were hung. From that elevation he could see the whole
extent of the "pah," and as far as Kai-Koumou's house.

"They are all crowding round the chief," said he softly. "They are throwing


their arms about... . They are howling. .... Kai-Koumou is trying to speak."
Then he was silent for a few minutes.
"Kai-Koumou is speaking. . . . The savages are quieter..... They are
listening..... -


"Evidently," said the Major, "this chief has a personal interest in protecting


us. He wants to exchange his prisoners for some chiefs of his tribe! But will his
warriors consent?"

"Yes! ... They are listening..... They have dispersed, some are gone into
their huts. ... The others have left the intrenchment."

"Are you sure?" said the Major.

"Yes, Mr. McNabbs," replied Robert, "Kai-Koumou is left alone with the
warriors of his canoe..... Oh! one of them is coming up here..... 4

"Come down, Robert," said Glenarvan.

At this moment, Lady Helena who had risen, seized her husband's arm.

"Edward," she said in a resolute tone, "neither Mary Grant nor I must fall
into the hands of these savages alive!"

And so saying, she handed Glenarvan a loaded revolver.

"Firearm!" exclaimed Glenarvan, with flashing eyes.

"Yes! the Maories do not search their prisoners. But, Edward, this is for us,
not for them."

Glenarvan slipped the revolver under his coat; at the same moment the mat at
the entrance was raised, and a native entered.

He motioned to the prisoners to follow him. Glenarvan and the rest walked
across the "pah" and stopped before Kai-Koumou. He was surrounded by the
principal warriors of his tribe, and among them the Maori whose canoe joined
that of the Kai-Koumou at the confluence of Pohain-henna, on the Waikato. He
was a man about forty years of age, powerfully built and of fierce and cruel
aspect. His name was Kara-Tete, meaning "the irascible" in the native tongue.
Kai-Koumou treated him with a certain tone of respect, and by the fineness of
his tattoo, it was easy to perceive that Kara-Tete held a lofty position in the tribe,
but a keen observer would have guessed the feeling of rivalry that existed
between these two chiefs. The Major observed that the influence of Kara-Tete
gave umbrage to Kai-Koumou. They both ruled the Waikato tribes, and were
equal in authority. During this interview Kai-Koumou smiled, but his eyes
betrayed a deep-seated enmity.

Kai-Koumou interrogated Glenarvan.

"You are English?" said he.

"Yes," replied Glenarvan, unhesitatingly, as his nationality would facilitate
the exchange.

"And your companions?" said Kai-Koumou.

"My companions are English like myself. We are shipwrecked travelers, but
it may be important to state that we have taken no part in the war."

"That matters little!" was the brutal answer of Kara-Tete. "Every Englishman
is an enemy. Your people invaded our island! They robbed our fields! they


bumed our villages!"

"They were wrong!" said Glenarvan, quietly. "I say so, because I think it, not
because I am in your power."

"Listen," said Kai-Koumou, "the Tohonga, the chief priest of Noui-Atoua has
fallen into the hands of your brethren; he is a prisoner among the Pakekas. Our
deity has commanded us to ransom him. For my own part, I would rather have
torn out your heart, I would have stuck your head, and those of your
companions, on the posts of that palisade. But Noui-Atoua has spoken."

As he uttered these words, Kai-Koumou, who till now had been quite
unmoved, trembled with rage, and his features expressed intense ferocity.

Then after a few minutes' interval he proceeded more calmly.

"Do you think the English will exchange you for our Tohonga?"

Glenarvan hesitated, all the while watching the Maori chief.

"IT do not know," said he, after a moment of silence.

"Speak," returned Kai-Koumou, "is your life worth that of our Tohonga?"

"No," replied Glenarvan. "I am neither a chief nor a priest among my own
people."

Paganel, petrified at this reply, looked at Glenarvan in amazement. Kai-
Koumou appeared equally astonished.

"You doubt it then?" said he.

"I do not know," replied Glenarvan.

"Your people will not accept you as an exchange for Tohonga?"

"Me alone? no," repeated Glenarvan. "All of us perhaps they might."

"Our Maori custom," replied Kai-Koumou, "is head for head."

"Offer first these ladies in exchange for your priest," said Glenarvan,
pointing to Lady Helena and Mary Grant.

Lady Helena was about to interrupt him. But the Major held her back.

"Those two ladies," continued Glenarvan, bowing respectfully toward Lady
Helena and Mary Grant, "are personages of rank in their own country."

The warrior gazed coldly at his prisoner. An evil smile relaxed his lips for a
moment; then he controlled himself, and in a voice of ill-concealed anger:

"Do you hope to deceive Kai-Koumou with lying words, accursed Pakeka?
Can not the eyes of Kai-Koumou read hearts?"

And pointing to Lady Helena: "That is your wife?" he said.

"No! mine!" exclaimed Kara-Tete.

And then pushing his prisoners aside, he laid his hand on the shoulder of
Lady Helena, who tured pale at his touch.

"Edward!" cried the unfortunate woman in terror.

Glenarvan, without a word, raised his arm, a shot! and Kara-Tete fell at his


feet.

The sound brought a crowd of natives to the spot. A hundred arms were
ready, and Glenarvan's revolver was snatched from him.

Kai-Koumou glanced at Glenarvan with a curious expression: then with one
hand protecting Glenarvan, with the other he waved off the crowd who were
rushing on the party.

At last his voice was heard above the tumult.

"Taboo! Taboo!" he shouted.

At that word the crowd stood still before Glenarvan and his companions,
who for the time were preserved by a supernatural influence.

A few minutes after they were re-conducted to Ware-Atoua, which was their
prison. But Robert Grant and Paganel were not with them.


CHAPTER XI THE CHIEF'S FUNERAL


KAI-KOUMOU, as frequently happens among the Maories, joined the title
of ariki to that of tribal chief. He was invested with the dignity of priest, and, as
such, he had the power to throw over persons or things the superstitious
protection of the "taboo."

The "taboo," which is common to all the Polynesian races, has the primary
effect of isolating the "tabooed" person and preventing the use of "tabooed"
things. According to the Maori doctrine, anyone who laid sacrilegious hands on
what had been declared "taboo," would be punished with death by the insulted
deity, and even if the god delayed the vindication of his power, the priests took
care to accelerate his vengeance.

By the chiefs, the "taboo" is made a political engine, except in some cases,
for domestic reasons. For instance, a native is tabooed for several days when his
hair is cut; when he is tattooed; when he is building a canoe, or a house; when he
is seriously ill, and when he is dead. If excessive consumption threatens to
exterminate the fish of a river, or ruin the early crop of sweet potatoes, these
things are put under the protection of the taboo. If a chief wishes to clear his
house of hangers-on, he taboos it; if an English trader displeases him he is
tabooed. His interdict has the effect of the old royal "veto."

If an object is tabooed, no one can touch it with impunity. When a native is
under the interdict, certain aliments are denied him for a prescribed period. If he
is relieved, as regards the severe diet, his slaves feed him with the viands he is
forbidden to touch with his hands; if he is poor and has no slaves, he has to take
up the food with his mouth, like an animal.

In short, the most trifling acts of the Maories are directed and modified by
this singular custom, the deity is brought into constant contact with their daily
life. The taboo has the same weight as a law; or rather, the code of the Maories,
indisputable and undisputed, is comprised in the frequent applications of the
taboo.

As to the prisoners confined in the Ware-Atoua, it was an arbitrary taboo
which had saved them from the fury of the tribe. Some of the natives, friends
and partisans of Kai-Koumou, desisted at once on hearing their chief's voice, and
protected the captives from the rest.

Glenarvan cherished no illusive hopes as to his own fate; nothing but his
death could atone for the murder of a chief, and among these people death was
only the concluding act of a martyrdom of torture. Glenarvan, therefore, was


fully prepared to pay the penalty of the righteous indignation that nerved his
arm, but he hoped that the wrath of Kai-Koumou would not extend beyond
himself.

What a night he and his companions passed! Who could picture their agonies
or measure their sufferings? Robert and Paganel had not been restored to them,
but their fate was no doubtful matter. They were too surely the first victims of
the frenzied natives. Even McNabbs, who was always sanguine, had abandoned
hope. John Mangles was nearly frantic at the sight of Mary Grant's despair at
being separated from her brother. Glenarvan pondered over the terrible request
of Lady Helena, who preferred dying by his hand to submitting to torture and
slavery. How was he to summon the terrible courage!

"And Mary? who has a right to strike her dead?" thought John, whose heart
was broken.

Escape was clearly impossible. Ten warriors, armed to the teeth, kept watch
at the door of Ware-Atoua.

The morning of February 13th arrived. No communication had taken place
between the natives and the "tabooed" prisoners. A limited supply of provisions
was in the house, which the unhappy inmates scarcely touched. Misery deadened
the pangs of hunger. The day passed without change, and without hope; the
funeral ceremonies of the dead chief would doubtless be the signal for their
execution.

Although Glenarvan did not conceal from himself the probability that Kai-
Koumou had given up all idea of exchange, the Major still cherished a spark of
hope.

"Who knows," said he, as he reminded Glenarvan of the effect produced on
the chief by the death of Kara-Tete--"who knows but that Kai-Koumou, in his
heart, is very much obliged to you?"

But even McNabbs' remarks failed to awaken hope in Glenarvan's mind. The
next day passed without any appearance of preparation for their punishment; and
this was the reason of the delay.

The Maories believe that for three days after death the soul inhabits the body,
and therefore, for three times twenty-four hours, the corpse remains unburied.
This custom was rigorously observed. Till February 15th the "pah" was deserted.

John Mangles, hoisted on Wilson's shoulders, frequently reconnoitered the
outer defences. Not a single native was visible; only the watchful sentinels
relieving guard at the door of the Ware-Atoua.

But on the third day the huts opened; all the savages, men, women, and
children, in all several hundred Maories, assembled in the "pah," silent and calm.

Kai-Koumou came out of his house, and surrounded by the principal chiefs


of his tribe, he took his stand on a mound some feet above the level, in the center
of the enclosure. The crowd of natives formed in a half circle some distance off,
in dead silence.

At a sign from Kai-Koumou, a warrior bent his steps toward Ware-Atoua.

"Remember," said Lady Helena to her husband. Glenarvan pressed her to his
heart, and Mary Grant went closer to John Mangles, and said hurriedly:

"Lord and Lady Glenarvan cannot but think if a wife may claim death at her
husband's hands, to escape a shameful life, a betrothed wife may claim death at
the hands of her betrothed husband, to escape the same fate. John! at this last
moment I ask you, have we not long been betrothed to each other in our secret
hearts? May I rely on you, as Lady Helena relies on Lord Glenarvan?"

"Mary!" cried the young captain in his despair. "Ah! dear Mary--"

The mat was lifted, and the captives led to Kai-Koumou; the two women
were resigned to their fate; the men dissembled their sufferings with superhuman
effort.

They arrived in the presence of the Maori chief.

"You killed Kara-Tete," said he to Glenarvan.

"T did," answered Glenarvan.

"You die to-morrow at sunrise."

"Alone?" asked Glenarvan, with a beating heart.

"Oh! if our Tohonga's life was not more precious than yours!" exclaimed
Kai-Koumou, with a ferocious expression of regret.

At this moment there was a commotion among the natives. Glenarvan looked
quickly around; the crowd made way, and a warrior appeared heated by running,
and sinking with fatigue.

Kai-Koumou, as soon as he saw him, said in English, evidently for the
benefit of the captives:

"You come from the camp of the Pakekas?"

"Yes," answered the Maori.

"You have seen the prisoner, our Tohonga?"

"T have seen him."

"Alive?"

"Dead! English have shot him."

It was all over with Glenarvan and his companions.

"All!" cried Kai-Koumou; "you all die to-morrow at daybreak."

Punishment fell on all indiscriminately. Lady Helena and Mary Grant were
grateful to Heaven for the boon.

The captives were not taken back to Ware-Atoua. They were destined to
attend the obsequies of the chief and the bloody rites that accompanied them. A


guard of natives conducted them to the foot of an immense kauri, and then stood
on guard without taking their eyes off the prisoners.

The three prescribed days had elapsed since the death of Kara-Tete, and the
soul of the dead warrior had finally departed; so the ceremonies commenced.

The body was laid on a small mound in the central enclosure. It was clothed
in a rich dress, and wrapped in a magnificent flax mat. His head, adorned with
feathers, was encircled with a crown of green leaves. His face, arms, and chest
had been rubbed with oil, and did not show any sign of decay.

The parents and friends arrived at the foot of the mound, and at a certain
moment, as if the leader of an orchestra were leading a funeral chant, there arose
a great wail of tears, sighs, and sobs. They lamented the deceased with a
plaintive rhythm and doleful cadence. The kinsmen beat their heads; the
kinswomen tore their faces with their nails and lavished more blood than tears.
But these demonstrations were not sufficient to propitiate the soul of the
deceased, whose wrath might strike the survivors of his tribe; and his warriors,
as they could not recall him to life, were anxious that he should have nothing to
wish for in the other world. The wife of Kara-Tete was not to be parted from
him; indeed, she would have refused to survive him. It was a custom, as well as
a duty, and Maori history has no lack of such sacrifices.

This woman came on the scene; she was still young. Her disheveled hair
flowed over her shoulders. Her sobs and cries filled the air. Incoherent words,
regrets, sobs, broken phrases in which she extolled the virtues of the dead,
alternated with her moans, and in a crowning paroxysm of sorrow, she threw
herself at the foot of the mound and beat her head on the earth.

The Kai-Koumou drew near; suddenly the wretched victim rose; but a
violent blow from a "MERE," a kind of club brandished by the chief, struck her
to the ground; she fell senseless.

Horrible yells followed; a hundred arms threatened the terror-stricken
captives. But no one moved, for the funeral ceremonies were not yet over.

The wife of Kara-Tete had joined her husband. The two bodies lay stretched
side by side. But in the future life, even the presence of his faithful companion
was not enough. Who would attend on them in the realm of Noui-Atoua, if their
slaves did not follow them into the other world.

Six unfortunate fellows were brought to the mound. They were attendants
whom the pitiless usages of war had reduced to slavery. During the chief's
lifetime they had borne the severest privations, and been subjected to all kinds of
ill-usage; they had been scantily fed, and incessantly occupied like beasts of
burden, and now, according to Maori ideas, they were to resume to all eternity
this life of bondage.


These poor creatures appeared quite resigned to their destiny. They were not
taken by surprise. Their unbound hands showed that they met their fate without
resistance.

Their death was speedy and not aggravated by tedious suffering; torture was
reserved for the authors of the murder, who, only twenty paces off, averted their
eyes from the horrible scene which was to grow yet more horrible.

Six blows of the MERE, delivered by the hands of six powerful warriors,
felled the victims in the midst of a sea of blood.

This was the signal for a fearful scene of cannibalism. The bodies of slaves
are not protected by taboo like those of their masters. They belong to the tribe;
they were a sort of small change thrown among the mourners, and the moment
the sacrifice was over, the whole crowd, chiefs, warriors, old men, women,
children, without distinction of age, or sex, fell upon the senseless remains with
brutal appetite. Faster than a rapid pen could describe it, the bodies, still reeking,
were dismembered, divided, cut up, not into morsels, but into crumbs. Of the
two hundred Maories present everyone obtained a share. They fought, they
struggled, they quarreled over the smallest fragment. The drops of hot blood
splashed over these festive monsters, and the whole of this detestable crew
groveled under a rain of blood. It was like the delirious fury of tigers fighting
over their prey, or like a circus where the wild beasts devour the deer. This scene
ended, a score of fires were lit at various points of the "pah"; the smell of charred
flesh polluted the air; and but for the fearful tumult of the festival, but for the
cries that emanated from these flesh-sated throats, the captives might have heard
the bones crunching under the teeth of the cannibals.

Glenarvan and his companions, breathless with horror, tried to conceal this
fearful scene from the eyes of the two poor ladies. They understood then what
fate awaited them next day at dawn, and also with what cruel torture this death
would be preceded. They were dumb with horror.

The funeral dances commenced. Strong liquors distilled from the "piper
excelsum" animated the intoxication of the natives. They had nothing human
left. It seemed possible that the "taboo" might be forgotten, and they might rush
upon the prisoners, who were already terrified at their delirious gestures.

But Kai-Koumou had kept his own senses amidst the general delirium. He
allowed an hour for this orgy of blood to attain its maximum and then cease, and
the final scene of the obsequies was performed with the accustomed ceremonial.

The corpses of Kara-Tete and his wife were raised, the limbs were bent, and
laid against the stomach according to the Maori usage; then came the funeral, not
the final interment, but a burial until the moment when the earth had destroyed
the flesh and nothing remained but the skeleton.


The place of "oudoupa,” or the tomb, had been chosen outside the fortress,
about two miles off at the top of a low hill called Maunganamu, situated on the
right bank of the lake, and to this spot the body was to be taken. Two palanquins
of a very primitive kind, hand-barrows, in fact, were brought to the foot of the
mound, and the corpses doubled up so that they were sitting rather than lying,
and their garments kept in place by a band of hanes, were placed on them. Four
warriors took up the litters on their shoulders, and the whole tribe, repeating
their funeral chant, followed in procession to the place of sepulture.

The captives, still strictly guarded, saw the funeral cortege leave the inner
inclosure of the "pah"; then the chants and cries grew fainter. For about half an
hour the funeral procession remained out of sight, in the hollow valley, and then
came in sight again winding up the mountain side; the distance gave a fantastic
effect to the undulating movement of this long serpentine column.

The tribe stopped at an elevation of about 800 feet, on the summit of
Maunganamu, where the burial place of Kara-Tete had been prepared. An
ordinary Maori would have had nothing but a hole and a heap of earth. But a
powerful and formidable chief destined to speedy deification, was honored with
a tomb worthy of his exploits.

The "oudoupa" had been fenced round, and posts, surmounted with faces
painted in red ochre, stood near the grave where the bodies were to lie. The
relatives had not forgotten that the "Waidoua," the spirit of the dead, lives on
mortal food, as the body did in this life. Therefore, food was deposited in the
inclosure as well as the arms and clothing of the deceased. Nothing was omitted
for comfort. The husband and wife were laid side by side, then covered with
earth and grass, after another series of laments.

Then the procession wound slowly down the mountain, and henceforth none
dare ascend the slope of Maunganamu on pain of death, for it was "tabooed,"
like Tongariro, where lie the ashes of a chief killed by an earthquake in 1846.


CHAPTER XII STRANGELY LIBERATED


JUST as the sun was sinking beyond Lake Taupo, behind the peaks of
Tuhahua and Pukepapu, the captives were conducted back to their prison. They
were not to leave it again till the tops of the Wahiti Ranges were lit with the first
fires of day.

They had one night in which to prepare for death. Overcome as they were
with horror and fatigue, they took their last meal together.

"We shall need all our strength," Glenarvan had said, "to look death in the
face. We must show these savages how Europeans can die."

The meal ended. Lady Helena repeated the evening prayer aloud, her
companions, bare-headed, repeated it after her. Who does not turn his thoughts
toward God in the hour of death? This done, the prisoners embraced each other.
Mary Grant and Helena, in a corner of the hut, lay down on a mat. Sleep, which
keeps all sorrow in abeyance, soon weighed down their eyelids; they slept in
each other's arms, overcome by exhaustion and prolonged watching.

Then Glenarvan, taking his friends aside, said: "My dear friends, our lives
and the lives of these poor women are in God's hands. If it is decreed that we die
to-morrow, let us die bravely, like Christian men, ready to appear without terror
before the Supreme Judge. God, who reads our hearts, knows that we had a
noble end in view. If death awaits us instead of success, it is by His will. Stern as
the decree may seem, I will not repine. But death here, means not death only, it
means torture, insult, perhaps, and here are two ladies--"

Glenarvan's voice, firm till now, faltered. He was silent a moment, and
having overcome his emotion, he said, addressing the young captain:

"John, you have promised Mary what I promised Lady Helena. What is your
plan?"

"I believe," said John, "that in the sight of God I have a right to fulfill that
promise."

"Yes, John; but we are unarmed."

"No!" replied John, showing him a dagger. "I snatched it from Kara-Tete
when he fell at your feet. My Lord, whichever of us survives the other will fulfill
the wish of Lady Helena and Mary Grant."

After these words were said, a profound silence ensued. At last the Major
said: "My friends, keep that to the last moment. I am not an advocate of
irremediable measures."

"I did not speak for ourselves," said Glenarvan. "Be it as it may, we can face


death! Had we been alone, I should ere now have cried, 'My friends, let us make
an effort. Let us attack these wretches!’ But with these poor girls--"

At this moment John raised the mat, and counted twenty-five natives keeping
guard on the Ware-Atoua. A great fire had been lighted, and its lurid glow threw
into strong relief the irregular outlines of the "pah." Some of the savages were
sitting round the brazier; the others standing motionless, their black outlines
relieved against the clear background of flame. But they all kept watchful guard
on the hut confided to their care.

It has been said that between a vigilant jailer and a prisoner who wishes to
escape, the chances are in favor of the prisoner; the fact is, the interest of the one
is keener than that of the other. The jailer may forget that he is on guard; the
prisoner never forgets that he is guarded. The captive thinks oftener of escaping
than the jailer of preventing his flight, and hence we hear of frequent and
wonderful escapes.

But in the present instance hatred and revenge were the jailers-- not an
indifferent warder; the prisoners were not bound, but it was because bonds were
useless when five-and-twenty men were watching the only egress from the
Ware-Atoua.

This house, with its back to the rock which closed the fortress, was only
accessible by a long, narrow promontory which joined it in front to the plateau
on which the "pah" was erected. On its two other sides rose pointed rocks, which
jutted out over an abyss a hundred feet deep. On that side descent was
impossible, and had it been possible, the bottom was shut in by the enormous
rock. The only outlet was the regular door of the Ware-Atoua, and the Maories
guarded the promontory which united it to the "pah" like a drawbridge. All
escape was thus hopeless, and Glenarvan having tried the walls for the twentieth
time, was compelled to acknowledge that it was so.

The hours of this night, wretched as they were, slipped away. Thick darkness
had settled on the mountain. Neither moon nor stars pierced the gloom. Some
gusts of wind whistled by the sides of the "pah," and the posts of the house
creaked: the fire outside revived with the puffs of wind, and the flames sent fitful
gleams into the interior of Ware-Atoua. The group of prisoners was lit up for a
moment; they were absorbed in their last thoughts, and a deathlike silence
reigned in the hut.

It might have been about four o'clock in the morning when the Major's
attention was called to a slight noise which seemed to come from the foundation
of the posts in the wall of the hut which abutted on the rock. McNabbs was at
first indifferent, but finding the noise continue, he listened; then his curiosity
was aroused, and he put his ear to the ground; it sounded as if someone was


scraping or hollowing out the ground outside.

As soon as he was sure of it, he crept over to Glenarvan and John Mangles,
and startling them from their melancholy thoughts, led them to the end of the
hut.

"Listen," said he, motioning them to stoop.

The scratching became more and more audible; they could hear the little
stones grate on a hard body and roll away.

"Some animal in his burrow," said John Mangles.

Glenarvan struck his forehead.

"Who knows?" said he, "it might be a man."

"Animal or man," answered the Major, "I will soon find out!"

Wilson and Olbinett joined their companions, and all united to dig through
the wall--John with his dagger, the others with stones taken from the ground, or
with their nails, while Mulrady, stretched along the ground, watched the native
guard through a crevice of the matting.

These savages sitting motionless around the fire, suspected nothing of what
was going on twenty feet off.

The soil was light and friable, and below lay a bed of silicious tufa;
therefore, even without tools, the aperture deepened quickly. It soon became
evident that a man, or men, clinging to the sides of the "pah," were cutting a
passage into its exterior wall. What could be the object? Did they know of the
existence of the prisoners, or was it some private enterprise that led to the
undertaking?

The prisoners redoubled their efforts. Their fingers bled, but still they
worked on; after half an hour they had gone three feet deep; they perceived by
the increased sharpness of the sounds that only a thin layer of earth prevented
immediate communication.

Some minutes more passed, and the Major withdrew his hand from the
stroke of a sharp blade. He suppressed a cry.

John Mangles, inserting the blade of his poniard, avoided the knife which
now protruded above the soil, but seized the hand that wielded it.

It was the hand of a woman or child, a European! On

V. IV Verne neither side had a word been uttered. It was evidently the cue of
both sides to be silent.

"Is it Robert?" whispered Glenarvan.

But softly as the name was breathed, Mary Grant, already awakened by the
sounds in the hut, slipped over toward Glenarvan, and seizing the hand, all
stained with earth, she covered it with kisses.

"My darling Robert," said she, never doubting, "it is you! it is you!"


"Yes, little sister," said he, "it is I am here to save you all; but be very silent."

"Brave lad!" repeated Glenarvan.

"Watch the savages outside," said Robert.

Mulrady, whose attention was distracted for a moment by the appearance of
the boy, resumed his post.

"Tt is all right," said he. "There are only four awake; the rest are asleep."

A minute after, the hole was enlarged, and Robert passed from the arms of
his sister to those of Lady Helena. Round his body was rolled a long coil of flax
rope.

"My child, my child," murmured Lady Helena, "the savages did not kill
you!"

"No, madam," said he; "I do not know how it happened, but in the scuffle I
got away; I jumped the barrier; for two days I hid in the bushes, to try and see
you; while the tribe were busy with the chief's funeral, I came and reconnoitered
this side of the path, and I saw that I could get to you. I stole this knife and rope
out of the desert hut. The tufts of bush and the branches made me a ladder, and I
found a kind of grotto already hollowed out in the rock under this hut; I had only
to bore some feet in soft earth, and here I am."

Twenty noiseless kisses were his reward.

"Let us be off!" said he, in a decided tone.

"Is Paganel below?" asked Glenarvan.

"Monsieur Paganel?" replied the boy, amazed.

"Yes; is he waiting for us?"

"No, my Lord; but is he not here?" inquired Robert.

"No, Robert!" answered Mary Grant.

"Why! have you not seen him?" asked Glenarvan. "Did you lose each other
in the confusion? Did you not get away together?"

"No, my Lord!" said Robert, taken aback by the disappearance of his friend
Paganel.

"Well, lose no more time," said the Major. "Wherever Paganel is, he cannot
be in worse plight than ourselves. Let us go."

Truly, the moments were precious. They had to fly. The escape was not very
difficult, except the twenty feet of perpendicular fall outside the grotto.

After that the slope was practicable to the foot of the mountain. From this
point the prisoners could soon gain the lower valleys; while the Maories, if they
perceived the flight of the prisoners, would have to make a long round to catch
them, being unaware of the gallery between the Ware-Atoua and the outer rock.

The escape was commenced, and every precaution was taken. The captives
passed one by one through the narrow passage into the grotto. John Mangles,


before leaving the hut, disposed of all the evidences of their work, and in his turn
slipped through the opening and let down over it the mats of the house, so that
the entrance to the gallery was quite concealed.

The next thing was to descend the vertical wall to the slope below, and this
would have been impracticable, but that Robert had brought the flax rope, which
was now unrolled and fixed to a projecting point of rock, the end hanging over.

John Mangles, before his friends trusted themselves to this flax rope, tried it;
he did not think it very strong; and it was of importance not to risk themselves
imprudently, as a fall would be fatal.

"This rope," said he, "will only bear the weight of two persons; therefore let
us go in rotation. Lord and Lady Glenarvan first; when they arrive at the bottom,
three pulls at the rope will be a signal to us to follow."

"I will go first," said Robert. "I discovered a deep hollow at the foot of the
slope where those who come down can conceal themselves and wait for the
rest."

"Go, my boy," said Glenarvan, pressing Robert's hand.

Robert disappeared through the opening out of the grotto. A minute after, the
three pulls at the cord informed them the boy had alighted safely.

Glenarvan and Lady Helena immediately ventured out of the grotto. The
darkness was still very great, though some grayish streaks were already visible
on the eastern summits.

The biting cold of the morning revived the poor young lady. She felt stronger
and commenced her perilous descent.

Glenarvan first, then Lady Helena, let themselves down along the rope, till
they came to the spot where the perpendicular wall met the top of the slope.
Then Glenarvan going first and supporting his wife, began to descend backward.

He felt for the tufts and grass and shrubs able to afford a foothold; tried them
and then placed Lady Helena's foot on them. Some birds, suddenly awakened,
flew away, uttering feeble cries, and the fugitives trembled when a stone
loosened from its bed rolled to the foot of the mountain.

They had reached half-way down the slope, when a voice was heard from the
opening of the grotto.

"Stop!" whispered John Mangles.

Glenarvan, holding with one hand to a tuft of tetragonia, with the other
holding his wife, waited with breathless anxiety.

Wilson had had an alarm. Having heard some unusual noise outside the
Ware-Atoua, he went back into the hut and watched the Maories from behind the
mat. At a sign from him, John stopped Glenarvan.

One of the warriors on guard, startled by an unusual sound, rose and drew


nearer to the Ware-Atoua. He stood still about two paces from the hut and
listened with his head bent forward. He remained in that attitude for a minute
that seemed an hour, his ear intent, his eye peering into the darkness. Then
shaking his head like one who sees he is mistaken, he went back to his
companions, took an armful of dead wood, and threw it into the smouldering
fire, which immediately revived. His face was lighted up by the flame, and was
free from any look of doubt, and after having glanced to where the first light of
dawn whitened the eastern sky, stretched himself near the fire to warm his
stiffened limbs.

"All's well!" whispered Wilson.

John signaled to Glenarvan to resume his descent.

Glenarvan let himself gently down the slope; soon Lady Helena and he
landed on the narrow track where Robert waited for them.

The rope was shaken three times, and in his turn John Mangles, preceding
Mary Grant, followed in the dangerous route.

He arrived safely; he rejoined Lord and Lady Glenarvan in the hollow
mentioned by Robert.

Five minutes after, all the fugitives had safely escaped from the Ware-Atoua,
left their retreat, and keeping away from the inhabited shores of the lakes, they
plunged by narrow paths into the recesses of the mountains.

They walked quickly, trying to avoid the points where they might be seen
from the pah. They were quite silent, and glided among the bushes like shadows.
Whither? Where chance led them, but at any rate they were free.

Toward five o'clock, the day began to dawn, bluish clouds marbled the upper
stratum of clouds. The misty summits began to pierce the morning mists. The
orb of day was soon to appear, and instead of giving the signal for their
execution, would, on the contrary, announce their flight.

It was of vital importance that before the decisive moment arrived they
should put themselves beyond the reach of the savages, so as to put them off
their track. But their progress was slow, for the paths were steep. Lady
Glenarvan climbed the slopes, supported, not to say carried, by Glenarvan, and
Mary Grant leaned on the arm of John Mangles; Robert, radiant with joy,
triumphant at his success, led the march, and the two sailors brought up the rear.

Another half an hour and the glorious sun would rise out of the mists of the
horizon. For half an hour the fugitives walked on as chance led them. Paganel
was not there to take the lead. He was now the object of their anxiety, and whose
absence was a black shadow between them and their happiness. But they bore
steadily eastward, as much as possible, and faced the gorgeous morning light.
Soon they had reached a height of 500 feet above Lake Taupo, and the cold of


the morning, increased by the altitude, was very keen. Dim outlines of hills and
mountains rose behind one another; but Glenarvan only thought how best to get
lost among them. Time enough by and by to see about escaping from the
labyrinth.

At last the sun appeared and sent his first rays on their path.

Suddenly a terrific yell from a hundred throats rent the air. It came from the
pah, whose direction Glenarvan did not know. Besides, a thick veil of fog,
which, spread at his feet, prevented any distinct view of the valleys below.

But the fugitives could not doubt that their escape had been discovered; and
now the question was, would they be able to elude pursuit? Had they been seen?
Would not their track betray them?

At this moment the fog in the valley lifted, and enveloped them for a
moment in a damp mist, and at three hundred feet below they perceived the
swarming mass of frantic natives.

While they looked they were seen. Renewed howls broke forth, mingled with
the barking of dogs, and the whole tribe, after vainly trying to scale the rock of
Ware-Atoua, rushed out of the pah, and hastened by the shortest paths in pursuit
of the prisoners who were flying from their vengeance.


CHAPTER XII THE SACRED MOUNTAIN


THE summit of the mountain was still a hundred feet above them. The
fugitives were anxious to reach it that they might continue their flight on the
eastern slope out of the view of their pursuers. They hoped then to find some
practicable ridge that would allow of a passage to the neighboring peaks that
were thrown together in an orographic maze, to which poor Paganel's genius
would doubtless have found the clew.

They hastened up the slope, spurred on by the loud cries that drew nearer and
nearer. The avenging crowd had already reached the foot of the mountain.

"Courage! my friends," cried Glenarvan, urging his companions by voice and
look.

In less than five minutes they were at the top of the mountain, and then they
turned to judge of their position, and decide on a route that would baffle their
pursuers.

From their elevated position they could see over Lake Taupo, which
stretched toward the west in its setting of picturesque mountains. On the north
the peaks of Pirongia; on the south the burning crater of Tongariro. But eastward
nothing but the rocky barrier of peaks and ridges that formed the Wahiti ranges,
the great chain whose unbroken links stretch from the East Cape to Cook's
Straits. They had no alternative but to descend the opposite slope and enter the
narrow gorges, uncertain whether any outlet existed.

Glenarvan could not prolong the halt for a moment. Wearied as they might
be, they must fly or be discovered.

"Let us go down!" cried he, "before our passage is cut off."

But just as the ladies had risen with a despairing effort, McNabbs stopped
them and said:

"Glenarvan, it is useless. Look!"

And then they all perceived the inexplicable change that had taken place in
the movements of the Maories.

Their pursuit had suddenly stopped. The ascent of the mountain had ceased
by an imperious command. The natives had paused in their career, and surged
like the sea waves against an opposing rock. All the crowd, thirsting for blood,
stood at the foot of the mountain yelling and gesticulating, brandishing guns and
hatchets, but not advancing a foot. Their dogs, rooted to the spot like themselves,
barked with rage.

What stayed them? What occult power controlled these savages? The


fugitives looked without understanding, fearing lest the charm that enchained
Kai-Koumou's tribe should be broken.

Suddenly John Mangles uttered an exclamation which attracted the attention
of his companions. He pointed to a little inclosure on the summit of the cone.

"The tomb of Kara-Tete!" said Robert.

"Are you sure, Robert?" said Glenarvan.

"Yes, my Lord, it is the tomb; I recognize it."

Robert was right. Fifty feet above, at the extreme peak of the mountain,
freshly painted posts formed a small palisaded inclosure, and Glenarvan too was
convinced that it was the chief's burial place. The chances of their flight had led
them to the crest of Maunganamu.

Glenarvan, followed by the rest, climbed to the foot of the tomb. A large
opening, covered with mats, led into it. Glenarvan was about to invade the
sanctity of the "oudoupa," when he reeled backward.

"A savage!" said he.

"In the tomb?" inquired the Major.

"Yes, McNabbs."

"No matter; go in."

Glenarvan, the Major, Robert and John Mangles entered. There sat a Maori,
wrapped in a large flax mat; the darkness of the "oudoupa" preventing them from
distinguishing his features. He was very quiet, and was eating his breakfast quite
coolly.

Glenarvan was about to speak to him when the native forestalled him by
saying gayly and in good English:

"Sit down, my Lord; breakfast is ready."

It was Paganel. At the sound of his voice they all rushed into the "oudoupa,"
and he was cordially embraced all round. Paganel was found again. He was their
salvation. They wanted to question him; to know how and why he was here on
the summit of Maunganamu; but Glenarvan stopped this misplaced curiosity.

"The savages?" said he.

"The savages," said Paganel, shrugging his shoulders. "I have a contempt for
those people! Come and look at them."

They all followed Paganel out of the "oudoupa." The Maories were still in
the same position round the base of the mountain, uttering fearful cries.

"Shout! yell! till your lungs are gone, stupid wretches!" said Paganel. "I dare
you to come here!"

"But why?" said Glenarvan.

"Because the chief is buried here, and the tomb protects us, because the
mountain is tabooed."


"Tabooed?"

"Yes, my friends! and that is why I took refuge here, as the malefactors used
to flee to the sanctuaries in the middle ages."

"God be praised!" said Lady Helena, lifting her hands to heaven.

The fugitives were not yet out of danger, but they had a moment's respite,
which was very welcome in their exhausted state.

Glenarvan was too much overcome to speak, and the Major nodded his head
with an air of perfect content.

"And now, my friends," said Paganel, "if these brutes think to exercise their
patience on us, they are mistaken. In two days we shall be out of their reach."

"By flight!" said Glenarvan. "But how?"

"That I do not know," answered Paganel, "but we shall manage it."

And now everybody wanted to know about their friend's adventures. They
were puzzled by the reserve of a man generally so talkative; on this occasion
they had to drag the words out of his mouth; usually he was a ready story-teller,
now he gave only evasive answers to the questions of the rest.

"Paganel is another man!" thought McNabbs.

His face was really altered. He wrapped himself closely in his great flax mat
and seemed to deprecate observation. Everyone noticed his embarrassment,
when he was the subject of conversation, though nobody appeared to remark it;
when other topics were under discussion, Paganel resumed his usual gayety.

Of his adventures all that could be extracted from him at this time was as
follows:

After the murder of Kara-Tete, Paganel took advantage, like Robert, of the
commotion among the natives, and got out of the inclosure. But less fortunate
than young Grant, he walked straight into a Maori camp, where he met a tall,
intelligent-looking chief, evidently of higher rank than all the warriors of his
tribe. The chief spoke excellent English, and he saluted the new-comer by
rubbing the end of his nose against the end of the geographer's nose.

Paganel wondered whether he was to consider himself a prisoner or not. But
perceiving that he could not stir without the polite escort of the chief, he soon
made up his mind on that point.

This chief, Hihi, or Sunbeam, was not a bad fellow. Paganel's spectacles and
telescope seemed to give him a great idea of Paganel's importance, and he
manifested great attachment to him, not only by kindness, but by a strong flax
rope, especially at night.

This lasted for three days; to the inquiry whether he was well treated, he said
"Yes and no!" without further answer; he was a prisoner, and except that he
expected immediate execution, his state seemed to him no better than that in


which he had left his unfortunate friends.

One night, however, he managed to break his rope and escape. He had seen
from afar the burial of the chief, and knew that he was buried on the top of
Maunganamu, and he was well acquainted with the fact that the mountain would
be therefore tabooed. He resolved to take refuge there, being unwilling to leave
the region where his companions were in durance. He succeeded in his
dangerous attempt, and had arrived the previous night at the tomb of Kara-Tete,
and there proposed to recruit his strength while he waited in the hope that his
friends might, by Divine mercy, find the means of escape.

Such was Paganel's story. Did he designedly conceal some incident of his
captivity? More than once his embarrassment led them to that conclusion. But
however that might be, he was heartily congratulated on all sides. And then the
present emergency came on for serious discussion. The natives dare not climb
Maunganamu, but they, of course, calculated that hunger and thirst would restore
them their prey. It was only a question of time, and patience is one of the virtues
of all savages. Glenarvan was fully alive to the difficulty, but made up his mind
to watch for an opportunity, or make one. First of all he made a thorough survey
of Maunganamu, their present fortress; not for the purpose of defence, but of
escape. The Major, John, Robert, Paganel, and himself, made an exact map of
the mountain. They noted the direction, outlet and inclination of the paths. The
ridge, a mile in length, which united Maunganamu to the Wahiti chain had a
downward inclination. Its slope, narrow and jagged though it was, appeared the
only practicable route, if they made good their escape at all. If they could do this
without observation, under cover of night, they might possibly reach the deep
valleys of the Range and put the Maories off the scent.

But there were dangers in this route; the last part of it was within pistol shot
of natives posted on the lower slopes. Already when they ventured on the
exposed part of the crest, they were saluted with a hail of shot which did not
reach them. Some gun wads, carried by the wind, fell beside them; they were
made of printed paper, which Paganel picked up out of curiosity, and with some
trouble deciphered.

"That is a good idea! My friends, do you know what those creatures use for
wads?"

"No, Paganel!" said Glenarvan.

"Pages of the Bible! If that is the use they make of the Holy Book, I pity the
missionaries! It will be rather difficult to establish a Maori library."

"And what text of scripture did they aim at us?"

"A message from God Himself!" exclaimed John Mangles, who was in the
act of reading the scorched fragment of paper. "It bids us hope in Him," added


the young captain, firm in the faith of his Scotch convictions.

"Read it, John!" said Glenarvan.

And John read what the powder had left visible: "I will deliver him, for he
hath trusted in me."

"My friends," said Glenarvan, "we must carry these words of hope to our
dear, brave ladies. The sound will bring comfort to their hearts."

Glenarvan and his companions hastened up the steep path to the cone, and
went toward the tomb. As they climbed they were astonished to perceive every
few moments a kind of vibration in the soil. It was not a movement like
earthquake, but that peculiar tremor that affects the metal of a boiler under high
pressure. It was clear the mountain was the outer covering of a body of vapor,
the product of subterranean fires.

This phenomenon of course excited no surprise in those that had just traveled
among the hot springs of the Waikato. They knew that the central region of the
Ika-na-Mani is essentially volcanic. It is a sieve, whose interstices furnish a
passage for the earth's vapors in the shape of boiling geysers and solfataras.

Paganel, who had already noticed this, called the attention of his friends to
the volcanic nature of the mountain. The peak of Maunganamu was only one of
the many cones which bristle on this part of the island. It was a volcano of the
future. A slight mechanical change would produce a crater of eruption in these
slopes, which consisted merely of whitish silicious tufa.

"That may be," said Glenarvan, "but we are in no more danger here than
standing by the boiler of the DUNCAN; this solid crust is like sheet iron."

"I agree with you," added the Major, "but however good a boiler may be, it
bursts at last after too long service."

"McNabbs," said Paganel, "I have no fancy for staying on the cone. When
Providence points out a way, I will go at once."

"T wish," remarked John, "that Maunganamu could carry us himself, with all
the motive power that he has inside. It is too bad that millions of horse-power
should lie under our feet unavailable for our needs. Our DUNCAN would carry
us to the end of the world with the thousandth part of it."

The recollections of the DUNCAN evoked by John Mangles turned
Glenarvan's thoughts into their saddest channel; for desperate as his own case
was he often forgot it, in vain regret at the fate of his crew.

His mind still dwelt on it when he reached the summit of Maunganamu and
met his companions in misfortune.

Lady Helena, when she saw Glenarvan, came forward to meet him.

"Dear Edward," said she, "you have made up your mind? Are we to hope or
fear?"


"Hope, my dear Helena," replied Glenarvan. "The natives will never set foot
on the mountain, and we shall have time to devise a plan of escape."

"More than that, madam, God himself has encouraged us to hope."

And so saying, John Mangles handed to Lady Helena the fragment of paper
on which was legible the sacred words; and these young women, whose trusting
hearts were always open to observe Providential interpositions, read in these
words an indisputable sign of salvation.

"And now let us go to the 'oudoupa!" cried Paganel, in his gayest mood. "It
is our castle, our dining-room, our study! None can meddle with us there!
Ladies! allow me to do the honors of this charming abode."

They followed Paganel, and when the savages saw them profaning anew the
tabooed burial place, they renewed their fire and their fearful yells, the one as
loud as the other. But fortunately the balls fell short of our friends, though the
cries reached them.

Lady Helena, Mary Grant, and their companions were quite relieved to find
that the Maories were more dominated by superstition than by anger, and they
entered the monument.

It was a palisade made of red-painted posts. Symbolic figures, tattooed on
the wood, set forth the rank and achievements of the deceased. Strings of
amulets, made of shells or cut stones, hung from one part to another. In the
interior, the ground was carpeted with green leaves, and in the middle, a slight
mound betokened the place of the newly made grave. There lay the chief's
weapons, his guns loaded and capped, his spear, his splendid ax of green jade,
with a supply of powder and ball for the happy hunting grounds.

"Quite an arsenal!" said Paganel, "of which we shall make a better use. What
ideas they have! Fancy carrying arms in the other world!"

"Well!" said the Major, "but these are English firearms."

"No doubt," replied Glenarvan, "and it is a very unwise practice to give
firearms to savages! They turn them against the invaders, naturally enough. But
at any rate, they will be very valuable to us."

"Yes," said Paganel, "but what is more useful still is the food and water
provided for Kara-Tete."

Things had been handsomely done for the deceased chief; the amount of
provisions denoted their esteem for the departed. There was food enough to
sustain ten persons for fifteen days, or the dead man forever.

The vegetable aliments consisted of edible ferns, sweet potatoes, the
"convolvulus batatas," which was indigenous, and the potato which had been
imported long before by the Europeans. Large jars contained pure water, and a
dozen baskets artistically plaited contained tablets of an unknown green gum.


The fugitives were therefore provided for some days against hunger and
thirst, and they needed no persuasion to begin their attack on the deceased chief's
stores. Glenarvan brought out the necessary quantity and put them into Olbinett's
hands. The steward, who never could forget his routine ideas, even in the most
exceptional circumstances, thought the meal a slender one. He did not know how
to prepare the roots, and, besides, had no fire.

But Paganel soon solved the difficulty by recommending him to bury his fern
roots and sweet potatoes in the soil. The temperature of the surface stratum was
very high, and a thermometer plunged into the soil would have marked from 160
to 170 degrees; in fact, Olbinett narrowly missed being scalded, for just as he
had scooped a hole for the roots, a jet of vapor sprang up and with a whistling
sound rose six feet above the ground.

The steward fell back in terror.

"Shut off steam!" cried the Major, running to close the hole with the loose
drift, while Paganel pondering on the singular phenomenon muttered to himself:

"Let me see! ha! ha! Why not?"

"Are you hurt?” inquired McNabbs of Olbinett.

"No, Major," said the steward, "but I did not expect--"

"That Providence would send you fire," interrupted Paganel in a jovial tone.
"First the larder of Kara-Tete and then fire out of the ground! Upon my word,
this mountain is a paradise! I propose that we found a colony, and cultivate the
soil and settle here for life! We shall be the Robinsons of Maunganamu. We
should want for nothing."

"If it is solid ground," said John Mangles.

"Well! it is not a thing of yesterday," said Paganel. "It has stood against the
internal fire for many a day, and will do so till we leave it, at any rate."

"Breakfast is ready," announced Olbinett with as much dignity as if he was in
Malcolm Castle.

Without delay, the fugitives sat down near the palisade, and began one of the
many meals with which Providence had supplied them in critical circumstances.
Nobody was inclined to be fastidious, but opinions were divided as regarded the
edible fern. Some thought the flavor sweet and agreeable, others pronounced it
leathery, insipid, and resembling the taste of gum. The sweet potatoes, cooked in
the burning soil, were excellent. The geographer remarked that Kara-Tete was
not badly off after all.

And now that their hunger was appeased, it was time to decide on their plan
of escape.

"So soon!" exclaimed Paganel in a piteous tone. "Would you quit the home
of delight so soon?"


"But, Monsieur Paganel," interposed Lady Helena, "if this be Capua, you
dare not intend to imitate Hannibal!"

"Madam, I dare not contradict you, and if discussion is the order of the day,
let it proceed."

"First," said Glenarvan, "I think we ought to start before we are driven to it
by hunger. We are revived now, and ought to take advantage of it. To-night we
will try to reach the eastern valleys by crossing the cordon of natives under cover
of the darkness."

"Excellent," answered Paganel, "if the Maories allow us to pass."

"And if not?" asked John Mangles.

"Then we will use our great resources,” said Paganel.

"But have we great resources?" inquired the Major.

"More than we can use!" replied Paganel, without any further explanation.

And then they waited for the night.

The natives had not stirred. Their numbers seemed even greater, perhaps
owing to the influx of the stragglers of the tribe. Fires lighted at intervals formed
a girdle of flame round the base of the mountain, so that when darkness fell,
Maunganamu appeared to rise out of a great brasier, and to hide its head in the
thick darkness. Five hundred feet below they could hear the hum and the cries of
the enemy's camp.

At nine o'clock the darkness being very intense, Glenarvan and John
Mangles went out to reconnoiter before embarking the whole party on this
critical journey. They made the descent noiselessly, and after about ten minutes,
arrived on the narrow ridge that crossed the native lines, fifty feet above the
camp.

All went well so far. The Maories, stretched beside the fires, did not appear
to observe the two fugitives. But in an instant a double fusillade burst forth from
both sides of the ridge.

"Back," exclaimed Glenarvan; "those wretches have the eyes of cats and the
guns of riflemen!"

And they turned, and once more climbed the steep slope of the mountain,
and then hastened to their friends who had been alarmed at the firing.
Glenarvan's hat was pierced by two balls, and they concluded that it was out of
the question to venture again on the ridge between two lines of marksmen.

"Wait till to-morrow," said Paganel, "and as we cannot elude their vigilance,
let me try my hand on them."

The night was cold; but happily Kara-Tete had been furnished with his best
night gear, and the party wrapped themselves each in a warm flax mantle, and
protected by native superstition, slept quietly inside the inclosure, on the warm


ground, still violating with the violence of the internal ebullition.


CHAPTER XIV A BOLD STRATAGEM


NEXT day, February 17th, the sun's first rays awoke the sleepers of the
Maunganamu. The Maories had long since been astir, coming and going at the
foot of the mountain, without leaving their line of observation. Furious clamor
broke out when they saw the Europeans leave the sacred place they had
profaned.

Each of the party glanced first at the neighboring mountains, and at the deep
valleys still drowned in mist, and over Lake Taupo, which the morming breeze
ruffled slightly. And then all clustered round Paganel eager to hear his project.

Paganel soon satisfied their curiosity. "My friends," said he, "my plan has
one great recommendation; if it does not accomplish all that I anticipate, we
shall be no worse off than we are at present. But it must, it will succeed."

"And what is it?" asked McNabbs.

"It is this," replied Paganel, "the superstition of the natives has made this
mountain a refuge for us, and we must take advantage of their superstition to
escape. If I can persuade Kai-Koumou that we have expiated our profanation,
that the wrath of the Deity has fallen on us: in a word, that we have died a
terrible death, do you think he will leave the plateau of Maunganamu to return to
his village?"

"Not a doubt of it," said Glenarvan.

"And what is the horrible death you refer to?" asked Lady Helena.

"The death of the sacrilegious, my friends," replied Paganel. "The avenging
flames are under our feet. Let us open a way for them!"

"What! make a volcano!" cried John Mangles.

"Yes, an impromptu volcano, whose fury we can regulate. There are plenty
of vapors ready to hand, and subterranean fires ready to issue forth. We can have
an eruption ready to order."

"An excellent idea, Paganel; well conceived," said the Major.

"You understand," replied the geographer, "we are to pretend to fall victims
to the flames of the Maori Pluto, and to disappear spiritually into the tomb of
Kara-Tete. And stay there three, four, even five days if necessary--that is to say,
till the savages are convinced that we have perished, and abandon their watch."

"But," said Miss Grant, "suppose they wish to be sure of our punishment, and
climb up here to see?"

"No, my dear Mary," returned Paganel. "They will not do that. The mountain
is tabooed, and if it devoured its sacrilegious intruders, it would only be more


inviolably tabooed."

"It is really a very clever plan," said Glenarvan. "There is only one chance
against it; that is, if the savages prolong their watch at the foot of Maunganamu,
we may run short of provisions. But if we play our game well there is not much
fear of that."

"And when shall we try this last chance?" asked Lady Helena.

"To-night," rejoined Paganel, "when the darkness is the deepest."

"Agreed," said McNabbs; "Paganel, you are a genius! and I, who seldom get
up an enthusiasm, I answer for the success of your plan. Oh! those villains! They
shall have a little miracle that will put off their conversion for

V. IV Verne another century. I hope the missionaries will forgive us."

The project of Paganel was therefore adopted, and certainly with the
superstitious ideas of the Maories there seemed good ground for hope. But
brilliant as the idea might be, the difficulty was in the modus operandi. The
volcano might devour the bold schemers, who offered it a crater. Could they
control and direct the eruption when they had succeeded in letting loose its vapor
and flames, and lava streams? The entire cone might be engulfed. It was
meddling with phenomena of which nature herself has the absolute monopoly.

Paganel had thought of all this; but he intended to act prudently and without
pushing things to extremes. An appearance would be enough to dupe the
Maories, and there was no need for the terrible realities of an eruption.

How long that day seemed. Each one of the party inwardly counted the
hours. All was made ready for flight. The oudoupa provisions were divided and
formed very portable packets. Some mats and firearms completed their light
equipment, all of which they took from the tomb of the chief. It is needless to
say that their preparations were made within the inclosure, and that they were
unseen by the savages.

At six o'clock the steward served up a refreshing meal. Where or when they
would eat in the valleys of the Ranges no one could foretell. So that they had to
take in supplies for the future. The principal dish was composed of half a dozen
rats, caught by Wilson and stewed. Lady Helena and Mary Grant obstinately
refused to taste this game, which is highly esteemed by the natives; but the men
enjoyed it like the real Maories. The meat was excellent and savory, and the six
devourers were devoured down to the bones.

The evening twilight came on. The sun went down in a stormy-looking bank
of clouds. A few flashes of lightning glanced across the horizon and distant
thunder pealed through the darkened sky.

Paganel welcomed the storm, which was a valuable aid to his plans, and
completed his program. The savages are superstitiously affected by the great


phenomena of nature. The New Zealanders think that thunder is the angry voice
of Noui-Atoua, and lightning the fierce gleam of his eyes. Thus their deity was
coming personally to chastise the violators of the taboo.

At eight o'clock, the summit of the Maunganamu was lost in portentous
darkness. The sky would supply a black background for the blaze which Paganel
was about to throw on it. The Maories could no longer see their prisoners; and
this was the moment for action. Speed was necessary. Glenarvan, Paganel,
McNabbs, Robert, the steward, and the two sailors, all lent a hand.

The spot for the crater was chosen thirty paces from Kara-Tete's tomb. It was
important to keep the oudoupa intact, for if it disappeared, the taboo of the
mountain would be nullified. At the spot mentioned Paganel had noticed an
enormous block of stone, round which the vapors played with a certain degree of
intensity. This block covered a small natural crater hollowed in the cone, and by
its own weight prevented the egress of the subterranean fire. If they could move
it from its socket, the vapors and the lava would issue by the disencumbered
opening.

The workers used as levers some posts taken from the interior of the
oudoupa, and they plied their tools vigorously against the rocky mass. Under
their united efforts the stone soon moved. They made a little trench so that it
might roll down the inclined plane. As they gradually raised it, the vibrations
under foot became more distinct. Dull roarings of flame and the whistling sound
of a furnace ran along under the thin crust. The intrepid la-borers, veritable
Cyclops handling Earth's fires, worked in silence; soon some fissures and jets of
steam warned them that their place was growing dangerous. But a crowning
effort moved the mass which rolled down and disappeared. Immediately the thin
crust gave way. A column of fire rushed to the sky with loud detonations, while
streams of boiling water and lava flowed toward the native camp and the lower
valleys.

All the cone trembled as if it was about to plunge into a fathomless gulf.

Glenarvan and his companions had barely time to get out of the way; they
fled to the enclosure of the oudoupa, not without having been sprinkled with
water at 220 degrees. This water at first spread a smell like soup, which soon
changed into a strong odor of sulphur.

Then the mud, the lava, the volcanic stones, all spouted forth in a torrent.
Streams of fire furrowed the sides of Maunganamu. The neighboring mountains
were lit up by the glare; the dark valleys were also filled with dazzling light.

All the savages had risen, howling under the pain inflicted by the burning
lava, which was bubbling and foaming in the midst of their camp.

Those whom the liquid fire had not touched fled to the surrounding hills;


then turned, and gazed in terror at this fearful phenomenon, this volcano in
which the anger of their deity would swallow up the profane intruders on the
sacred mountain. Now and then, when the roar of the eruption became less
violent, their cry was heard:

"Taboo! taboo! taboo!"

An enormous quantity of vapors, heated stones and lava was escaping by this
crater of Maunganamu. It was not a mere geyser like those that girdle round
Mount Hecla, in Iceland, it was itself a Hecla. All this volcanic commotion was
confined till then in the envelope of the cone, because the safety valve of
Tangariro was enough for its expansion; but when this new issue was afforded, it
rushed forth fiercely, and by the laws of equilibrium, the other eruptions in the
island must on that night have lost their usual intensity.

An hour after this volcano burst upon the world, broad streams of lava were
running down its sides. Legions of rats came out of their holes, and fled from the
scene.

All night long, and fanned by the tempest in the upper sky, the crater never
ceased to pour forth its torrents with a violence that alarmed Glenarvan. The
eruption was breaking away the edges of the opening. The prisoners. hidden
behind the inclosure of stakes, watched the fearful progress of the phenomenon.

Morning came. The fury of the volcano had not slackened. Thick yellowish
fumes were mixed with the flames; the lava torrents wound their serpentine
course in every direction.

Glenarvan watched with a beating heart, looking from all the interstices of
the palisaded enclosure, and observed the movements in the native camp.

The Maories had fled to the neighboring ledges, out of the reach of the
volcano. Some corpses which lay at the foot of the cone, were charred by the
fire. Further off toward the "pah," the lava had reached a group of twenty huts,
which were still smoking. The Maories, forming here and there groups,
contemplated the canopied summit of Maunganamu with religious awe.

Kai-Koumou approached in the midst of his warriors, and Glenarvan
recognized him. The chief advanced to the foot of the hill, on the side untouched
by the lava, but he did not ascend the first ledge.

Standing there, with his arms stretched out like an exerciser, he made some
grimaces, whose meaning was obvious to the prisoners. As Paganel had
foreseen, Kai-Koumou launched on the avenging mountain a more rigorous
taboo.

Soon after the natives left their positions and followed the winding paths that
led toward the pah.

"They are going!" exclaimed Glenarvan. "They have left their posts! God be


praised! Our stratagem has succeeded! My dear Lady Helena, my brave friends,
we are all dead and buried! But this evening when night comes, we shall rise and
leave our tomb, and fly these barbarous tribes!"

It would be difficult to conceive of the joy that pervaded the oudoupa. Hope
had regained the mastery in all hearts. The intrepid travelers forgot the past,
forgot the future, to enjoy the present delight! And yet the task before them was
not an easy one--to gain some European outpost in the midst of this unknown
country. But Kai-Koumou once off their track, they thought themselves safe
from all the savages in New Zealand.

A whole day had to elapse before they could make a start, and they employed
it in arranging a plan of flight. Paganel had treasured up his map of New
Zealand, and on it could trace out the best roads.

After discussion, the fugitives resolved to make for the Bay of Plenty,
towards the east. The region was unknown, but apparently desert. The travelers,
who from their past experience, had learned to make light of physical
difficulties, feared nothing but meeting Maories. At any cost they wanted to
avoid them and gain the east coast, where the missionaries had several stations.
That part of the country had hitherto escaped the horrors of war, and the natives
were not in the habit of scouring the country.

As to the distance that separated Lake Taupo from the Bay of Plenty, they
calculated it about a hundred miles. Ten days' march at ten miles a day, could be
done, not without fatigue, but none of the party gave that a thought. If they could
only reach the mission stations they could rest there while waiting for a
favorable opportunity to get to Auckland, for that was the point they desired to
reach.

This question settled, they resumed their watch of the native proceedings,
and continued so doing till evening fell. Not a solitary native remained at the
foot of the mountain, and when darkness set in over the Taupo valleys, not a fire
indicated the presence of the Maories at the base. The road was free.

At nine o'clock, the night being unusually dark, Glenarvan gave the order to
start. His companions and he, armed and equipped at the expense of Kara-Tete,
began cautiously to descend the slopes of Maunganamu, John Mangles and
Wilson leading the way, eyes and ears on the alert. They stopped at the slightest
sound, they started at every passing cloud. They slid rather than walked down
the spur, that their figures might be lost in the dark mass of the mountain. At two
hundred feet below the summit, John Mangles and his sailors reached the
dangerous ridge that had been so obstinately defended by the natives. If by ill
luck the Maories, more cunning than the fugitives, had only pretended to retreat;
if they were not really duped by the volcanic phenomenon, this was the spot


where their presence would be betrayed. Glenarvan could not but shudder, in
spite of his confidence, and in spite of the jokes of Paganel. The fate of the
whole party would hang in the balance for the ten minutes required to pass along
that ridge. He felt the beating of Lady Helena's heart, as she clung to his arm.

He had no thought of tuming back. Neither had John. The young captain,
followed closely by the whole party, and protected by the intense darkness, crept
along the ridge, stopping when some loose stone rolled to the bottom. If the
savages were still in the ambush below, these unusual sounds might provoke
from both sides a dangerous fusillade.

But speed was impossible in their serpent-like progress down this sloping
crest. When John Mangles had reached the lowest point, he was scarcely twenty-
five feet from the plateau, where the natives were encamped the night before,
and then the ridge rose again pretty steeply toward a wood for about a quarter of
a mile.

All this lower part was crossed without molestation, and they commenced
the ascent in silence. The clump of bush was invisible, though they knew it was
there, and but for the possibility of an ambush, Glenarvan counted on being safe
when the party arrived at that point. But he observed that after this point, they
were no longer protected by the taboo. The ascending ridge belonged not to
Maunganamu, but to the mountain system of the eastern side of Lake Taupo, so
that they had not only pistol shots, but hand-to-hand fighting to fear. For ten
minutes, the little band ascended by insensible degrees toward the higher table-
land. John could not discern the dark wood, but he knew it ought to be within
two hundred feet. Suddenly he stopped; almost retreated. He fancied he heard
something in the darkness; his stoppage interrupted the march of those behind.

He remained motionless long enough to alarm his companions. They waited
with unspeakable anxiety, wondering if they were doomed to retrace their steps,
and return to the summit of Maunganamu.

But John, finding that the noise was not repeated, resumed the ascent of the
narrow path of the ridge. Soon they perceived the shadowy outline of the wood
showing faintly through the darkness. A few steps more and they were hid from
sight in the thick foliage of the trees.


CHAPTER XV FROM PERIL TO SAFETY


THE night favored their escape, and prudence urged them to lose no time in
getting away from the fatal neighborhood of Lake Taupo. Paganel took the post
of leader, and his wonderful instinct shone out anew in this difficult mountain
journey. His nyctalopia was a great advantage, his cat-like sight enabling him to
distinguish the smallest object in the deepest gloom.

For three hours they walked on without halting along the far-reaching slope
of the eastern side. Paganel kept a little to the southeast, in order to make use of
a Narrow passage between the Kaimanawa and the Wahiti Ranges, through
which the road from Hawkes' Bay to Auckland passes. Once through that gorge,
his plan was to keep off the road, and, under the shelter of the high ranges,
march to the coast across the inhabited regions of the province.

At nine o'clock in the morning, they had made twelve miles in twelve hours.
The courageous women could not be pressed further, and, besides, the locality
was suitable for camping. The fugitives had reached the pass that separates the
two chains. Paganel, map in hand, made a loop toward the northeast, and at ten
o'clock the little party reached a sort of redan, formed by a projecting rock.

The provisions were brought out, and justice was done to their meal. Mary
Grant and the Major, who had not thought highly of the edible fern till then, now
ate of it heartily.

The halt lasted till two o'clock in the afternoon, then they resumed their
journey; and in the evening they stopped eight miles from the mountains, and
required no persuasion to sleep in the open air.

Next day was one of serious difficulties. Their route lay across this wondrous
region of volcanic lakes, geysers, and solfataras, which extended to the east of
the Wahiti Ranges. It is a country more pleasant for the eye to ramble over, than
for the limbs. Every quarter of a mile they had to turn aside or go around for
some obstacle, and thus incurred great fatigue; but what a strange sight met their
eyes! What infinite variety nature lavishes on her great panoramas!

On this vast extent of twenty miles square, the subterranean forces had a
field for the display of all their varied effects. Salt springs, of singular
transparency, peopled by myriads of insects, sprang up from thickets of tea-tree
scrub. They diffused a powerful odor of burnt powder, and scattered on the
ground a white sediment like dazzling snow. The limpid waters were nearly at
boiling point, while some neighboring springs spread out like sheets of glass.
Gigantic tree-ferns grew beside them, in conditions analogous to those of the


Silurian vegetation.

On every side jets of water rose like park fountains, out of a sea of vapor;
some of them continuous, others intermittent, as if a capricious Pluto controlled
their movements. They rose like an amphitheater on natural terraces; their waters
gradually flowed together under folds of white smoke, and corroding the edges
of the semi-transparent steps of this gigantic staircase. They fed whole lakes
with their boiling torrents.

Farther still, beyond the hot springs and tumultuous geysers, came the
solfataras. The ground looked as if covered with large pustules. These were
slumbering craters full of cracks and fissures from which rose various gases. The
air was saturated with the acrid and unpleasant odor of sulphurous acid. The
ground was encrusted with sulphur and crystalline concretions. All this
incalculable wealth had been accumulating for centuries, and if the sulphur beds
of Sicily should ever be exhausted, it is here, in this little known district of New
Zealand, that supplies must be sought.

The fatigue in traveling in such a country as this will be best understood.
Camping was very difficult, and the sportsmen of the party shot nothing worthy
of Olbinett's skill; so that they had generally to content themselves with fern and
sweet potato-- a poor diet which was scarcely sufficient to recruit the exhausted
strength of the little party, who were all anxious to escape from this barren
region.

But four days at least must elapse before they could hope to leave it. On
February 23, at a distance of fifty miles from Maunganamu, Glenarvan called a
halt, and camped at the foot of a nameless mountain, marked on Paganel's map.
The wooded plains stretched away from sight, and great forests appeared on the
horizon.

That day McNabbs and Robert killed three kiwis, which filled the chief place
on their table, not for long, however, for in a few moments they were all
consumed from the beaks to the claws.

At dessert, between the potatoes and sweet potatoes, Paganel moved a
resolution which was carried with enthusiasm. He proposed to give the name of
Glenarvan to this unnamed mountain, which rose 3,000 feet high, and then was
lost in the clouds, and he printed carefully on his map the name of the Scottish
nobleman.

It would be idle to narrate all the monotonous and uninteresting details of the
rest of the journey. Only two or three occurrences of any importance took place
on the way from the lakes to the Pacific Ocean. The march was all day long
across forests and plains. John took observations of the sun and stars. Neither
heat nor rain increased the discomfort of the journey, but the travelers were so


reduced by the trials they had undergone, that they made very slow progress; and
they longed to arrive at the mission station.

They still chatted, but the conversation had ceased to be general. The little
party broke up into groups, attracted to each other, not by narrow sympathies,
but by a more personal communion of ideas.

Glenarvan generally walked alone; his mind seemed to recur to his
unfortunate crew, as he drew nearer to the sea. He apparently lost sight of the
dangers which lay before them on their way to Auckland, in the thought of his
massacred men; the horrible picture haunted him.

Harry Grant was never spoken of; they were no longer in a position to make
any effort on his behalf. If his name was uttered at all, it was between his
daughter and John Mangles.

John had never reminded Mary of what she had said to him on that last night
at Ware-Atoua. He was too wise to take advantage of a word spoken in a
moment of despair. When he mentioned Captain Grant, John always spoke of
further search. He assured Mary that Lord Glenarvan would re-embark in the
enterprise. He persistently returned to the fact that the authenticity of the
document was indisputable, and that therefore Harry Grant was somewhere to be
found, and that they would find him, if they had to try all over the world. Mary
drank in his words, and she and John, united by the same thought, cherished the
same hope. Often Lady Helena joined in the conversation; but she did not
participate in their illusions, though she refrained from chilling their enthusiasm.

McNabbs, Robert, Wilson, and Mulrady kept up their hunting parties,
without going far from the rest, and each one furnished his QUOTA of game.

Paganel, arrayed in his flax mat, kept himself aloof, in a silent and pensive
mood.

And yet, it is only justice to say, in spite of the general rule that, in the midst
of trials, dangers, fatigues, and privations, the most amiable dispositions become
ruffled and embittered, all our travelers were united, devoted, ready to die for
one another.

On the 25th of February, their progress was stopped by a river which
answered to the Wakari on Paganel's map, and was easily forded. For two days
plains of low scrub succeeded each other without interruption. Half the distance
from Lake Taupo to the coast had been traversed without accident, though not
without fatigue.

Then the scene changed to immense and interminable forests, which
reminded them of Australia, but here the kauri took the place of the eucalyptus.
Although their enthusiasm had been incessantly called forth during their four
months' journey, Glenarvan and his companions were compelled to admire and


wonder at those gigantic pines, worthy rivals of the Cedars of Lebanon, and the
"Mammoth trees" of California. The kauris measured a hundred feet high, before
the ramification of the branches. They grew in isolated clumps, and the forest
was not composed of trees, but of innumerable groups of trees, which spread
their green canopies in the air two hundred feet from the ground.

Some of these pines, still young, about a hundred years old, resembled the
red pine of Europe. They had a dark crown surmounted by a dark conical shoot.
Their older brethren, five or six hundred years of age, formed great green
pavilions supported on the inextricable network of their branches. These
patriarchs of the New Zealand forest measured fifty yards in circumference, and
the united arms of all the travelers could not embrace the giant trunk.

For three days the little party made their way under these vast arches, over a
clayey soil which the foot of man had never trod. They knew this by the quantity
of resinous gum that lay in heaps at the foot of the trees, and which would have
lasted for native exportation many years.

The sportsmen found whole coveys of the kiwi, which are scarce in districts
frequented by the Maories; the native dogs drive them away to the shelter of
these inaccessible forests. They were an abundant source of nourishing food to
our travelers.

Paganel also had the good fortune to espy, in a thicket, a pair of gigantic
birds; his instinct as a naturalist was awakened. He called his companions, and in
spite of their fatigue, the Major, Robert, and he set off on the track of these
animals.

His curiosity was excusable, for he had recognized, or thought he had
recognized, these birds as "moas" belonging to the species of "dinornis," which
many naturalists class with the extinct birds. This, if Paganel was right, would
confirm the opinion of Dr. Hochstetter and other travelers on the present
existence of the wingless giants of New Zealand.

These moas which Paganel was chasing, the contemporaries of the
Megatherium and the Pterodactyles, must have been eighteen feet high. They
were huge ostriches, timid too, for they fled with extreme rapidity. But no shot
could stay their course. After a few minutes of chase, these fleet-footed moas
disappeared among the tall trees, and the sportsmen lost their powder and their
pains.

That evening, March 1, Glenarvan and his companions, emerging at last
from the immense kauri-forest, camped at the foot of Mount Ikirangi, whose
summit rose five thousand five hundred feet into the air. At this point they had
traveled a hundred miles from Maunganamu, and the shore was still thirty miles
away. John Mangles had calculated on accomplishing the whole journey in ten


days, but he did not foresee the physical difficulties of the country.

On the whole, owing to the circuits, the obstacles, and the imperfect
observations, the journey had been extended by fully one-fifth, and now that
they had reached Mount Ikirangi, they were quite worn out.

Two long days of walking were still to be accomplished, during which time
all their activity and vigilance would be required, for their way was through a
district often frequented by the natives. The little party conquered their
weariness, and set out next morning at daybreak.

Between Mount Ikirangi which was left to the right, and Mount Hardy whose
summit rose on the left to a height of 3,700 feet, the journey was very trying; for
about ten miles the bush was a tangle of "supple-jack," a kind of flexible rope,
appropriately called "stifling-creeper," that caught the feet at every step. For two
days, they had to cut their way with an ax through this thousand-headed hydra.
Hunting became impossible, and the sportsmen failed in their accustomed
tribute. The provisions were almost exhausted, and there was no means of
renewing them; their thirst was increasing by fatigue, and there was no water
wherewith to quench it.

The sufferings of Glenarvan and his party became terrible, and for the first
time their moral energy threatened to give way. They no longer walked, they
dragged themselves along, soulless bodies, animated only by the instinct of self-
preservation which survives every other feeling, and in this melancholy plight
they reached Point Lottin on the shores of the Pacific.

Here they saw several deserted huts, the ruins of a village lately destroyed by
the war, abandoned fields, and everywhere signs of pillage and incendiary fires.

They were toiling painfully along the shore, when they saw, at a distance of
about a mile, a band of natives, who rushed toward them brandishing their
weapons. Glenarvan, hemmed in by the sea, could not fly, and summoning all
his remaining strength he was about to meet the attack, when John Mangles
cried:

"A boat! a boat!"

And there, twenty paces off, a canoe with six oars lay on the beach. To
launch it, jump in and fly from the dangerous shore, was only a minute's work.
John Mangles, McNabbs, Wilson and Mulrady took the oars; Glenarvan the
helm; the two women, Robert and Olbinett stretched themselves beside him. In
ten minutes the canoe was a quarter of a mile from the shore. The sea was calm.
The fugitives were silent. But John, who did not want to get too far from land,
was about to give the order to go up the coast, when he suddenly stopped
rowing.

He saw three canoes coming out from behind Point Lottin and evidently


about to give chase.

"Out to sea! Out to sea!" he exclaimed. "Better to drown if we must!"

The canoe went fast under her four rowers. For half an hour she kept her
distance; but the poor exhausted fellows grew weaker, and the three pursuing
boats began to gain sensibly on them. At this moment, scarcely two miles lay
between them. It was impossible to avoid the attack of the natives, who were
already preparing to fire their long guns.

What was Glenarvan about?--standing up in the stern he was looking toward
the horizon for some chimerical help. What did he hope for? What did he wish?
Had he a presentiment?

In a moment his eyes gleamed, his hand pointed out into the distance.

"A ship! a ship!" he cried. "My friends, row! row hard!"

Not one of the rowers turned his head--not an oar-stroke must be lost.
Paganel alone rose, and turned his telescope to the point indicated.

"Yes," said he, "a ship! a steamer! they are under full steam! they are coming
to us! Found now, brave comrades!"

The fugitives summoned new energy, and for another half hour, keeping their
distance, they rowed with hasty strokes. The steamer came nearer and nearer.
They made out her two masts, bare of sails, and the great volumes of black
smoke. Glenarvan, handing the tiller to Robert, seized Paganel's glass, and
watched the movements of the steamer.

John Mangles and his companions were lost in wonder when they saw
Glenarvan's features contract and grow pale, and the glass drop from his hands.
One word explained it.

"The DUNCAN!" exclaimed Glenarvan. "The DUNCAN, and the convicts!"

"The DUNCAN!" cried John, letting go his oar and rising.

"Yes, death on all sides!" murmured Glenarvan, crushed by despair.

It was indeed the yacht, they could not mistake her--the yacht and her bandit
crew!

The major could scarcely restrain himself from cursing their destiny.

The canoe was meantime standing still. Where should they go? Whither fly?
What choice was there between the convicts and the savages?

A shot was fired from the nearest of the native boats, and the ball struck
Wilson's oar.

A few strokes then carried the canoe nearer to the DUNCAN.

The yacht was coming down at full speed, and was not more than half a mile
off.

John Mangles, between two enemies, did not know what to advise, whither
to fly! The two poor ladies on their knees, prayed in their agony.


The savages kept up a running fire, and shots were raining round the canoe,
when suddenly a loud report was heard, and a ball from the yacht's cannon
passed over their heads, and now the boat remained motionless between the
DUNCAN and the native canoes.

John Mangles, frenzied with despair, seized his ax. He was about to scuttle
the boat and sink it with his unfortunate companions, when a cry from Robert
arrested his arm.

"Tom Austin! Tom Austin!" the lad shouted. "He is on board! I see him! He
knows us! He is waving his hat."

The ax hung useless in John's hand.

A second ball whistled over his head, and cut in two the nearest of the three
native boats, while a loud hurrah burst forth on board the DUNCAN.

The savages took flight, fled and regained the shore.

"Come on, Tom, come on!" cried John Mangles in a joyous voice.

And a few minutes after, the ten fugitives, how, they knew not, were all safe
on board the DUNCAN.

CHAPTER XVI WHY THE "DUNCAN" WENT TO NEW ZEALAND

IT would be vain to attempt to depict the feelings of Glenarvan and his
friends when the songs of old Scotia fell on their ears. The moment they set foot
on the deck of the DUNCAN, the piper blew his bagpipes, and commenced the
national pibroch of the Malcolm clan, while loud hurrahs rent the air.

Glenarvan and his whole party, even the Major himself, were crying and
embracing each other. They were delirious with joy. The geographer was
absolutely mad. He frisked about, telescope in hand, pointing it at the last canoe
approaching the shore.

But at the sight of Glenarvan and his companions, with their clothing in rags,
and thin, haggard faces, bearing marks of horrible sufferings, the crew ceased
their noisy demonstrations. These were specters who had returned--not the
bright, adventurous travelers who had left the yacht three months before, so full
of hope! Chance, and chance only, had brought them back to the deck of the
yacht they never thought to see again. And in what a state of exhaustion and
feebleness. But before thinking of fatigue, or attending to the imperious demands
of hunger and thirst, Glenarvan questioned Tom Austin about his being on this
coast.

Why had the DUNCAN come to the eastern coast of New Zealand? How
was it not in the hands of Ben Joyce? By what providential fatality had God
brought them in the track of the fugitives?

Why? how? and for what purpose? Tom was stormed with questions on all
sides. The old sailor did not know which to listen to first, and at last resolved to


hear nobody but Glenarvan, and to answer nobody but him.

"But the convicts?" inquired Glenarvan. "What did you do with them?"

"The convicts?" replied Tom, with the air of a man who does not in the least
understand what he is being asked.

"Yes, the wretches who attacked the yacht."

"What yacht? Your Honor's?"

"Why, of course, Tom. The DUNCAN, and Ben Joyce, who came on board."

"I don't know this Ben Joyce, and have never seen him."

"Never seen him!" exclaimed Paganel, stupefied at the old sailor's replies.
"Then pray tell me, Tom, how it is that the DUNCAN is cruising at this moment
on the coast of New Zealand?"

But if Glenarvan and his friends were totally at a loss to understand the
bewilderment of the old sailor, what was their amazement when he replied in a
calm voice:

"The DUNCAN is cruising here by your Honor's orders."

"By my orders?" cried Glenarvan.

"Yes, my Lord. I only acted in obedience to the instructions sent in your
letter of January fourteenth."

"My letter! my letter!" exclaimed Glenarvan.

The ten travelers pressed closer round Tom Austin, devouring him with their
eyes. The letter dated from Snowy River had reached the DUNCAN, then.

"Let us come to explanations, pray, for it seems to me I am dreaming. You
received a letter, Tom?"

"Yes, a letter from your Honor."

"At Melbourne?"

"At Melbourne, just as our repairs were completed."

"And this letter?"

"Tt was not written by you, but bore your signature, my Lord."

"Just so; my letter was brought by a convict called Ben Joyce."

"No, by a sailor called Ayrton, a quartermaster on the BRITANNIA."

"Yes, Ayrton or Ben Joyce, one and the same individual. Well, and what were
the contents of this letter?"

"Tt contained orders to leave Melbourne without delay, and go and cruise on
the eastern coast of--"

"Australia!" said Glenarvan with such vehemence that the old sailor was
somewhat disconcerted.

"Of Australia?" repeated Tom, opening his eyes. "No, but New Zealand."

"Australia, Tom! Australia!" they all cried with one voice.

Austin's head began to feel in a whirl. Glenarvan spoke with such assurance


that he thought after all he must have made a mistake in reading the letter. Could
a faithful, exact old servant like himself have been guilty of such a thing! He
turned red and looked quite disturbed.

"Never mind, Tom," said Lady Helena. "God so willed it."

"But, no, madam, pardon me," replied old Tom. "No, it is impossible, I was
not mistaken. Ayrton read the letter as I did, and it was he, on the contrary, who
wished to bring me to the Australian coast."

"Ayrton!" cried Glenarvan.

"Yes, Ayrton himself. He insisted it was a mistake: that you meant to order
me to Twofold Bay."

"Have you the letter still, Tom?" asked the Major, extremely interested in this
mystery.

"Yes, Mr. McNabbs," replied Austin. "I'll go and fetch it."

V. IV Verne

He ran at once to his cabin in the forecastle. During his momentary absence
they gazed at each other in silence, all but the Major, who crossed his arms and
said:

"Well, now, Paganel, you must own this would be going a little too far."

"What?" growled Paganel, looking like a gigantic note of interrogation, with
his spectacles on his forehead and his stooping back.

Austin returned directly with the letter written by Paganel and signed by
Glenarvan.

"Will your Honor read it?" he said, handing it to him.

Glenarvan took the letter and read as follows:

"Order to Tom Austin to put out to sea without delay, and to take the
Duncan, by latitude 37 degrees to the eastern coast of New Zealand!"

"New Zealand!" cried Paganel, leaping up.

And he seized the letter from Glenarvan, rubbed his eyes, pushed down his
spectacles on his nose, and read it for himself.

"New Zealand!" he repeated in an indescribable tone, letting the order slip
between his fingers.

That same moment he felt a hand laid on his shoulder, and turning round
found himself face to face with the Major, who said in a grave tone:

"Well, my good Paganel, after all, it is a lucky thing you did not send the
DUNCAN to Cochin China!"

This pleasantry finished the poor geographer. The crew burst out into loud
Homeric laughter. Paganel ran about like a madman, seized his head with both
hands and tore his hair. He neither knew what he was doing nor what he wanted
to do. He rushed down the poop stairs mechanically and paced the deck, nodding


to himself and going straight before without aim or object till he reached the
forecastle. There his feet got entangled in a coil of rope. He stumbled and fell,
accidentally catching hold of a rope with both hands in his fall.

Suddenly a tremendous explosion was heard. The forecastle gun had gone
off, riddling the quiet calm of the waves with a volley of small shot. The
unfortunate Paganel had caught hold of the cord of the loaded gun. The
geographer was thrown down the forecastle ladder and disappeared below.

A cry of terror succeeded the surprise produced by the explosion. Everybody
thought something terrible must have happened. The sailors rushed between
decks and lifted up Paganel, almost bent double. The geographer uttered no
sound.

They carried his long body onto the poop. His companions were in despair.
The Major, who was always the surgeon on great occasions, began to strip the
unfortunate that he might dress his wounds; but he had scarcely put his hands on
the dying man when he started up as if touched by an electrical machine.

"Never! never!" he exclaimed, and pulling his ragged coat tightly round him,
he began buttoning it up in a strangely excited manner.

"But, Paganel," began the Major.

"No, I tell you!"

"[ must examine--"

"You shall not examine."

"You may perhaps have broken--" continued McNabbs.

"Yes," continued Paganel, getting up on his long legs, "but what I have
broken the carpenter can mend."

"What is it, then?"

"There."

Bursts of laughter from the crew greeted this speech. Paganel's friends were
quite reassured about him now. They were satisfied that he had come off safe
and sound from his adventure with the forecastle gun.

"At any rate," thought the Major, "the geographer is wonderfully bashful."

But now Paganel was recovered a little, he had to reply to a question he
could not escape.

"Now, Paganel," said Glenarvan, "tell us frankly all about it. I own that your
blunder was providential. It is sure and certain that but for you the DUNCAN
would have fallen into the hands of the convicts; but for you we should have
been recaptured by the Maories. But for my sake tell me by what supernatural
aberration of mind you were induced to write New Zealand instead of
Australia?"

"Well, upon my oath," said Paganel, "it is--"


But the same instant his eyes fell on Mary and Robert Grant, and he stopped
short and then went on:

"What would you have me say, my dear Glenarvan? I am mad, I am an idiot,
an incorrigible fellow, and I shall live and die the most terrible absent man. I
can't change my skin."

"Unless you get flayed alive."

"Get flayed alive!" cried the geographer, with a furious look. "Is that a
personal allusion?"

"An allusion to what?" asked McNabbs, quietly. This was all that passed.
The mystery of the DUNCAN'S presence on the coast was explained, and all that
the travelers thought about now was to get back to their comfortable cabins, and
to have breakfast.

However, Glenarvan and John Mangles stayed behind with Tom Austin after
the others had retired. They wished to put some further questions to him.

"Now, then, old Austin," said Glenarvan, "tell me, didn't it strike you as
strange to be ordered to go and cruise on the coast of New Zealand?"

"Yes, your Honor," replied Tom. "I was very much surprised, but it is not my
custom to discuss any orders I receive, and I obeyed. Could I do otherwise? If
some catastrophe had occurred through not carrying out your injunctions to the
letter, should not I have been to blame? Would you have acted differently,
captain?"

"No, Tom," replied John Mangles.

"But what did you think?" asked Glenarvan.

"I thought, your Honor, that in the interest of Harry Grant, it was necessary
to go where I was told to go. I thought that in consequence of fresh
arrangements, you were to sail over to New Zealand, and that I was to wait for
you on the east coast of the island. Moreover, on leaving Melbourne, I kept our
destination a secret, and the crew only knew it when we were right out at sea,
and the Australian continent was finally out of sight. But one circumstance
occurred which greatly perplexed me."

"What was it, Tom?" asked Glenarvan.

"Just this, that when the quartermaster of the BRITANNIA heard our
destination--"

"Ayrton!" cried Glenarvan. "Then he is on board?"

"Yes, your Honor."

"Ayrton here?" repeated Glenarvan, looking at John Mangles.

"God has so willed!" said the young captain.

In an instant, like lightning, Ayrton's conduct, his long-planned treachery,
Glenarvan's wound, Mulrady's assassination, the sufferings of the expedition in


the marshes of the Snowy River, the whole past life of the miscreant, flashed
before the eyes of the two men. And now, by the strangest concourse of events,
the convict was in their power.

"Where is he?" asked Glenarvan eagerly.

"In a cabin in the forecastle, and under guard."

"Why was he imprisoned?"

"Because when Ayrton heard the vessel was going to New Zealand, he was
in a fury; because he tried to force me to alter the course of the ship; because he
threatened me; and, last of all, because he incited my men to mutiny. I saw
clearly he was a dangerous individual, and I must take precautions against him."

"And since then?"

"Since then he has remained in his cabin without attempting to go out."

"That's well, Tom."

Just at this moment Glenarvan and John Mangles were summoned to the
saloon where breakfast, which they so sorely needed, was awaiting them. They
seated themselves at the table and spoke no more of Ayrton.

But after the meal was over, and the guests were refreshed and invigorated,
and they all went upon deck, Glenarvan acquainted them with the fact of the
quartermaster's presence on board, and at the same time announced his intention
of having him brought before them.

"May I beg to be excused from being present at his examination?" said Lady
Helena. "I confess, dear Edward, it would be extremely painful for me to see the
wretched man."

"He must be confronted with us, Helena," replied Lord Glenarvan; "I beg
you will stay. Ben Joyce must see all his victims face to face."

Lady Helena yielded to his wish. Mary Grant sat beside her, near Glenarvan.
All the others formed a group round them, the whole party that had been
compromised so seriously by the treachery of the convict. The crew of the yacht,
without understanding the gravity of the situation, kept profound silence.

"Bring Ayrton here,” said Glenarvan.


'


CHAPTER XVII AYRTON'S OBSTINACY


AYRTON came. He crossed the deck with a confident tread, and mounted
the steps to the poop. His eyes were gloomy, his teeth set, his fists clenched
convulsively. His appearance betrayed neither effrontery nor timidity. When he
found himself in the presence of Lord Glenarvan he folded his arms and awaited
the questions calmly and silently.

"Ayrton," said Glenarvan, "here we are then, you and us, on this very
DUNCAN that you wished to deliver into the hands of the convicts of Ben
Joyce."

The lips of the quartermaster trembled slightly and a quick flush suffused his
impassive features. Not the flush of remorse, but of shame at failure. On this
yacht which he thought he was to command as master, he was a prisoner, and his
fate was about to be decided in a few seconds.

However, he made no reply. Glenarvan waited patiently. But Ayrton persisted
in keeping absolute silence.

"Speak, Ayrton, what have you to say?" resumed Glenarvan.

Ayrton hesitated, the wrinkles in his forehead deepened, and at length he said
in calm voice:

"I have nothing to say, my Lord. I have been fool enough to allow myself to
be caught. Act as you please."

Then he turned his eyes away toward the coast which lay on the west, and
affected profound indifference to what was passing around him. One would have
thought him a stranger to the whole affair. But Glenarvan was determined to be
patient. Powerful motives urged him to find out certain details concerning the
mysterious life of Ayrton, especially those which related to Harry Grant and the
BRITANNIA. He therefore resumed his interrogations, speaking with extreme
gentleness and firmly restraining his violent irritation against him.

"I think, Ayrton," he went on, "that you will not refuse to reply to certain
questions that I wish to put to you; and, first of all, ought I to call you Ayrton or
Ben Joyce? Are you, or are you not, the quartermaster of the BRITANNIA?"

Ayrton remained impassive, gazing at the coast, deaf to every question.

Glenarvan's eyes kindled, as he said again:

"Will you tell me how you left the BRITANNIA, and why you are in
Australia?"

The same silence, the same impassibility.

"Listen to me, Ayrton," continued Glenarvan; "it is to your interest to speak.


Frankness is the only resource left to you, and it may stand you in good stead.
For the last time, I ask you, will you reply to my questions?"

Ayrton turned his head toward Glenarvan, and looked into his eyes.

"My Lord," he said, "it is not for me to answer. Justice may witness against
me, but I am not going to witness against myself."

"Proof will be easy," said Glenarvan.

"Easy, my Lord," repeated Ayrton, in a mocking tone. "Your honor makes
rather a bold assertion there, it seems to me. For my own part, I venture to affirm
that the best judge in the Temple would be puzzled what to make of me. Who
will say why I came to Australia, when Captain Grant is not here to tell? Who
will prove that I am the Ben Joyce placarded by the police, when the police have
never had me in their hands, and my companions are at liberty? Who can
damage me except yourself, by bringing forward a single crime against me, or
even a blameable action? Who will affirm that I intended to take possession of
this ship and deliver it into the hands of the convicts? No one, I tell you, no one.
You have your suspicions, but you need certainties to condemn a man, and
certainties you have none. Until there is a proof to the contrary, I am Ayrton,
quartermaster of the BRITANNIA."

Ayrton had become animated while he was speaking, but soon relapsed into
his former indifference.

He, no doubt, expected that his reply would close the examination, but
Glenarvan commenced again, and said:

"Ayrton, I am not a Crown prosecutor charged with your indictment. That is
no business of mine. It is important that our respective situations should be
clearly defined. I am not asking you anything that could compromise you. That
is for justice to do. But you know what I am searching for, and a single word
may put me on the track I have lost. Will you speak?"

Ayrton shook his head like a man determined to be silent.

"Will you tell me where Captain Grant is?" asked Glenarvan.

"No, my Lord," replied Ayrton.

"Will you tell me where the BRITANNIA was wrecked?"

"No, neither the one nor the other."

"Ayrton," said Glenarvan, in almost beseeching tones, "if you know where
Harry Grant is, will you, at least, tell his poor children, who are waiting for you
to speak the word?"

Ayrton hesitated. His features contracted, and he muttered in a low voice, "I
cannot, my Lord."

Then he added with vehemence, as if reproaching himself for a momentary
weakness:


"No, I will not speak. Have me hanged, if you choose."

"Hanged!" exclaimed Glenarvan, overcome by a sudden feeling of anger.

But immediately mastering himself, he added in a grave voice:

"Ayrton, there is neither judge nor executioner here. At the first port we
touch at, you will be given up into the hands of the English authorities."

"That is what I demand," was the quartermaster's reply.

Then he turned away and quietly walked back to his cabin, which served as
his prison. Two sailors kept guard at the door, with orders to watch his slightest
movement. The witnesses of this examination retired from the scene indignant
and despairing.

As Glenarvan could make no way against Ayrton's obstinacy, what was to be
done now? Plainly no course remained but to carry out the plan formed at Eden,
of returning to Europe and giving up for the time this unsuccessful enterprise, for
the traces of the BRITANNIA seemed irrevocably lost, and the document did not
appear to allow any fresh interpretation. On the 37th parallel there was not even
another country, and the DUNCAN had only to turn and go back.

After Glenarvan had consulted his friends, he talked over the question of
returning, more particularly with the captain. John examined the coal bunkers,
and found there was only enough to last fifteen days longer at the outside. It was
necessary, therefore, to put in at the nearest port for a fresh supply.

John proposed that he should steer for the Bay of Talcahuano, where the
DUNCAN had once before been revictualed before she commenced her voyage
of circumnavigation. It was a direct route across, and lay exactly along the 37th
parallel. From thence the yacht, being amply provisioned, might go south,
double Cape Horn, and get back to Scotland by the Atlantic route.

This plan was adopted, and orders were given to the engineer to get up the
steam. Half an hour afterward the beak-head of the yacht was turned toward
Talcahuano, over a sea worthy of being called the Pacific, and at six P. M. the
last mountains of New Zealand had disappeared in warm, hazy mist on the
horizon.

The return voyage was fairly commenced. A sad voyage, for the courageous
searching party to come back to the port without bringing home Harry Grant
with them! The crew, so joyous at departure and so hopeful, were coming back
to Europe defeated and discouraged. There was not one among the brave fellows
whose heart did not swell at the thought of seeing his own country once more;
and yet there was not one among them either who would not have been willing
to brave the perils of the sea for a long time still if they could but find Captain
Grant.

Consequently, the hurrahs which greeted the return of Lord Glenarvan to the


yacht soon gave place to dejection. Instead of the close intercourse which had
formerly existed among the passengers, and the lively conversations which had
cheered the voyage, each one kept apart from the others in the solitude of his
own cabin, and it was seldom that anyone appeared on the deck of the
DUNCAN.

Paganel, who generally shared in an exaggerated form the feelings of those
about him, whether painful or joyous-- a man who could have invented hope if
necessary--even Paganel was gloomy and taciturn. He was seldom visible; his
natural loquacity and French vivacity gave place to silence and dejection. He
seemed even more downhearted than his companions. If Glenarvan spoke at all
of renewing the search, he shook his head like a man who has given up all hope,
and whose convictions concerning the fate of the shipwrecked men appeared
settled. It was quite evident he believed them irrevocably lost.

And yet there was a man on board who could have spoken the decisive word,
and refused to break his silence. This was Ayrton. There was no doubt the fellow
knew, if not the present whereabouts of the captain, at least the place of
shipwreck. But it was evident that were Grant found, he would be a witness
against him. Hence his persistent silence, which gave rise to great indignation on
board, especially among the crew, who would have liked to deal summarily with
him.

Glenarvan repeatedly renewed his attempts with the quartermaster, but
promises and threats were alike useless. Ayrton's obstinacy was so great, and so
inexplicable, that the Major began to believe he had nothing to reveal. His
opinion was shared, moreover, by the geographer, as it corroborated his own
notion about Harry Grant.

But if Ayrton knew nothing, why did he not confess his ignorance? It could
not be turned against him. His silence increased the difficulty of forming any
new plan. Was the presence of the quartermaster on the Australian continent a
proof of Harry Grant's being there? It was settled that they must get this
information out of Ayrton.

Lady Helena, seeing her husband's ill-success, asked his permission to try
her powers against the obstinacy of the quartermaster. When a man had failed, a
woman perhaps, with her gentler influence, might succeed. Is there not a
constant repetition going on of the story of the fable where the storm, blow as it
will, cannot tear the cloak from the shoulders of the traveler, while the first warm
rays of sunshine make him throw it off immediately?

Glenarvan, knowing his young wife's good sense, allowed her to act as she
pleased.

The same day (the 5th of March), Ayrton was conducted to Lady Helena's


saloon. Mary Grant was to be present at the interview, for the influence of the
young girl might be considerable, and Lady Helena would not lose any chance of
success.

For a whole hour the two ladies were closeted with the quartermaster, but
nothing transpired about their interview. What had been said, what arguments
they used to win the secret from the convict, or what questions were asked,
remained unknown; but when they left Ayrton, they did not seem to have
succeeded, as the expression on their faces denoted discouragement.

In consequence of this, when the quartermaster was being taken back to his
cabin, the sailors met him with violent menaces. He took no notice except by
shrugging his shoulders, which so increased their rage, that John Mangles and
Glenarvan had to interfere, and could only repress it with difficulty.

But Lady Helena would not own herself vanquished. She resolved to struggle
to the last with this pitiless man, and went next day herself to his cabin to avoid
exposing him again to the vindictiveness of the crew.

The good and gentle Scotchwoman stayed alone with the convict leader for
two long hours. Glenarvan in a state of extreme nervous anxiety, remained
outside the cabin, alternately resolved to exhaust completely this last chance of
success, alternately resolved to rush in and snatch his wife from so painful a
situation.

But this time when Lady Helena reappeared, her look was full of hope. Had
she succeeded in extracting the secret, and awakening in that adamant heart a
last faint touch of pity?

McNabbs, who first saw her, could not restrain a gesture of incredulity.

However the report soon spread among the sailors that the quartermaster had
yielded to the persuasions of Lady Helena. The effect was electrical. The entire
crew assembled on deck far quicker than Tom Austin's whistle could have
brought them together.

Glenarvan had hastened up to his wife and eagerly asked:

"Has he spoken?"

"No," replied Lady Helena, "but he has yielded to my entreaties, and wishes
to see you."

"Ah, dear Helena, you have succeeded!"

"I hope so, Edward."

"Have you made him any promise that I must ratify?"

"Only one; that you will do all in your power to mitigate his punishment."

"Very well, dear Helena. Let Ayrton come immediately."

Lady Helena retired to her cabin with Mary Grant, and the quartermaster was
brought into the saloon where Lord Glenarvan was expecting him.


CHAPTER XVIII A DISCOURAGING
CONFESSION


As soon as the quartermaster was brought into the presence of Lord
Glenarvan, his keepers withdrew.

"You wanted to speak to me, Ayrton?" said Glenarvan.

"Yes, my Lord," replied the quartermaster.

"Did you wish for a private interview?"

"Yes, but I think if Major McNabbs and Mr. Paganel were present it would
be better."

"For whom?"

"For myself."

Ayrton spoke quite calmly and firmly. Glenarvan looked at him for an
instant, and then sent to summon McNabbs and Paganel, who came at once.

"We are all ready to listen to you," said Glenarvan, when his two friends had
taken their place at the saloon table.

Ayrton collected himself, for an instant, and then said:

"My Lord, it is usual for witnesses to be present at every contract or
transaction between two parties. That is why I desire the presence of Messrs.
Paganel and McNabbs, for it is, properly speaking, a bargain which I propose to
make."

Glenarvan, accustomed to Ayrton's ways, exhibited no surprise, though any
bargaining between this man and himself seemed strange.

"What is the bargain?" he said.

"This," replied Ayrton. "You wish to obtain from me certain facts which may
be useful to you. I wish to obtain from you certain advantages which would be
valuable to me. It is giving for giving, my Lord. Do you agree to this or not?"

"What are the facts?" asked Paganel eagerly.

"No," said Glenarvan. "What are the advantages?"

Ayrton bowed in token that he understood Glenarvan's distinction.

"These," he said, "are the advantages I ask. It is still your intention, I
suppose, to deliver me up to the English authorities?"

"Yes, Ayrton, it is only justice."

"I don't say it is not," replied the quartermaster quietly. "Then of course you
would never consent to set me at liberty."

Glenarvan hesitated before replying to a question so plainly put. On the
answer he gave, perhaps the fate of Harry Grant might depend!


However, a feeling of duty toward human justice compelled him to say:

"No, Ayrton, I cannot set you at liberty."

"I do not ask it," said the quartermaster proudly.

"Then, what is it you want?"

"A middle place, my Lord, between the gibbet that awaits me and the liberty
which you cannot grant me."

"And that is--"

"To allow me to be left on one of the uninhabited islands of the Pacific, with
such things as are absolute necessaries. I will manage as best I can, and will
repent if I have time."

Glenarvan, quite unprepared for such a proposal, looked at his two friends in
silence. But after a brief reflection, he replied:

"Ayrton, if I agree to your request, you will tell me all I have an interest in
knowing."

"Yes, my Lord, that is to say, all I know about Captain Grant and the
BRITANNIA."

"The whole truth?"

"The whole."

"But what guarantee have I?"

"Oh, I see what you are uneasy about. You need a guarantee for me, for the
truth of a criminal. That's natural. But what can you have under the
circumstances. There is no help for it, you must either take my offer or leave it."

"I will trust to you, Ayrton," said Glenarvan, simply.

"And you do right, my Lord. Besides, if I deceive you, vengeance is in your
Own power."

"How?"

"You can come and take me again from where you left me, as I shall have no
means of getting away from the island."

Ayrton had an answer for everything. He anticipated the difficulties and
furnished unanswerable arguments against himself. It was evident he intended to
affect perfect good faith in the business. It was impossible to show more
complete confidence. And yet he was prepared to go still further in
disinterestedness.

"My Lord and gentlemen," he added, "I wish to convince you of the fact that
I am playing cards on the table. I have no wish to deceive you, and I am going to
give you a fresh proof of my sincerity in this matter. I deal frankly with you,
because I reckon on your honor."

"Speak, Ayrton," said Glenarvan.

"My Lord, I have not your promise yet to accede to my proposal, and yet I


do not scruple to tell you that I know very little about Harry Grant."

"Very little," exclaimed Glenarvan.

"Yes, my Lord, the details I am in a position to give you relate to myself.
They are entirely personal, and will not do much to help you to recover the lost
traces of Captain Grant."

Keen disappointment was depicted on the faces of Glenarvan and the Major.
They thought the quartermaster in the possession of an important secret, and he
declared that his communications would be very nearly barren. Paganel's
countenance remained unmoved.

Somehow or other, this avowal of Ayrton, and surrender of himself, so to
speak, unconditionally, singularly touched his auditors, especially when the
quartermaster added:

"So I tell you beforehand, the bargain will be more to my profit than yours."

"It does not signify," replied Glenarvan. "I accept your proposal, Ayrton. I
give you my word to land you on one of the islands of the Pacific Ocean."

"All right, my Lord," replied the quartermaster.

Was this strange man glad of this decision? One might have doubted it, for
his impassive countenance betokened no emotion whatever. It seemed as if he
were acting for someone else rather than himself.

"I am ready to answer," he said.

"We have no questions to put to you,” said Glenarvan. "Tell us all you know,
Ayrton, and begin by declaring who you are."

"Gentlemen," replied Ayrton, "I am really Tom Ayrton, the quartermaster of
the BRITANNIA. I left Glasgow on Harry Grant's ship on the 12th of March,
1861. For fourteen months I cruised with him in the Pacific in search of an
advantageous spot for founding a Scotch colony. Harry Grant was the man to
carry out grand projects, but serious disputes often arose between us. His temper
and mine could not agree. I cannot bend, and with Harry Grant, when once his
resolution is taken, any resistance is impossible, my Lord. He has an iron will
both for himself and others.

"But in spite of that, I dared to rebel, and I tried to get the crew to join me,
and to take possession of the vessel. Whether I was to blame or not is of no
consequence. Be that as it may, Harry Grant had no scruples, and on the 8th of
April, 1862, he left me behind on the west coast of Australia."

"Of Australia!" said the Major, interrupting Ayrton in his narrative. "Then of
course you had quitted the BRITANNIA before she touched at Callao, which
was her last date?"

"Yes," replied the quartermaster, "for the BRITANNIA did not touch there
while I was on board. And how I came to speak of Callao at Paddy O'Moore's


farm was that I learned the circumstances from your recital."

"Go on, Ayrton," said Glenarvan.

"I found myself abandoned on a nearly desert coast, but only forty miles
from the penal settlement at Perth, the capital of Western Australia. As I was
wandering there along the shore, I met a band of convicts who had just escaped,
and I joined myself to them. You will dispense, my Lord, with any account of
my life for two years and a half. This much, however, I must tell you, that I
became the leader of the gang, under the name of Ben Joyce. In September,
1864, I introduced myself at the Irish farm, where I engaged myself as a servant
in my real name, Ayrton. I waited there till I should get some chance of seizing a
ship. This was my one idea. Two months afterward the DUNCAN arrived.
During your visit to the farm you related Captain Grant's history, and I learned
then facts of which I was not previously aware-- that the BRITANNIA had
touched at Callao, and that her latest news was dated June, 1862, two months
after my disembarkation, and also about the document and the loss of the ship
somewhere along the 37th parallel; and, lastly, the strong reasons you had for
supposing Harry Grant was on the Australian continent. Without the least
hesitation I determined to appropriate the DUNCAN, a matchless vessel, able to
outdistance the swiftest ships in the British Navy. But serious injuries had to be
repaired. I therefore let it go to Melbourne, and joined myself to you in my true
character as quartermaster, offering to guide you to the scene of the shipwreck,
fictitiously placed by me on the east coast of Australia. It was in this way,
followed or sometimes preceded by my gang of convicts, I directed your
expedition toward the province of Victoria. My men committed a bootless crime
at Camden Bridge; since the DUNCAN, if brought to the coast, could not escape
me, and with the yacht once mine, I was master of the ocean. I led you in this
way unsuspectingly as far as the Snowy River. The horses and bullocks dropped
dead one by one, poisoned by the gastrolobium. I dragged the wagon into the
marshes, where it got half buried. At my instance--but you know the rest, my
Lord, and you may be sure that but for the blunder of Mr. Paganel, I should now
command the DUNCAN. Such is my history, gentlemen. My disclosures,
unfortunately, cannot put you on the track of Harry Grant, and you perceive that
you have made but a poor bargain by coming to my terms."

The quartermaster said no more, but crossed his arms in his usual fashion
and waited. Glenarvan and his friends kept silence. They felt that this strange
criminal had spoken the whole truth. He had only missed his coveted prize, the
DUNCAN, through a cause independent of his will. His accomplices had gone to
Twofold Bay, as was proved by the convict blouse found by Glenarvan. Faithful
to the orders of their chief, they had kept watch on the yacht, and at length,


weary of waiting, had returned to the old haunt of robbers and incendiaries in the
country parts of New South Wales.

The Major put the first question, his object being to verify the dates of the
BRITANNIA.

"You are sure then," he said, "that it was on the 8th of April you were left on
the west coast of Australia?"

"On that very day," replied Ayrton.

"And do you know what projects Harry Grant had in view at the time?"

"In an indefinite way I do."

"Say all you can, Ayrton," said Glenarvan, "the least indication may set us in
the right course."

"I only know this much, my Lord," replied the quartermaster, "that Captain
Grant intended to visit New Zealand. Now, as this part of the programme was
not carried out while I was on board, it is not impossible that on leaving Callao
the BRITANNIA went to reconnoiter New Zealand. This would agree with the
date assigned by the document to the shipwreck--the 27th of June, 1862."

"Clearly," said Paganel.

"But," objected Glenarvan, "there is nothing in the fragmentary words in the
document that could apply to New Zealand."

"That I cannot answer," said the quartermaster.

"Well, Ayrton," said Glenarvan, "you have kept your word, and I will keep
mine. We have to decide now on what island of the Pacific Ocean you are to be
left?"

"It matters little, my Lord," replied Ayrton.

"Retum to your cabin," said Glenarvan, "and wait our decision."

The quartermaster withdrew, guarded by the two sailors.

"That villain might have been a man," said the Major.

"Yes," returned Glenarvan; "he is a strong, clear-headed fellow. Why was it
that he must needs turn his powers to such evil account?"

"But Harry Grant?"

"I must fear he is irrevocably lost. Poor children! Who can tell them where
their father is?"

"I can!" replied Paganel. "Yes; I can!" One could not help remarking that the
geographer, so loquacious and impatient usually, had scarcely spoken during
Ayrton's examination. He listened without opening his mouth. But this speech of
his now was worth many others, and it made Glenarvan spring to his feet, crying
out: "You, Paganel! you know where Captain Grant is?"

"Yes, as far as can be known."

"How do you know?"


"From that infernal document."

"Ah!" said the Major, in a tone of the most profound incredulity.

"Hear me first, and shrug your shoulders afterward," said Paganel. "I did not
speak sooner, because you would not have believed me. Besides, it was useless;
and I only speak to-day because Ayrton's opinion just supports my own."

V. ITV Verne

"Then it is New Zealand?" asked Glenarvan.

"Listen and judge," replied Paganel. "It is not without reason, or, rather, I had
a reason for making the blunder which has saved our lives. When I was in the
very act of writing the letter to Glenarvan's dictation, the word ZEALAND was
swimming in my brain. This is why. You remember we were in the wagon.
McNabbs had just apprised Lady Helena about the convicts; he had given her the
number of the Australian and New Zealand Gazette which contained the account
of the catastrophe at Camden Bridge. Now, just as I was writing, the newspaper
was lying on the ground, folded in such a manner that only two syllables of the
title were visible; these two syllables were ALAND. What a sudden light flashed
on my mind. ALAND was one of the words in the English document, one that
hitherto we had translated a terre, and which must have been the termination of
the proper noun, ZEALAND."

"Indeed!" said Glenarvan.

"Yes," continued Paganel, with profound conviction; "this meaning had
escaped me, and do you know why? Because my wits were exercised naturally
on the French document, as it was most complete, and in that this important
word was wanting."

"Oh, oh!" said the Major; "your imagination goes too far, Paganel; and you
forget your former deductions."

"Go on, Major; I am ready to answer you."

"Well, then, what do you make of your word AUSTRA?"

"What it was at first. It merely means southern countries."

"Well, and this syllable, INDI, which was first the root of the INDIANS, and
second the root of the word indigenes ?"

"Well, the third and last time," replied Paganel, "it will be the first syllable of
the word INDIGENCE."

"And CONTIN?" cried McNabbs. "Does that still mean CONTINENT?"

"No; since New Zealand is only an island."

"What then?" asked Glenarvan.

"My dear lord," replied Paganel, "I am going to translate the document
according to my third interpretation, and you shall judge. I only make two
observations beforehand. First, forget as much as_ possible preceding


interpretations, and divest your mind of all preconceived notions. Second,
certain parts may appear to you strained, and it is possible that I translate them
badly; but they are of no importance; among others, the word AGONIE, which
chokes me; but I cannot find any other explanation. Besides, my interpretation
was founded on the French document; and don't forget it was written by an
Englishman, who could not be familiar with the idioms of the French language.
Now then, having said this much, I will begin."

And slowly articulating each syllable, he repeated the following sentences:

"LE 27th JUIN, 1862, le trois-mats Britannia, de Glasgow, a sombre apres
une longue AGONIE dans les mers AUSTRALES sur les cotes de la Nouvelle
ZELANDE--in English Zealand. Deux matelots et le Capitaine Grant ont pu y
ABORDER. La CONTINUellement en PRoie a une CRUELIle INDIgence, ils
ont jete ce document par--_de lon_gitude ET 37 degrees 11' de LATItude. Venex
a leur secours, ou ils sont PERDUS!" (On the 27th of June, 1865, the three-mast
vessel BRITANNIA, of Glasgow, has foundered after a long AGOnie in the
Southern Seas, on the coast of New Zealand. Two sailors and Captain Grant have
succeeded in landing. Continually a prey to cruel indigence, they have thrown
this document into the sea in-- longitude and 37 degrees 11' latitude. Come to
their help, or they are lost.)

Paganel stopped. His interpretation was admissible. But precisely because it
appeared as likely as the preceding, it might be as false. Glenarvan and the
Major did not then try and discuss it. However, since no traces of the
BRITANNIA had yet been met with, either on the Patagonian or Australian
coasts, at the points where these countries are crossed by the 37th parallel, the
chances were in favor of New Zealand.


"Now, Paganel," said Glenarvan, "will you tell me why you have kept this
interpretation secret for nearly two months?"

"Because I did not wish to buoy you up again with vain hopes. Besides, we
were going to Auckland, to the very spot indicated by the latitude of the
document."

"But since then, when we were dragged out of the route, why did you not
speak?"

"Because, however just the interpretation, it could do nothing for the
deliverance of the captain."

"Why not, Paganel?"

"Because, admitting that the captain was wrecked on the New Zealand coast,
now that two years have passed and he has not reappeared, he must have
perished by shipwreck or by the New Zealanders."

"Then you are of the opinion," said Glenarvan, "that--"

"That vestiges of the wreck might be found; but that the survivors of the
BRITANNIA have, beyond doubt, perished."

"Keep all this silent, friends," said Glenarvan, "and let me choose a fitting
moment to communicate these sad tidings to Captain Grant's children."

CHAPTER XIX A CRY IN THE NIGHT

THE crew soon heard that no light had been thrown on the situation of
Captain Grant by the revelations of Ayrton, and it caused profound
disappointment among them, for they had counted on the quartermaster, and the
quartermaster knew nothing which could put the DUNCAN on the right track.

The yacht therefore continued her course. They had yet to select the island
for Ayrton's banishment.

Paganel and John Mangles consulted the charts on board, and exactly on the
37th parallel found a little isle marked by the name of Maria Theresa, a sunken
rock in the middle of the Pacific Ocean, 3,500 miles from the American coast,
and 1,500 miles from New Zealand. The nearest land on the north was the
Archipelago of Pomotou, under the protectorate of France; on the south there
was nothing but the eternal ice-belt of the Polar Sea. No ship would come to
reconnoiter this solitary isle. No echoes from the world would ever reach it. The
storm birds only would rest awhile on it during their long flight, and in many
charts the rock was not even marked.

If ever complete isolation was to be found on earth, it was on this little out-
of-the-way island. Ayrton was informed of its situation, and expressed his
willingness to live there apart from his fellows. The head of the vessel was in
consequence turned toward it immediately.

Two days later, at two o'clock, the man on watch signaled land on the


horizon. This was Maria Theresa, a low, elongated island, scarcely raised above
the waves, and looking like an enormous whale. It was still thirty miles distant
from the yacht, whose stem was rapidly cutting her way over the water at the
rate of sixteen knots an hour.

Gradually the form of the island grew more distinct on the horizon. The orb
of day sinking in the west, threw up its peculiar outlines in sharp relief. A few
peaks of no great elevation stood out here and there, tipped with sunlight. At five
o'clock John Mangles could discern a light smoke rising from it.

"Is it a volcano?" he asked of Paganel, who was gazing at this new land
through his telescope.

"I don't know what to think," replied the geographer; "Maria Theresa is a
spot little known; nevertheless, it would not be surprising if its origin were due
to some submarine upheaval, and consequently it may be volcanic."

"But in that case," said Glenarvan, "is there not reason to fear that if an
eruption produced it, an eruption may carry it away?"

"That is not possible," replied Paganel. "We know of its existence for several
centuries, which is our security. When the Isle Julia emerged from the
Mediterranean, it did not remain long above the waves, and disappeared a few
months after its birth."

"Very good," said Glenarvan. "Do you think, John, we can get there to-
night?"

"No, your honor, I must not risk the DUNCAN in the dark, for I am
unacquainted with the coast. I will keep under steam, but go very slowly, and to-
morrow, at daybreak, we can send off a boat."

At eight o'clock in the evening, Maria Theresa, though five miles to leeward,
appeared only an elongated shadow, scarcely visible. The DUNCAN was always
getting nearer.

At nine o'clock, a bright glare became visible, and flames shot up through the
darkness. The light was steady and continued.

"That confirms the supposition of a volcano," said Paganel, observing it
attentively.

"Yet," replied John Mangles, "at this distance we ought to hear the noise
which always accompanies an eruption, and the east wind brings no sound
whatever to our ear."

"That's true," said Paganel. "It is a volcano that blazes, but does not speak.
The gleam seems intermittent too, sometimes, like that of a lighthouse."

"You are right," said John Mangles, "and yet we are not on a lighted coast."

"Ah!" he exclaimed, "another fire? On the shore this time! Look! It moves! It
has changed its place!"


John was not mistaken. A fresh fire had appeared, which seemed to die out
now and then, and suddenly flare up again.

"Is the island inhabited then?" said Glenarvan.

"By savages, evidently,” replied Paganel.

"But in that case, we cannot leave the quartermaster there."

"No," replied the Major, "he would be too bad a gift even to bestow on
savages."

"We must find some other uninhabited island," said Glenarvan, who could
not help smiling at the delicacy of McNabbs. "I promised Ayrton his life, and I
mean to keep my promise."

"At all events, don't let us trust them," added Paganel. "The New Zealanders
have the barbarous custom of deceiving ships by moving lights, like the
wreckers on the Cornish coast in former times. Now the natives of Maria
Theresa may have heard of this proceeding."

"Keep her off a point," called out John to the man at the helm. "To-morrow at
sunrise we shall know what we're about."

At eleven o'clock, the passengers and John Mangles retired to their cabins. In
the forepart of the yacht the man on watch was pacing the deck, while aft, there
was no one but the man at the wheel.

At this moment Mary Grant and Robert came on the poop.

The two children of the captain, leaning over the rail, gazed sadly at the
phosphorescent waves and the luminous wake of the DUNCAN. Mary was
thinking of her brother's future, and Robert of his sister's. Their father was
uppermost in the minds of both. Was this idolized parent still in existence? Must
they give him up? But no, for what would life be without him? What would
become of them without him? What would have become of them already, but for
Lord Glenarvan and Lady Helena?

The young boy, old above his years through trouble, divined the thoughts
that troubled his sister, and taking her hand in his own, said, "Mary, we must
never despair. Remember the lessons our father gave us. Keep your courage up
and no matter what befalls you, let us show this obstinate courage which can rise
above everything. Up to this time, sister, you have been working for me, it is my
turn now, and I will work for you."

"Dear Robert!" replied the young girl.

"T must tell you something," resumed Robert. "You mustn't be vexed, Mary!"

"Why should I be vexed, my child?"

"And you will let me do it?"

"What do you mean?" said Mary, getting uneasy.

"Sister, I am going to be a sailor!"


"You are going to leave me!" cried the young girl, pressing her brother's
hand.

"Yes, sister; I want to be a sailor, like my father and Captain John. Mary, dear
Mary, Captain John has not lost all hope, he says. You have confidence in his
devotion to us, and so have I. He is going to make a grand sailor out of me some
day, he has promised me he will; and then we are going to look for our father
together. Tell me you are willing, sister mine. What our father would have done
for us it is our duty, mine, at least, to do for him. My life has one purpose to
which it should be entirely consecrated-- that is to search, and never cease
searching for my father, who would never have given us up. Ah, Mary, how
good our father was!"

"And so noble, so generous!" added Mary. "Do you know, Robert, he was
already a glory to our country, and that he would have been numbered among
our great men if fate had not arrested his course."

"Yes, I know it," said Robert.

Mary put her arm around the boy, and hugged him fondly as he felt her tears
fall on his forehead.

"Mary, Mary!" he cried, "it doesn't matter what our friends say, I still hope,
and will always hope. A man like my father doesn't die till he has finished his
work."

Mary Grant could not reply. Sobs choked her voice. A thousand feelings
struggled in her breast at the news that fresh attempts were about to be made to
recover Harry Grant, and that the devotion of the captain was so unbounded.

"And does Mr. John still hope?" she asked.

"Yes," replied Robert. "He is a brother that will never forsake us, never! I
will be a sailor, you'll say yes, won't you, sister? And let me join him in looking
for my father. I am sure you are willing."

"Yes, I am willing,” said Mary. "But the separation!" she murmured.

"You will not be alone, Mary, I know that. My friend John told me so. Lady
Helena will not let you leave her. You are a woman; you can and should accept
her kindness. To refuse would be ungrateful, but a man, my father has said a
hundred times, must make his own way."

"But what will become of our own dear home in Dundee, so full of
memories?"

"We will keep it, little sister! All that is settled, and settled so well, by our
friend John, and also by Lord Glenarvan. He is to keep you at Malcolm Castle as
if you were his daughter. My Lord told my friend John so, and he told me. You
will be at home there, and have someone to speak to about our father, while you
are waiting till John and I bring him back to you some day. Ah! what a grand day


that will be!" exclaimed Robert, his face glowing with enthusiasm.

"My boy, my brother," replied Mary, "how happy my father would be if he
could hear you. How much you are like him, dear Robert, like our dear, dear
father. When you grow up you'll be just himself."

"I hope I may," said Robert, blushing with filial and sacred pride.

"But how shall we requite Lord and Lady Glenarvan?" said Mary Grant.

"Oh, that will not be difficult," replied Robert, with boyish confidence. "We
will love and revere them, and we will tell them so; and we will give them plenty
of kisses, and some day, when we can get the chance, we will die for them."

"We'll live for them, on the contrary," replied the young girl, covering her
brother's forehead with kisses. "They will like that better, and so shall I."

The two children then relapsed into silence, gazing out into the dark night,
and giving way to long reveries, interrupted occasionally by a question or
remark from one to the other. A long swell undulated the surface of the calm sea,
and the screw turned up a luminous furrow in the darkness.

A strange and altogether supernatural incident now occurred. The brother
and sister, by some of those magnetic communications which link souls
mysteriously together, were the subjects at the same time and the same instant of
the same hallucination.

Out of the midst of these waves, with their alternations of light and shadow, a
deep plaintive voice sent up a cry, the tones of which thrilled through every fiber
of their being.

"Come! come!" were the words which fell on their ears.

They both started up and leaned over the railing, and peered into the gloom
with questioning eyes.

"Mary, you heard that? You heard that?" cried Robert.

But they saw nothing but the long shadow that stretched before them.

"Robert," said Mary, pale with emotion, "I thought--yes, I thought as you
did, that--We must both be ill with fever, Robert."

A second time the cry reached them, and this time the illusion was so great,
that they both exclaimed simultaneously, "My father! My father!"

It was too much for Mary. Overcome with emotion, she fell fainting into
Robert's arms.

"Help!" shouted Robert. "My sister! my father! Help! Help!"

The man at the wheel darted forward to lift up the girl. The sailors on watch
ran to assist, and John Mangles, Lady Helena, and Glenarvan were hastily
roused from sleep.

"My sister is dying, and my father is there!" exclaimed Robert, pointing to
the waves.


They were wholly at a loss to understand him.

"Yes!" he repeated, "my father is there! I heard my father's voice; Mary
heard it too!"

Just at this moment, Mary Grant recovering consciousness, but wandering
and excited, called out, "My father! my father is there!"

And the poor girl started up, and leaning over the side of the yacht, wanted to
throw herself into the sea.

"My Lord--Lady Helena!" she exclaimed, clasping her hands, "I tell you my
father is there! I can declare that I heard his voice come out of the waves like a
wail, as if it were a last adieu."

The young girl went off again into convulsions and spasms, which became so
violent that she had to be carried to her cabin, where Lady Helena lavished every
care on her. Robert kept on repeating, "My father! my father is there! I am sure
of it, my Lord!"

The spectators of this painful scene saw that the captain's children were
laboring under an hallucination. But how were they to be undeceived?

Glenarvan made an attempt, however. He took Robert's hand, and said, "You
say you heard your father's voice, my dear boy?"

"Yes, my Lord; there, in the middle of the waves. He cried out, 'Come!
come!"

"And did you recognize his voice?"

"Yes, I recognized it immediately. Yes, yes; I can swear to it! My sister heard
it, and recognized it as well. How could we both be deceived? My Lord, do let
us go to my father's help. A boat! a boat!"

Glenarvan saw it was impossible to undeceive the poor boy, but he tried once
more by saying to the man at the wheel:

"Hawkins, you were at the wheel, were you not, when Miss Mary was so
strangely attacked?"

"Yes, your Honor," replied Hawkins.

"And you heard nothing, and saw nothing?"

"Nothing."

"Now Robert, see?"

"If it had been Hawkins's father," returned the boy, with indomitable energy,
"Hawkins would not say he had heard nothing. It was my father, my lord! my
father."

Sobs choked his voice; he became pale and silent, and presently fell down
insensible, like his sister.

Glenarvan had him carried to his bed, where he lay in a deep swoon.

"Poor orphans," said John Mangles. "It is a terrible trial they have to bear!"


"Yes," said Glenarvan; "excessive grief has produced the same hallucination
in both of them, and at the same time."

"In both of them!" muttered Paganel; "that's strange, and pure science would
say inadmissible."

He leaned over the side of the vessel, and listened attentively, making a sign
to the rest to keep still.

But profound silence reigned around. Paganel shouted his loudest. No
response came.

"It is strange," repeated the geographer, going back to his cabin. "Close
sympathy in thought and grief does not suffice to explain this phenomenon."

Next day, March 4, at 5 A. M., at dawn, the passengers, including Mary and
Robert, who would not stay behind, were all assembled on the poop, each one
eager to examine the land they had only caught a glimpse of the night before.

The yacht was coasting along the island at the distance of about a mile, and
its smallest details could be seen by the eye.

Suddenly Robert gave a loud cry, and exclaimed he could see two men
running about and gesticulating, and a third was waving a flag.

"The Union Jack," said John Mangles, who had caught up a spy-glass.

"True enough,” said Paganel, turning sharply round toward Robert.

"My Lord," said Robert, trembling with emotion, "if you don't want me to
swim to the shore, let a boat be lowered. Oh, my Lord, I implore you to let me be
the first to land."

No one dared to speak. What! on this little isle, crossed by the 37th parallel,
there were three men, shipwrecked Englishmen! Instantaneously everyone
thought of the voice heard by Robert and Mary the preceding night. The children
were right, perhaps, in the affirmation. The sound of a voice might have reached
them, but this voice-- was it their father's? No, alas, most assuredly no. And as
they thought of the dreadful disappointment that awaited them, they trembled
lest this new trial should crush them completely. But who could stop them from
going on shore? Lord Glenarvan had not the heart to do it.

"Lower a boat," he called out.

Another minute and the boat was ready. The two children of Captain Grant,
Glenarvan, John Mangles, and Paganel, rushed into it, and six sailors, who
rowed so vigorously that they were presently almost close to the shore.

At ten fathoms' distance a piercing cry broke from Mary's lips.

"My father!" she exclaimed.

A man was standing on the beach, between two others. His tall, powerful
form, and his physiognomy, with its mingled expression of boldness and
gentleness, bore a resemblance both to Mary and Robert. This was indeed the


man the children had so often described. Their hearts had not deceived them.
This was their father, Captain Grant!

The captain had heard Mary's cry, for he held out his arms, and fell flat on
the sand, as if struck by a thunderbolt.


CHAPTER XX CAPTAIN GRANT'S STORY


JOY does not kill, for both father and children recovered before they had
reached the yacht. The scene which followed, who can describe? Language fails.
The whole crew wept aloud at the sight of these three clasped together in a close,
silent embrace.

The moment Harry Grant came on deck, he knelt down reverently. The pious
Scotchman's first act on touching the yacht, which to him was the soil of his
native land, was to return thanks to the God of his deliverance. Then, turning to
Lady Helena and Lord Glenarvan, and his companions, he thanked them in
broken words, for his heart was too full to speak. During the short passage from
the isle to the yacht, his children had given him a brief sketch of the DUNCAN'S
history.

What an immense debt he owed to this noble lady and her friends! From
Lord Glenarvan, down to the lowest sailor on board, how all had struggled and
suffered for him! Harry Grant expressed his gratitude with such simplicity and
nobleness, his manly face suffused with pure and sweet emotion, that the whole
crew felt amply recompensed for the trials they had undergone. Even the
impassable Major himself felt a tear steal down his cheek in spite of all his self-
command; while the good, simple Paganel cried like a child who does not care
who sees his tears.

Harry Grant could not take his eyes off his daughter. He thought her
beautiful, charming; and he not only said so to himself, but repeated it aloud, and
appealed to Lady Helena for confirmation of his opinion, as if to convince
himself that he was not blinded by his paternal affection. His boy, too, came in
for admiration. "How he has grown! he is a man!" was his delighted
exclamation. And he covered the two children so dear to him with the kisses he
had been heaping up for them during his two years of absence.

Robert then presented all his friends successively, and found means always
to vary the formula of introduction, though he had to say the same thing about
each. The fact was, each and all had been perfect in the children's eyes.

John Mangles blushed like a child when his turn came, and his voice
trembled as he spoke to Mary's father.

Lady Helena gave Captain Grant a narrative of the voyage, and made him
proud of his son and daughter. She told him of the young hero's exploits, and
how the lad had already paid back part of the paternal debt to Lord Glenarvan.
John Mangles sang Mary's praises in such terms, that Harry Grant, acting on a


hint from Lady Helena, put his daughter's hand into that of the brave young
captain, and turning to Lord and Lady Glenarvan, said: "My Lord, and you,
Madam, also give your blessing to our children."

When everything had been said and re-said over and over again, Glenarvan
informed Harry Grant about Ayrton. Grant confirmed the quartermaster's
confession as far as his disembarkation on the coast of Australia was concerned.

"He is an intelligent, intrepid man," he added, "whose passions have led him
astray. May reflection and repentance bring him to a better mind!"

But before Ayrton was transferred, Harry Grant wished to do the honors of
his rock to his friends. He invited them to visit his wooden house, and dine with
him in Robinson Crusoe fashion.

Glenarvan and his friends accepted the invitation most willingly. Robert and
Mary were eagerly longing to see the solitary house where their father had so
often wept at the thought of them. A boat was manned, and the Captain and his
two children, Lord and Lady Glenarvan, the Major, John Mangles, and Paganel,
landed on the shores of the island.

A few hours sufficed to explore the whole domain of Harry Grant. It was in
fact the summit of a submarine mountain, a plateau composed of basaltic rocks
and volcanic DEBRIS. During the geological epochs of the earth, this mountain
had gradually emerged from the depths of the Pacific, through the action of the
subterranean fires, but for ages back the volcano had been a peaceful mountain,
and the filled-up crater, an island rising out of the liquid plain. Then soil formed.
The vegetable kingdom took possession of this new land. Several whalers landed
domestic animals there in passing; goats and pigs, which multiplied and ran
wild, and the three kingdoms of nature were now displayed on this island, sunk
in mid ocean.

When the survivors of the shipwrecked BRITANNIA took refuge there, the
hand of man began to organize the efforts of nature. In two years and a half,
Harry Grant and his two sailors had metamorphosed the island. Several acres of
well-cultivated land were stocked with vegetables of excellent quality.

The house was shaded by luxuriant gum-trees. The magnificent ocean
stretched before the windows, sparkling in the sunlight. Harry Grant had the
table placed beneath the grand trees, and all the guests seated themselves. A hind
quarter of a goat, nardou bread, several bowls of milk, two or three roots of wild
endive, and pure fresh water, composed the simple repast, worthy of the
shepherds of Arcadia.

Paganel was enchanted. His old fancies about Robinson Crusoe revived in
full force. "He is not at all to be pitied, that scoundrel, Ayrton!" he exclaimed,
enthusiastically. "This little isle is just a paradise!"


"Yes," replied Harry Grant, "a paradise to these poor, shipwrecked fellows
that Heaven had pity on, but I am sorry that Maria Theresa was not an extensive
and fertile island, with a river instead of a stream, and a port instead of a tiny bay
exposed to the open sea.”

"And why, captain?” asked Glenarvan.

"Because I should have made it the foundation of the colony with which I
mean to dower Scotland."

"Ah, Captain Grant, you have not given up the project, then, which made you
so popular in our old country?"

"No, my Lord, and God has only saved me through your efforts that I might
accomplish my task. My poor brothers in old Caledonia, all who are needy must
have a refuge provided for them in another land against their misery, and my
dear country must have a colony of her own, for herself alone, somewhere in
these seas, where she may find that independence and comfort she so lacks in
Europe."

"Ah, that is very true, Captain Grant," said Lady Helena. "This is a grand
project of yours, and worthy of a noble heart. But this little isle--"

"No, madam, it is a rock only fit at most to support a few settlers; while what
we need is a vast country, whose virgin soil abounds in untouched stores of
wealth," replied the captain.

"Well, captain," exclaimed Glenarvan, "the future is ours, and this country
we will seek for together."

And the two brave Scotchmen joined hands in a hearty grip and so sealed the
compact.

A general wish was expressed to hear, while they were on the island, the
account of the shipwreck of the BRITANNIA, and of the two years spent by the
survivors in this very place. Harry Grant was delighted to gratify their curiosity,
and commenced his narration forthwith.

"My story," he said, "is that of all the Robinson Crusoes cast upon an island,
with only God and themselves to rely on, and feeling it a duty to struggle for life
with the elements.

"It was during the night of the 26th or 27th of June, 1862, that the
BRITANNIA, disabled by a six days' storm, struck against the rocks of Maria
Theresa. The sea was mountains high, and lifeboats were useless. My
unfortunate crew all perished, except Bob Learce and Joe Bell, who with myself
managed to reach shore after twenty unsuccessful attempts.

"The land which received us was only an uninhabited island, two miles broad
and five long, with about thirty trees in the interior, a few meadows, and a brook
of fresh water, which fortunately never dried up. Alone with my sailors, in this


comer of the globe, I did not despair. I put my trust in God, and accustomed
myself to struggle resolutely for existence. Bob and Joe, my brave companions
in misfortune, my friends, seconded me energetically.

"We began like the fictitious Robinson Crusoe of Defoe, our model, by
collecting the planks of the ship, the tools, a little powder, and firearms, and a
bag of precious seeds. The first few days were painful enough, but hunting and
fishing soon afforded us a sure supply of food, for wild goats were in abundance
in the interior of the island, and marine animals abounded on the coast. By
degrees we fell into regular ways and habits of life.

"T had saved my instruments from the wreck, and knew exactly the position
of the island. I found we were out of the route of vessels, and could not be
rescued unless by some providential chance. I accepted our trying lot
composedly, always thinking, however, of my dear ones, remembering them
every day in my prayers, though never hoping to see them again.

"However, we toiled on resolutely, and before long several acres of land
were sown with the seed off the BRITANNIA; potatoes, endive, sorrel, and other
vegetables besides, gave wholesome variety to our daily fare. We caught some
young kids, which soon grew quite tame. We had milk and butter. The nardou,
which grew abundantly in dried up creeks, supplied us with tolerably substantial
bread, and we had no longer any fears for our material life.

"We had built a log hut with the DEBRIS of the BRITANNIA, and this was
covered over with sail cloth, carefully tarred over, and beneath this secure shelter
the rainy season passed comfortably. Many a plan was discussed here, and many
a dream indulged in, the brightest of which is this day realized.

"I had at first the idea of trying to brave the perils of the ocean in a canoe
made out of the spars of the ship, but 1,500 miles lay between us and the nearest
coast, that is to say the islands of the Archipelago of Pomotou. No boat could
have stood so long a voyage. I therefore relinquished my scheme, and looked for
no deliverance except from a divine hand.

"Ah, my poor children! how often we have stood on the top of the rocks and
watched the few vessels passing in the distance far out at sea. During the whole
period of our exile only two or three vessels appeared on the horizon, and those
only to disappear again immediately. Two years and a half were spent in this
manner. We gave up hoping, but yet did not despair. At last, early yesterday
morning, when I was standing on the highest peak of the island, I noticed a light
smoke rising in the west. It increased, and soon a ship appeared in sight. It
seemed to be coming toward us. But would it not rather steer clear of an island
where there was no harbor.

"Ah, what a day of agony that was! My heart was almost bursting. My


comrades kindled a fire on one of the peaks. Night came on, but no signal came
from the yacht. Deliverance was there, however. Were we to see it vanish from
our eyes?

"I hesitated no longer. The darkness was growing deeper. The ship might
double the island during the night. I jumped into the sea, and attempted to make
my way toward it. Hope trebled my strength, I cleft the waves with superhuman
vigor, and had got so near the yacht that I was scarcely thirty fathoms off, when
it tacked about.

"This provoked me to the despairing cry, which only my two children heard.
It was no illusion.

"Then I came back to the shore, exhausted and overcome with emotion and
fatigue. My two sailors received me half dead. It was a horrible night this last we
spent on the island, and we believed ourselves abandoned forever, when day
dawned, and there was the yacht sailing nearly alongside, under easy steam.
Your boat was lowered--we were saved--and, oh, wonder of Divine goodness,
my children, my beloved children, were there holding out their arms to me!"

Robert and Mary almost smothered their father with kisses and caresses as he
ended his narrative.

It was now for the first time that the captain heard that he owed his
deliverance to the somewhat hieroglyphical

V. ITV Verne document which he had placed in a bottle and confined to the
mercy of the ocean.

But what were Jacques Paganel's thoughts during Captain Grant's recital?
The worthy geographer was turning over in his brain for the thousandth time the
words of the document. He pondered his three successive interpretations, all of
which had proved false. How had this island, called Maria Theresa, been
indicated in the papers originally?

At last Paganel could contain himself no longer, and seizing Harry Grant's
hand, he exclaimed:

"Captain! will you tell me at last what really was in your indecipherable
document?"

A general curiosity was excited by this question of the geographer, for the
enigma which had been for nine months a mystery was about to be explained.

"Well, captain," repeated Paganel, "do you remember the precise words of
the document?"

"Exactly," replied Harry Grant; "and not a day has passed without my
recalling to memory words with which our last hopes were linked."

"And what are they, captain?" asked Glenarvan. "Speak, for our amour
propre is wounded to the quick!"


"I am ready to satisfy you," replied Harry Grant; "but, you know, to multiply
the chances of safety, I had inclosed three documents in the bottle, in three
different languages. Which is it you wish to hear?"

"They are not identical, then?" cried Paganel.

"Yes, they are, almost to a word."

"Well, then, let us have the French document," replied Glenarvan. "That is
the one that is most respected by the waves, and the one on which our
interpretations have been mostly founded."

"My Lord, I will give it you word for word," replied Harry Grant.

"LE 27 JUIN, 1862, le trois-mats Britannia, de Glasgow, s'est perdu a quinze
cents lieues de la Patagonie, dans I'hemisphere austral. Partes a terre, deux
matelots et le Capitaine Grant ont atteint l'ile Tabor--"

"Oh!" exclaimed Paganel.

"LA," continued Harry Grant, "continuellement en proie a une cruelle
indigence, ils ont jete ce document par 153 degrees de longitude et 37 degrees
11' de latitude. Venes a leur secours, ou ils sont perdus."

At the name of Tabor, Paganel had started up hastily, and now being unable
to restrain himself longer, he called out:

"How can it be Isle Tabor? Why, this is Maria Theresa!"

"Undoubtedly, Monsieur Paganel," replied Harry Grant. "It is Maria Theresa
on the English and German charts, but is named Tabor on the French ones!"

At this moment a vigorous thump on Paganel's shoulder almost bent him
double. Truth obliges us to say it was the Major that dealt the blow, though
strangely contrary to his usual strict politeness.

"Geographer!" said McNabbs, in a tone of the most supreme contempt.

But Paganel had not even felt the Major's hand. What was that compared to
the geographical blow which had stunned him?

He had been gradually getting nearer the truth, however, as he learned from
Captain Grant. He had almost entirely deciphered the indecipherable document.
The names Patagonia, Australia, New Zealand, had appeared to him in turn with
absolute certainty. CONTIN, at first CONTINENT, had gradually reached its
true meaning, continuelle. Indi had successively signified indiens, indigenes, and
at last the right word was found--INDIGENCE. But one mutilated word, ABOR,
had baffled the geographer's sagacity. Paganel had persisted in making it the root
of the verb ABORDER, and it turned out to be a proper name, the French name
of the Isle Tabor, the isle which had been a refuge for the shipwrecked sailors of
the BRITANNIA. It was difficult to avoid falling into the error, however, for on
the English planispheres on the DUNCAN, the little isle was marked Maria
Theresa.


"No matter?" cried Paganel, tearing his hair; "I ought not to have forgotten
its double appellation. It is an unpardonable mistake, one unworthy of a
secretary of the Geographical Society. I am disgraced!"

"Come, come, Monsieur Paganel,” said Lady Helena; "moderate your grief."

"No, madam, no; I am a mere ass!"

"And not even a learned one!" added the Major, by way of consolation.

When the meal was over, Harry Grant put everything in order in his house.
He took nothing away, wishing the guilty to inherit the riches of the innocent.
Then they returned to the vessel, and, as Glenarvan had determined to start the
same day, he gave immediate orders for the disembarkation of the quartermaster.
Ayrton was brought up on the poop, and found himself face to face with Harry
Grant.

"It is I, Ayrton!" said Grant

"Yes, it is you, captain,” replied Ayrton, without the least sign of surprise at
Harry Grant's recovery. "Well, I am not sorry to see you again in good health."

"It seems, Ayrton, that I made a mistake in landing you on an inhabited
coast."

"It seems so, captain.”

"You are going to take my place on this uninhabited island. May Heaven
give you repentance!"

"Amen," said Ayrton, calmly.

Glenarvan then addressed the quartermaster.

"Tt is still your wish, then, Ayrton, to be left behind?"

"Yes, my Lord!"

"And Isle Tabor meets your wishes?"

"Perfectly."

"Now then, listen to my last words, Ayrton. You will be cut off here from all
the world, and no communication with your fellows is possible. Miracles are
rare, and you will not be able to quit this isle. You will be alone, with no eye
upon you but that of God, who reads the deepest secrets of the heart; but you
will be neither lost nor forsaken, as Captain Grant was. Unworthy as you are of
anyone's remembrance, you will not be dropped out of recollection. I know
where you are, Ayrton; I know where to find you-- I shall never forget."

"God keep your Honor," was all Ayrton's reply.

These were the final words exchanged between Glenarvan and the
quartermaster. The boat was ready and Ayrton got into it.

John Mangles had previously conveyed to the island several cases of
preserved food, besides clothing, and tools and firearms, and a supply of powder
and shot. The quartermaster could commence a new life of honest labor. Nothing


was lacking, not even books; among others, the Bible, so dear to English hearts.

The parting hour had come. The crew and all the passengers were assembled
on deck. More than one felt his heart swell with emotion. Mary Grant and Lady
Helena could not restrain their feelings.

"Must it be done?" said the young wife to her husband. "Must the poor man
be left there?"

"He must, Helena," replied Lord Glenarvan. "It is in expiation of his crimes."

At that moment the boat, in charge of John Mangles, turned away. Ayrton,
who remained standing, and still unmoved, took off his cap and bowed gravely.

Glenarvan uncovered, and all the crew followed his example, as if in
presence of a man who was about to die, and the boat went off in profound
silence.

On reaching land, Ayrton jumped on the sandy shore, and the boat returned
to the yacht. It was then four o'clock in the afternoon, and from the poop the
passengers could see the quartermaster gazing at the ship, standing with folded
arms on a rock, motionless as a statue.

"Shall we set sail, my Lord?" asked John Mangles.

"Yes, John," replied Glenarvan, hastily, more moved than he cared to show.

"Go on!" shouted John to the engineer.

The steam hissed and puffed out, the screw began to stir the waves, and by
eight o'clock the last peaks of Isle Tabor disappeared in the shadows of the night.


CHAPTER XXI PAGANEL'S LAST
ENTANGLEMENT


ON the 19th of March, eleven days after leaving the island, the DUNCAN
sighted the American coast, and next day dropped anchor in the bay of
Talcahuano. They had come back again after a voyage of five months, during
which, and keeping strictly along the 37th parallel, they had gone round the
world. The passengers in this memorable expedition, unprecedented in the
annals of the Travelers’ Club, had visited Chili, the Pampas, the Argentine
Republic, the Atlantic, the island of Tristan d'Acunha, the Indian Ocean,
Amsterdam Island, Australia, New Zealand, Isle Tabor, and the Pacific. Their
search had not been fruitless, for they were bringing back the survivors of the
shipwrecked BRITANNIA.

Not one of the brave Scots who set out at the summons of their chief, but
could answer to their names; all were returning to their old Scotia.

As soon as the DUNCAN had re-provisioned, she sailed along the coast of
Patagonia, doubled Cape Horn, and made a swift run up the Atlantic Ocean. No
voyage could be more devoid of incident. The yacht was simply carrying home a
cargo of happiness. There was no secret now on board, not even John Mangles's
attachment to Mary Grant.

Yes, there was one mystery still, which greatly excited McNabbs's curiosity.
Why was it that Paganel remained always hermetically fastened up in his
clothes, with a big comforter round his throat and up to his very ears? The Major
was burning with desire to know the reason of this singular fashion. But in spite
of interrogations, allusions, and suspicions on the part of McNabbs, Paganel
would not unbutton.

Not even when the DUNCAN crossed the line, and the heat was so great that
the seams of the deck were melting. "He is so DISTRAIT that he thinks he is at
St. Petersburg," said the Major, when he saw the geographer wrapped in an
immense great-coat, as if the mercury had been frozen in the thermometer.

At last on the 9th of May, fifty-three days from the time of leaving
Talcahuano, John Mangles sighted the lights of Cape Clear. The yacht entered St.
George's Channel, crossed the Irish Sea, and on the 10th of May reached the
Firth of Clyde. At 11 o'clock she dropped anchor off Dunbarton, and at 2 P.M.
the passengers arrived at Malcolm Castle amidst the enthusiastic cheering of the
Highlanders.

As fate would have it then, Harry Grant and his two companions were saved.


John Mangles wedded Mary Grant in the old cathedral of St. Mungo, and Mr.
Paxton, the same clergyman who had prayed nine months before for the
deliverance of the father, now blessed the marriage of his daughter and his
deliverer. Robert was to become a sailor like Harry Grant and John Mangles, and
take part with them in the captain's grand projects, under the auspices of Lord
Glenarvan.

But fate also decreed that Paganel was not to die a bachelor? Probably so.

The fact was, the learned geographer after his heroic exploits, could not
escape celebrity. His blunders made quite a FURORE among the fashionables of
Scotland, and he was overwhelmed with courtesies.

It was then that an amiable lady, about thirty years of age, in fact, a cousin of
McNabbs, a little eccentric herself, but good and still charming, fell in love with
the geographer's oddities, and offered him her hand. Forty thousand pounds went
with it, but that was not mentioned.

Paganel was far from being insensible to the sentiments of Miss Arabella,
but yet he did not dare to speak. It was the Major who was the medium of
communication between these two souls, evidently made for each other. He even
told Paganel that his marriage was the last freak he would be able to allow
himself. Paganel was in a great state of embarrassment, but strangely enough
could not make up his mind to speak the fatal word.

"Does not Miss Arabella please you then?" asked McNabbs.

"Oh, Major, she is charming,” exclaimed Paganel, "a thousand times too
charming, and if I must tell you all, she would please me better if she were less
so. I wish she had a defect!"

"Be easy on that score," replied the Major, "she has, and more than one. The
most perfect woman in the world has always her quota. So, Paganel, it is settled
then, I suppose?"

"T dare not."

"Come, now, my learned friend, what makes you hesitate?"

"IT am unworthy of Miss Arabella," was the invariable reply of the
geographer. And to this he would stick.

At last, one day being fairly driven in a corner by the intractable Major, he
ended by confiding to him, under the seal of secrecy, a certain peculiarity which
would facilitate his apprehension should the police ever be on his track.

"Bah!" said the Major.

"It is really as I tell you," replied Paganel.

"What does it matter, my worthy friend?"

"Do you think so, Major?"

"On the contrary, it only makes you more uncommon. It adds to your


personal merits. It is the very thing to make you the nonpareil husband that
Arabella dreams about."

And the Major with imperturbable gravity left Paganel in a state of the
utmost disquietude.

A short conversation ensued between McNabbs and Miss Arabella. A
fortnight afterwards, the marriage was celebrated in grand style in the chapel of
Malcolm Castle. Paganel looked magnificent, but closely buttoned up, and Miss
Arabella was arrayed in splendor.

And this secret of the geographer would have been forever buried in
oblivion, if the Major had not mentioned it to Glenarvan, and he could not hide it
from Lady Helena, who gave a hint to Mrs. Mangles. To make a long story short,
it got in the end to M. Olbinett's ears, and soon became noised abroad.

Jacques Paganel, during his three days' captivity among the Maories, had
been tattooed from the feet to the shoulders, and he bore on his chest a heraldic
kiwi with outspread wings, which was biting at his heart.

This was the only adventure of his grand voyage that Paganel could never
get over, and he always bore a grudge to New Zealand on account of it. It was
for this reason too, that, notwithstanding solicitation and regrets, he never would
return to France. He dreaded lest he should expose the whole Geographical
Society in his person to the jests of caricaturists and low newspapers, by their
secretary coming back tattooed.

The return of the captain to Scotland was a national event, and Harry Grant
was soon the most popular man in old Caledonia. His son Robert became a sailor
like himself and Captain Mangles, and under the patronage of Lord Glenarvan
they resumed the project of founding a Scotch colony in the Southern Seas.


MICHAEL STROGOFF
OR, THE COURIER OF THE CZAR
by Jules Verne


BOOK I


CHAPTER I A FETE AT THE NEW PALACE

"SIRE, a fresh dispatch."

"Whence?"

"From Tomsk?"

"Is the wire cut beyond that city?"

"Yes, sire, since yesterday."

"Telegraph hourly to Tomsk, General, and keep me informed of all that
occurs."

"Sire, it shall be done," answered General Kissoff.

These words were exchanged about two hours after midnight, at the moment
when the fete given at the New Palace was at the height of its splendor.

During the whole evening the bands of the Preobra-jensky and Paulowsky
regiments had played without cessation polkas, mazurkas, schottisches, and
waltzes from among the choicest of their repertoires. Innumerable couples of
dancers whirled through the magnificent saloons of the palace, which stood at a
few paces only from the "old house of stones"--in former days the scene of so
many terrible dramas, the echoes of whose walls were this night awakened by
the gay strains of the musicians.

The grand-chamberlain of the court, was, besides, well seconded in his
arduous and delicate duties. The grand-dukes and their aides-de-camp, the
chamberlains-in-waiting and other officers of the palace, presided personally in
the arrangement of the dances. The grand duchesses, covered with diamonds, the
ladies-in-waiting in their most exquisite costumes, set the example to the wives
of the military and civil dignitaries of the ancient "city of white stone." When,
therefore, the signal for the "polonaise" resounded through the saloons, and the
guests of all ranks took part in that measured promenade, which on occasions of
this kind has all the importance of a national dance, the mingled costumes, the
sweeping robes adorned with lace, and uniforms covered with orders, presented
a scene of dazzling splendor, lighted by hundreds of lusters multiplied tenfold by
the numerous mirrors adorning the walls.

The grand saloon, the finest of all those contained in the New Palace, formed
to this procession of exalted personages and splendidly dressed women a frame
worthy of the magnificence they displayed. The rich ceiling, with its gilding


already softened by the touch of time, appeared as if glittering with stars. The
embroidered drapery of the curtains and doors, falling in gorgeous folds,
assumed rich and varied hues, broken by the shadows of the heavy masses of
damask.

Through the panes of the vast semicircular bay-windows the light, with
which the saloons were filled, shone forth with the brilliancy of a conflagration,
vividly illuminating the gloom in which for some hours the palace had been
shrouded. The attention of those of the guests not taking part in the dancing was
attracted by the contrast. Resting in the recesses of the windows, they could
discern, standing out dimly in the darkness, the vague outlines of the countless
towers, domes, and spires which adorn the ancient city. Below the sculptured
balconies were visible numerous sentries, pacing silently up and down, their
rifles carried horizontally on the shoulder, and the spikes of their helmets
glittering like flames in the glare of light issuing from the palace. The steps also
of the patrols could be heard beating time on the stones beneath with even more
regularity than the feet of the dancers on the floor of the saloon. From time to
time the watchword was repeated from post to post, and occasionally the notes
of a trumpet, mingling with the strains of the orchestra, penetrated into their
midst. Still farther down, in front of the facade, dark masses obscured the rays of
light which proceeded from the windows of the New Palace. These were boats
descending the course of a river, whose waters, faintly illumined by a few lamps,
washed the lower portion of the terraces.

The principal personage who has been mentioned, the giver of the fete, and
to whom General Kissoff had been speaking in that tone of respect with which
sovereigns alone are usually addressed, wore the simple uniform of an officer of
chasseurs of the guard. This was not affectation on his part, but the custom of a
man who cared little for dress, his contrasting strongly with the gorgeous
costumes amid which he moved, encircled by his escort of Georgians, Cossacks,
and Circassians--a brilliant band, splendidly clad in the glittering uniforms of the
Caucasus.

This personage, of lofty stature, affable demeanor, and physiognomy calm,
though bearing traces of anxiety, moved from group to group, seldom speaking,
and appearing to pay but little attention either to the merriment of the younger
guests or the graver remarks of the exalted dignitaries or members of the
diplomatic corps who represented at the Russian court the principal governments
of Europe. Two or three of these astute politicians--physiognomists by virtue of
their profession--failed not to detect on the countenance of their host symptoms
of disquietude, the source of which eluded their penetration; but none ventured
to interrogate him on the subject.


It was evidently the intention of the officer of chasseurs that his own
anxieties should in no way cast a shade over the festivities; and, as he was a
personage whom almost the population of a world in itself was wont to obey, the
gayety of the ball was not for a moment checked.

Nevertheless, General Kissoff waited until the officer to whom he had just
communicated the dispatch forwarded from Tomsk should give him permission
to withdraw; but the latter still remained silent. He had taken the telegram, he
had read it carefully, and his visage became even more clouded than before.
Involuntarily he sought the hilt of his sword, and then passed his hand for an
instant before his eyes, as though, dazzled by the brilliancy of the light, he
wished to shade them, the better to see into the recesses of his own mind.

"We are, then,” he continued, after having drawn General Kissoff aside
towards a window, "since yesterday without intelligence from the Grand Duke?"

"Without any, sire; and it is to be feared that in a short time dispatches will
no longer cross the Siberian frontier."

"But have not the troops of the provinces of Amoor and Irkutsk, as those also
of the Trans-Balkan territory, received orders to march immediately upon
Irkutsk?"

"The orders were transmitted by the last telegram we were able to send
beyond Lake Baikal."

"And the governments of Yeniseisk, Omsk, Semipolatinsk, and Tobolsk--are
we still in direct communication with them as before the insurrection?"

"Yes, sire; our dispatches have reached them, and we are assured at the
present moment that the Tartars have not advanced beyond the Irtish and the
Obi."

"And the traitor Ivan Ogareff, are there no tidings of him?"

"None," replied General Kissoff. "The head of the police cannot state
whether or not he has crossed the frontier."

"Let a description of him be immediately dispatched to Nijni-Novgorod,
Perm, Ekaterenburg, Kasirnov, Tioumen, Ishim, Omsk, Tomsk, and to all the
telegraphic stations with which communication is yet open.”

"Your majesty's orders shall be instantly carried out."

"You will observe the strictest silence as to this."

The General, having made a sign of respectful assent, bowing low, mingled
with the crowd, and finally left the apartments without his departure being
remarked.

The officer remained absorbed in thought for a few moments, when,
recovering himself, he went among the various groups in the saloon, his
countenance reassuming that calm aspect which had for an instant been


disturbed.

Nevertheless, the important occurrence which had occasioned these rapidly
exchanged words was not so unknown as the officer of the chasseurs of the
guard and General Kissoff had possibly supposed. It was not spoken of officially,
it is true, nor even officiously, since tongues were not free; but a few exalted
personages had been informed, more or less exactly, of the events which had
taken place beyond the frontier. At any rate, that which was only slightly known,
that which was not matter of conversation even between members of the corps
diplomatique, two guests, distinguished by no uniform, no decoration, at this
reception in the New Palace, discussed in a low voice, and with apparently very
correct information.

By what means, by the exercise of what acuteness had these two ordinary
mortals ascertained that which so many persons of the highest rank and
importance scarcely even suspected? It is impossible to say. Had they the gifts of
foreknowledge and foresight? Did they possess a supplementary sense, which
enabled them to see beyond that limited horizon which bounds all human gaze?
Had they obtained a peculiar power of divining the most secret events? Was it
owing to the habit, now become a second nature, of living on information, that
their mental constitution had thus become really transformed? It was difficult to
escape from this conclusion.

Of these two men, the one was English, the other French; both were tall and
thin, but the latter was sallow as are the southern Provencals, while the former
was ruddy like a Lancashire gentleman. The Anglo-Norman, formal, cold, grave,
parsimonious of gestures and words, appeared only to speak or gesticulate under
the influence of a spring operating at regular intervals. The Gaul, on the contrary,
lively and petulant, expressed himself with lips, eyes, hands, all at once, having
twenty different ways of explaining his thoughts, whereas his interlocutor
seemed to have only one, immutably stereotyped on his brain.

The strong contrast they presented would at once have struck the most
superficial observer; but a physiognomist, regarding them closely, would have
defined their particular characteristics by saying, that if the Frenchman was "all
eyes," the Englishman was "all ears."

In fact, the visual apparatus of the one had been singularly perfected by
practice. The sensibility of its retina must have been as instantaneous as that of
those conjurors who recognize a card merely by a rapid movement in cutting the
pack or by the arrangement only of marks invisible to others. The Frenchman
indeed possessed in the highest degree what may be called "the memory of the
eye."

The Englishman, on the contrary, appeared especially organized to listen and


to hear. When his aural apparatus had been once struck by the sound of a voice
he could not forget it, and after ten or even twenty years he would have
recognized it among a thousand. His ears, to be sure, had not the power of
moving as freely as those of animals who are provided with large auditory flaps;
but, since scientific men know that human ears possess, in fact, a very limited
power of movement, we should not be far wrong in affirming that those of the
said Englishman became erect, and turned in all directions while endeavoring to
gather in the sounds, in a manner apparent only to the naturalist. It must be
observed that this perfection of sight and hearing was of wonderful assistance to
these two men in their vocation, for the Englishman acted as correspondent of
the Daily Telegraph, and the Frenchman, as correspondent of what newspaper, or
of what newspapers, he did not say; and when asked, he replied in a jocular
manner that he corresponded with "his cousin Madeleine." This Frenchman,
however, neath his careless surface, was wonderfully shrewd and sagacious.
Even while speaking at random, perhaps the better to hide his desire to learn, he
never forgot himself. His loquacity even helped him to conceal his thoughts, and
he was perhaps even more discreet than his confrere of the Daily Telegraph.
Both were present at this fete given at the New Palace on the night of the 15th of
July in their character of reporters.

It is needless to say that these two men were devoted to their mission in the
world--that they delighted to throw themselves in the track of the most
unexpected intelligence--that nothing terrified or discouraged them from
succeeding--that they possessed the imperturbable sang froid and the genuine
intrepidity of men of their calling. Enthusiastic jockeys in this steeplechase, this
hunt after information, they leaped hedges, crossed rivers, sprang over fences,
with the ardor of pure-blooded racers, who will run "a good first" or die!

Their journals did not restrict them with regard to money--the surest, the
most rapid, the most perfect element of information known to this day. It must
also be added, to their honor, that neither the one nor the other ever looked over
or listened at the walls of private life, and that they only exercised their vocation
when political or social interests were at stake. In a word, they made what has
been for some years called "the great political and military reports."

It will be seen, in following them, that they had generally an independent
mode of viewing events, and, above all, their consequences, each having his own
way of observing and appreciating.

The French correspondent was named Alcide Jolivet. Harry Blount was the
name of the Englishman. They had just met for the first time at this fete in the
New Palace, of which they had been ordered to give an account in their papers.
The dissimilarity of their characters, added to a certain amount of jealousy,


which generally exists between rivals in the same calling, might have rendered
them but little sympathetic. However, they did not avoid each other, but
endeavored rather to exchange with each other the chat of the day. They were
sportsmen, after all, hunting on the same ground. That which one missed might
be advantageously secured by the other, and it was to their interest to meet and
converse.

This evening they were both on the look out; they felt, in fact, that there was
something in the air.

"Even should it be only a wildgoose chase," said Alcide Jolivet to himself,
"it may be worth powder and shot."

The two correspondents therefore began by cautiously sounding each other.

"Really, my dear sir, this little fete is charming!" said Alcide Jolivet
pleasantly, thinking himself obliged to begin the conversation with this
eminently French phrase.

"I have telegraphed already, 'splendid!"" replied Harry Blount calmly,
employing the word specially devoted to expressing admiration by all subjects of
the United Kingdom.

"Nevertheless," added Alcide Jolivet, "I felt compelled to remark to my
cousin--"

"Your cousin?” repeated Harry Blount in a tone of surprise, interrupting his
brother of the pen.

"Yes," returned Alcide Jolivet, "my cousin Madeleine. It is with her that I
correspond, and she likes to be quickly and well informed, does my cousin. I
therefore remarked to her that, during this fete, a sort of cloud had appeared to
overshadow the sovereign's brow."

"To me, it seemed radiant," replied Harry Blount, who perhaps, wished to
conceal his real opinion on this topic.

"And, naturally, you made it ‘radiant,’ in the columns of the Daily
Telegraph."

"Exactly."

"Do you remember, Mr. Blount, what occurred at Zakret in 1812?"

"IT remember it as well as if I had been there, sir," replied the English
correspondent.

"Then," continued Alcide Jolivet, "you know that, in the middle of a fete
given in his honor, it was announced to the Emperor Alexander that Napoleon
had just crossed the Niemen with the vanguard of the French army. Nevertheless
the Emperor did not leave the fete, and notwithstanding the extreme gravity of
intelligence which might cost him his empire, he did not allow himself to show
more uneasiness."


"Than our host exhibited when General Kissoff informed him that the
telegraphic wires had just been cut between the frontier and the government of
Irkutsk."

"Ah! you are aware of that?"

"Tam!"

"As regards myself, it would be difficult to avoid knowing it, since my last
telegram reached Udinsk," observed Alcide Jolivet, with some satisfaction.

"And mine only as far as Krasnoiarsk," answered Harry Blount, in a no less
satisfied tone.

"Then you know also that orders have been sent to the troops of
Nikolaevsk?"

"I do, sir; and at the same time a telegram was sent to the Cossacks of the
government of Tobolsk to concentrate their forces."

"Nothing can be more true, Mr. Blount; I was equally well acquainted with
these measures, and you may be sure that my dear cousin shall know of them to-
morrow."

"Exactly as the readers of the Daily Telegraph shall know it also, M. Jolivet."

"Well, when one sees all that is going on...."

"And when one hears all that is said...."

"An interesting campaign to follow, Mr. Blount."

"T shall follow it, M. Jolivet!"

"Then it is possible that we shall find ourselves on ground less safe, perhaps,
than the floor of this ball-room."

"Less safe, certainly, but--"

"But much less slippery," added Alcide Jolivet, holding up his companion,
just as the latter, drawing back, was about to lose his equilibrium.

Thereupon the two correspondents separated, pleased that the one had not
stolen a march on the other.

At that moment the doors of the rooms adjoining the great reception saloon
were thrown open, disclosing to view several immense tables beautifully laid
out, and groaning under a profusion of valuable china and gold plate. On the
central table, reserved for the princes, princesses, and members of the corps
diplomatique, glittered an epergne of inestimable price, brought from London,
and around this chef-d'oeuvre of chased gold reflected under the light of the
lusters a thousand pieces of most beautiful service from the manufactories of
Sevres.

The guests of the New Palace immediately began to stream towards the
supper-rooms.

At that moment. General Kissoff, who had just re-entered, quickly


approached the officer of chasseurs.

"Well?" asked the latter abruptly, as he had done the former time.

"Telegrams pass Tomsk no longer, sire."

"A courier this moment!"

The officer left the hall and entered a large antechamber adjoining. It was a
cabinet with plain oak furniture, situated in an angle of the New Palace. Several
pictures, amongst others some by Horace Vernet, hung on the wall.

The officer hastily opened a window, as if he felt the want of air, and stepped
out on a balcony to breathe the pure atmosphere of a lovely July night. Beneath
his eyes, bathed in moonlight, lay a fortified inclosure, from which rose two
cathedrals, three palaces, and an arsenal. Around this inclosure could be seen
three distinct towns: Kitai-Gorod, Beloi-Gorod, Zemlianai-Gorod--European,
Tartar, and Chinese quarters of great extent, commanded by towers, belfries,
minarets, and the cupolas of three hundred churches, with green domes,
surmounted by the silver cross. A little winding river, here and there reflected the
rays of the moon.

This river was the Moskowa; the town Moscow; the fortified inclosure the
Kremlin; and the officer of chasseurs of the guard, who, with folded arms and
thoughtful brow, was listening dreamily to the sounds floating from the New
Palace over the old Muscovite city, was the Czar.


CHAPTER IT RUSSIANS AND TARTARS


THE Czar had not so suddenly left the ball-room of the New Palace, when
the fete he was giving to the civil and military authorities and principal people of
Moscow was at the height of its brilliancy, without ample cause; for he had just
received information that serious events were taking place beyond the frontiers
of the Ural. It had become evident that a formidable rebellion threatened to wrest
the Siberian provinces from the Russian crown.

Asiatic Russia, or Siberia, covers a superficial area of 1,790,208 square
miles, and contains nearly two millions of inhabitants. Extending from the Ural
Mountains, which separate it from Russia in Europe, to the shores of the Pacific
Ocean, it is bounded on the south by Turkestan and the Chinese Empire; on the
north by the Arctic Ocean, from the Sea of Kara to Behring's Straits. It is divided
into several governments or provinces, those of Tobolsk, Yeniseisk, Irkutsk,
Omsk, and Yakutsk; contains two districts, Okhotsk and Kamtschatka; and
possesses two countries, now under the Muscovite dominion--that of the Kirghiz
and that of the Tshouktshes. This immense extent of steppes, which includes
more than one hundred and ten degrees from west to east, is a land to which
criminals and political offenders are banished.

Two governor-generals represent the supreme authority of the Czar over this
vast country. The higher one resides at Irkutsk, the far capital of Eastern Siberia.
The River Tchouna separates the two Siberias.

No rail yet furrows these wide plains, some of which are in reality extremely
fertile. No iron ways lead from those precious mines which make the Siberian
soil far richer below than above its surface. The traveler journeys in summer in a
kibick or telga; in winter, in a sledge.

An electric telegraph, with a single wire more than eight thousand versts in
length, alone affords communication between the western and eastern frontiers
of Siberia. On issuing from the Ural, it passes through Ekaterenburg, Kasirnov,
Tioumen, Ishim, Omsk, Elamsk, Kolyvan, Tomsk, Krasnoiarsk, Nijni-Udinsk,
Irkutsk, Verkne-Nertschink, Strelink, Albazine, Blagowstenks, Radde,
Orlomskaya, Alexandrowskoe, and Nikolaevsk; and six roubles and nineteen
copecks are paid for every word sent from one end to the other. From Irkutsk
there is a branch to Kiatka, on the Mongolian frontier; and from thence, for thirty
copecks a word, the post conveys the dispatches to Pekin in a fortnight.

It was this wire, extending from Ekaterenburg to Nikolaevsk, which had been
cut, first beyond Tomsk, and then between Tomsk and Kolyvan.


This was why the Czar, to the communication made to him for the second
time by General Kissoff, had answered by the words, "A courier this moment!"

The Czar remained motionless at the window for a few moments, when the
door was again opened. The chief of police appeared on the threshold.

"Enter, General," said the Czar briefly, "and tell me all you know of Ivan
Ogareff."

"He is an extremely dangerous man, sire," replied the chief of police.

"He ranked as colonel, did he not?"

"Yes, sire."

"Was he an intelligent officer?"

"Very intelligent, but a man whose spirit it was impossible to subdue; and
possessing an ambition which stopped at nothing, he became involved in secret
intrigues, and was degraded from his rank by his Highness the Grand Duke, and
exiled to Siberia."

"How long ago was that?"

"Two years since. Pardoned after six months of exile by your majesty's favor,
he returned to Russia."

"And since that time, has he not revisited Siberia?"

"Yes, sire; but he voluntarily returned there," replied the chief of police,
adding, and slightly lowering his voice, "there was a time, sire, when NONE
returned from Siberia."

"Well, whilst I live, Siberia is and shall be a country whence men CAN
return."

The Czar had the right to utter these words with some pride, for often, by his
clemency, he had shown that Russian justice knew how to pardon.

The head of the police did not reply to this observation, but it was evident
that he did not approve of such half-measures. According to his idea, a man who
had once passed the Ural Mountains in charge of policemen, ought never again
to cross them. Now, it was not thus under the new reign, and the chief of police
sincerely deplored it. What! no banishment for life for other crimes than those
against social order! What! political exiles returning from Tobolsk, from
Yakutsk, from Irkutsk! In truth, the chief of police, accustomed to the despotic
sentences of the ukase which formerly never pardoned, could not understand this
mode of governing. But he was silent, waiting until the Czar should interrogate
him further. The questions were not long in coming.

"Did not Ivan Ogareff," asked the Czar, "return to Russia a second time, after
that journey through the Siberian provinces, the object of which remains
unknown?"

"He did."


"And have the police lost trace of him since?"

"No, sire; for an offender only becomes really dangerous from the day he has
received his pardon."

The Czar frowned. Perhaps the chief of police feared that he had gone rather
too far, though the stubbornness of his ideas was at least equal to the boundless
devotion he felt for his master. But the Czar, disdaining to reply to these indirect
reproaches cast on his policy, continued his questions. "Where was Ogareff last
heard of?"

"In the province of Perm."

"In what town?"

"At Perm itself."

"What was he doing?"

"He appeared unoccupied, and there was nothing suspicious in his conduct."

"Then he was not under the surveillance of the secret police?"

"No, sire."

"When did he leave Perm?"

"About the month of March?"

"To go...?"

"Where, is unknown."

"And it is not known what has become of him?"

"No, sire; it is not known."

"Well, then, I myself know," answered the Czar. "I have received anonymous
communications which did not pass through the police department; and, in the
face of events now taking place beyond the frontier, I have every reason to
believe that they are correct."

"Do you mean, sire,” cried the chief of police, "that Ivan Ogareff has a hand
in this Tartar rebellion?"

"Indeed I do; and I will now tell you something which you are ignorant of.
After leaving Perm, Ivan Ogareff crossed the Ural mountains, entered Siberia,
and penetrated the Kirghiz steppes, and there endeavored, not without success, to
foment rebellion amongst their nomadic population. He then went so far south as
free Turkestan; there, in the provinces of Bokhara, Khokhand, and Koondooz, he
found chiefs willing to pour their Tartar hordes into Siberia, and excite a general
rising in Asiatic Russia. The storm has been silently gathering, but it has at last
burst like a thunderclap, and now all means of communication between Eastern
and Western Siberia have been stopped. Moreover, Ivan Ogareff, thirsting for
vengeance, aims at the life of my brother!"

The Czar had become excited whilst speaking, and now paced up and down
with hurried steps. The chief of police said nothing, but he thought to himself


that, during the time when the emperors of Russia never pardoned an exile,
schemes such as those of Ivan Ogareff could never have been realized.
Approaching the Czar, who had thrown himself into an armchair, he asked,
"Your majesty has of course given orders so that this rebellion may be
suppressed as soon as possible?"

"Yes," answered the Czar. "The last telegram which reached Nijni-Udinsk
would set in motion the troops in the governments of Yenisei, Irkutsk, Yakutsk,
as well as those in the provinces of the Amoor and Lake Baikal. At the same
time, the regiments from Perm and Nijni-Novgorod, and the Cossacks from the
frontier, are advancing by forced marches towards the Ural Mountains; but some
weeks must pass before they can attack the Tartars."

"And your majesty's brother, his Highness the Grand Duke, is now isolated
in the government of Irkutsk, and is no longer in direct communication with
Moscow?"

"That is so."

"But by the last dispatches, he must know what measures have been taken by
your majesty, and what help he may expect from the governments nearest
Irkutsk?"

"He knows that," answered the Czar; "but what he does not know is, that
Ivan Ogareff, as well as being a rebel, is also playing the part of a traitor, and
that in him he has a personal and bitter enemy. It is to the Grand Duke that
Ogareff owes his first disgrace; and what is more serious is, that this man is not
known to him. Ogareff's plan, therefore, is to go to Irkutsk, and, under an
assumed name, offer his services to the Grand Duke. Then, after gaining his
confidence, when the Tartars have invested Irkutsk, he will betray the town, and
with it my brother, whose life he seeks. This is what I have learned from my
secret intelligence; this is what the Grand Duke does not know; and this is what
he must know!"

"Well, sire, an intelligent, courageous courier..."

"I momentarily expect one."

"And it is to be hoped he will be expeditious," added the chief of police; "for,
allow me to add, sire, that Siberia is a favorable land for rebellions."

"Do you mean to say. General, that the exiles would make common cause
with the rebels?" exclaimed the Czar.

"Excuse me, your majesty," stammered the chief of police, for that was really
the idea suggested to him by his uneasy and suspicious mind.

"I believe in their patriotism," returned the Czar.

"There are other offenders besides political exiles in Siberia," said the chief
of police.


"The criminals? Oh, General, I give those up to you! They are the vilest, I
grant, of the human race. They belong to no country. But the insurrection, or
rather, the rebellion, is not to oppose the emperor; it is raised against Russia,
against the country which the exiles have not lost all hope of again seeing--and
which they will see again. No, a Russian would never unite with a Tartar, to
weaken, were it only for an hour, the Muscovite power!"

The Czar was right in trusting to the patriotism of those whom his policy
kept, for a time, at a distance. Clemency, which was the foundation of his justice,
when he could himself direct its effects, the modifications he had adopted with
regard to applications for the formerly terrible ukases, warranted the belief that
he was not mistaken. But even without this powerful element of success in
regard to the Tartar rebellion, circumstances were not the less very serious; for it
was to be feared that a large part of the Kirghiz population would join the rebels.

The Kirghiz are divided into three hordes, the greater, the lesser, and the
middle, and number nearly four hundred thousand "tents," or two million souls.
Of the different tribes some are independent and others recognize either the
sovereignty of Russia or that of the Khans of Khiva, Khokhand, and Bokhara,
the most formidable chiefs of Turkestan. The middle horde, the richest, is also
the largest, and its encampments occupy all the space between the rivers Sara
Sou, Irtish, and the Upper Ishim, Lake Saisang and Lake Aksakal. The greater
horde, occupying the countries situated to the east of the middle one, extends as
far as the governments of Omsk and Tobolsk. Therefore, if the Kirghiz
population should rise, it would be the rebellion of Asiatic Russia, and the first
thing would be the separation of Siberia, to the east of the Yenisei.

It is true that these Kirghiz, mere novices in the art of war, are rather
nocturnal thieves and plunderers of caravans than regular soldiers. As M.
Levchine says, "a firm front or a square of good infantry could repel ten times
the number of Kirghiz; and a single cannon might destroy a frightful number."

That may be; but to do this it is necessary for the square of good infantry to
reach the rebellious country, and the cannon to leave the arsenals of the Russian
provinces, perhaps two or three thousand versts distant. Now, except by the
direct route from Ekaterenburg to Irkutsk, the often marshy steppes are not easily
practicable, and some weeks must certainly pass before the Russian troops could
reach the Tartar hordes.

Omsk is the center of that military organization of Western Siberia which is
intended to overawe the Kirghiz population. Here are the bounds, more than
once infringed by the half-subdued nomads, and there was every reason to
believe that Omsk was already in danger. The line of military stations, that is to
say, those Cossack posts which are ranged in echelon from Omsk to


Semipolatinsk, must have been broken in several places. Now, it was to be
feared that the "Grand Sultans," who govern the Kirghiz districts would either
voluntarily accept, or involuntarily submit to, the dominion of Tartars,
Mussulmen like themselves, and that to the hate caused by slavery was not
united the hate due to the antagonism of the Greek and Mussulman religions. For
some time, indeed, the Tartars of Turkestan had endeavored, both by force and
persuasion, to subdue the Kirghiz hordes.

A few words only with respect to these Tartars. The Tartars belong more
especially to two distinct races, the Caucasian and the Mongolian. The
Caucasian race, which, as Abel de Remusat says, "is regarded in Europe as the
type of beauty in our species, because all the nations in this part of the world
have sprung from it," includes also the Turks and the Persians. The purely
Mongolian race comprises the Mongols, Manchoux, and Thibetans.

The Tartars who now threatened the Russian Empire, belonged to the
Caucasian race, and occupied Turkestan. This immense country is divided into
different states, governed by Khans, and hence termed Khanats. The principal
khanats are those of Bokhara, Khokhand, Koondooz, etc. At this period, the
most important and the most formidable khanat was that of Bokhara. Russia had
already been several times at war with its chiefs, who, for their own interests,
had supported the independence of the Kirghiz against the Muscovite dominion.
The present chief, Feofar-Khan, followed in the steps of his predecessors.

The khanat of Bokhara has a population of two million five hundred
thousand inhabitants, an army of sixty thousand men, trebled in time of war, and
thirty thousand horsemen. It is a rich country, with varied animal, vegetable, and
mineral products, and has been increased by the accession of the territories of
Balkh, Aukoi, and Meimaneh. It possesses nineteen large towns. Bokhara,
surrounded by a wall measuring more than eight English miles, and flanked with
towers, a glorious city, made illustrious by Avicenna and other learned men of
the tenth century, is regarded as the center of Mussulman science, and ranks
among the most celebrated cities of Central Asia. Samarcand, which contains the
tomb of Tamerlane and the famous palace where the blue stone is kept on which
each new khan must seat himself on his accession, is defended by a very strong
citadel. Karschi, with its triple cordon, situated in an oasis, surrounded by a
marsh peopled with tortoises and lizards, is almost impregnable, Is-chardjoui is
defended by a population of twenty thousand souls. Protected by its mountains,
and isolated by its steppes, the khanat of Bokhara is a most formidable state; and
Russia would need a large force to subdue it.

The fierce and ambitious Feofar now governed this corner of Tartary.
Relying on the other khans--principally those of Khokhand and Koondooz, cruel


and rapacious warriors, all ready to join an enterprise so dear to Tartar instincts--
aided by the chiefs who ruled all the hordes of Central Asia, he had placed
himself at the head of the rebellion of which Ivan Ogareff was the instigator.
This traitor, impelled by insane ambition as much as by hate, had ordered the
movement so as to attack Siberia. Mad indeed he was, if he hoped to rupture the
Muscovite Empire. Acting under his suggestion, the Emir--which is the title
taken by the khans of Bokhara--had poured his hordes over the Russian frontier.
He invaded the government of Semipolatinsk, and the Cossacks, who were only
in small force there, had been obliged to retire before him. He had advanced
farther than Lake Balkhash, gaining over the Kirghiz population on his way.
Pillaging, ravaging, enrolling those who submitted, taking prisoners those who
resisted, he marched from one town to another, followed by those impedimenta
of Oriental sovereignty which may be called his household, his wives and his
slaves--all with the cool audacity of a modern Ghengis-Khan. It was impossible
to ascertain where he now was; how far his soldiers had marched before the
news of the rebellion reached Moscow; or to what part of Siberia the Russian
troops had been forced to retire. All communication was interrupted. Had the
wire between Kolyvan and Tomsk been cut by Tartar scouts, or had the Emir
himself arrived at the Yeniseisk provinces? Was all the lower part of Western
Siberia in a ferment? Had the rebellion already spread to the eastern regions? No
one could say. The only agent which fears neither cold nor heat, which can
neither be stopped by the rigors of winter nor the heat of summer, and which
flies with the rapidity of lightning--the electric current--was prevented from
traversing the steppes, and it was no longer possible to warn the Grand Duke,
shut up in Irkutsk, of the danger threatening him from the treason of Ivan
Ogareff.

A courier only could supply the place of the interrupted current. It would
take this man some time to traverse the five thousand two hundred versts
between Moscow and Irkutsk. To pass the ranks of the rebels and invaders he
must display almost superhuman courage and intelligence. But with a clear head
and a firm heart much can be done.

"Shall I be able to find this head and heart?" thought the Czar.


CHAPTER IT MICHAEL STROGOFF MEETS THE CZAR

THE door of the imperial cabinet was again opened and General Kissoff was
announced.

"The courier?" inquired the Czar eagerly.

"He is here, sire," replied General Kissoff.


"Have you found a fitting man?"

"T will answer for him to your majesty."

"Has he been in the service of the Palace?"

"Yes, sire."

"You know him?"

"Personally, and at various times he has fulfilled difficult missions with
success."

"Abroad?"

"In Siberia itself."

"Where does he come from?"

"From Omsk. He is a Siberian."

"Has he coolness, intelligence, courage?"

"Yes, sire; he has all the qualities necessary to succeed, even where others
might possibly fail."

"What is his age?"

"Thirty."

"Is he strong and vigorous?"

"Sire, he can bear cold, hunger, thirst, fatigue, to the very last extremities."

"He must have a frame of iron."

"Sire, he has."

"And a heart?"

"A heart of gold."

"His name?"

"Michael Strogoff."

"Is he ready to set out?"

"He awaits your majesty's orders in the guard-room."

"Let him come in," said the Czar.

In a few moments Michael Strogoff, the courier, entered the imperial library.
He was a tall, vigorous, broad-shouldered, deep-chested man. His powerful head
possessed the fine features of the Caucasian race. His well-knit frame seemed
built for the performance of feats of strength. It would have been a difficult task
to move such a man against his will, for when his feet were once planted on the
ground, it was as if they had taken root. As he doffed his Muscovite cap, locks of
thick curly hair fell over his broad, massive forehead. When his ordinarily pale
face became at all flushed, it arose solely from a more rapid action of the heart.
His eyes, of a deep blue, looked with clear, frank, firm gaze. The slightly-
contracted eyebrows indicated lofty heroism--"the hero's cool courage,"
according to the definition of the physiologist. He possessed a fine nose, with
large nostrils; and a well-shaped mouth, with the slightly-projecting lips which


denote a generous and noble heart.

Michael Strogoff had the temperament of the man of action, who does not
bite his nails or scratch his head in doubt and indecision. Sparing of gestures as
of words, he always stood motionless like a soldier before his superior; but when
he moved, his step showed a firmness, a freedom of movement, which proved
the confidence and vivacity of his mind.

Michael Strogoff wore a handsome military uniform something resembling
that of a light-cavalry officer in the field--boots, spurs, half tightly-fitting
trousers, brown pelisse, trimmed with fur and ornamented with yellow braid. On
his breast glittered a cross and several medals.

Michael Strogoff belonged to the special corps of the Czar's couriers, ranking
as an officer among those picked men. His most discernible characteristic--
particularly in his walk, his face, in the whole man, and which the Czar
perceived at a glance--was, that he was "a fulfiller of orders." He therefore
possessed one of the most serviceable qualities in Russia--one which, as the
celebrated novelist Tourgueneff says, "will lead to the highest positions in the
Muscovite empire."

In short, if anyone could accomplish this journey from Moscow to Irkutsk,
across a rebellious country, surmount obstacles, and brave perils of all sorts,
Michael Strogoff was the man.

A circumstance especially favorable to the success of his plan was, that he
was thoroughly acquainted with the country which he was about to traverse, and
understood its different dialects--not only from having traveled there before, but
because he was of Siberian origin.

His father--old Peter Strogoff, dead ten years since--inhabited the town of
Omsk, situated in the government of the same name; and his mother, Marfa
Strogoff, lived there still. There, amid the wild steppes of the provinces of Omsk
and Tobolsk, had the famous huntsman brought up his son Michael to endure
hardship. Peter Strogoff was a huntsman by profession. Summer and winter--in
the burning heat, as well as when the cold was sometimes fifty degrees below
zero--he scoured the frozen plains, the thickets of birch and larch, the pine
forests; setting traps; watching for small game with his gun, and for large game
with the spear or knife. The large game was nothing less than the Siberian bear, a
formidable and ferocious animal, in size equaling its fellow of the frozen seas.
Peter Strogoff had killed more than thirty-nine bears--that is to say, the fortieth
had fallen under his blows; and, according to Russian legends, most huntsmen
who have been lucky enough up to the thirty-ninth bear, have succumbed to the
fortieth.

Peter Strogoff had, however, passed the fatal number without even a scratch.


From that time, his son Michael, aged eleven years, never failed to accompany
him to the hunt, carrying the ragatina or spear to aid his father, who was armed
only with the knife. When he was fourteen, Michael Strogoff had killed his first
bear, quite alone--that was nothing; but after stripping it he dragged the gigantic
animal's skin to his father's house, many versts distant, exhibiting remarkable
strength in a boy so young.

This style of life was of great benefit to him, and when he arrived at
manhood he could bear any amount of cold, heat, hunger, thirst, or fatigue. Like
the Yakout of the northern countries, he was made of iron. He could go four-and-
twenty hours without eating, ten nights without sleeping, and could make
himself a shelter in the open steppe where others would have been frozen to
death. Gifted with marvelous acuteness, guided by the instinct of the Delaware
of North America, over the white plain, when every object is hidden in mist, or
even in higher latitudes, where the polar night is prolonged for many days, he
could find his way when others would have had no idea whither to turn. All his
father's secrets were known to him. He had learnt to read almost imperceptible
signs--the forms of icicles, the appearance of the small branches of trees, mists
rising far away in the horizon, vague sounds in the air, distant reports, the flight
of birds through the foggy atmosphere, a thousand circumstances which are so
many words to those who can decipher them. Moreover, tempered by snow like
a Damascus blade in the waters of Syria, he had a frame of iron, as General
Kissoff had said, and, what was no less true, a heart of gold.

The only sentiment of love felt by Michael Strogoff was that which he
entertained for his mother, the aged Marfa, who could never be induced to leave
the house of the Strogoffs, at Omsk, on the banks of the Irtish, where the old
huntsman and she had lived so long together. When her son left her, he went
away with a full heart, but promising to come and see her whenever he could
possibly do so; and this promise he had always religiously kept.

When Michael was twenty, it was decided that he should enter the personal
service of the Emperor of Russia, in the corps of the couriers of the Czar. The
hardy, intelligent, zealous, well-conducted young Siberian first distinguished
himself especially, in a journey to the Caucasus, through the midst of a difficult
country, ravaged by some restless successors of Schamyl; then later, in an
important mission to Petropolowski, in Kamtschatka, the extreme limit of
Asiatic Russia. During these long journeys he displayed such marvelous
coolness, prudence, and courage, as to gain him the approbation and protection
of his chiefs, who rapidly advanced him in his profession.

The furloughs which were his due after these distant missions, he never
failed to devote to his old mother. Having been much employed in the south of


the empire, he had not seen old Marfa for three years--three ages!--the first time
in his life he had been so long absent from her. Now, however, in a few days he
would obtain his furlough, and he had accordingly already made preparations for
departure for Omsk, when the events which have been related occurred. Michael
Strogoff was therefore introduced into the Czar's presence in complete ignorance
of what the emperor expected from him.

The Czar fixed a penetrating look upon him without uttering a word, whilst
Michael stood perfectly motionless.

The Czar, apparently satisfied with his scrutiny, motioned to the chief of
police to seat himself, and dictated in a low voice a letter of not more than a few
lines.

The letter penned, the Czar re-read it attentively, then signed it, preceding his
name with the words "Byt po semou," which, signifying "So be it," constitutes
the decisive formula of the Russian emperors.

The letter was then placed in an envelope, which was sealed with the
imperial arms.

The Czar, rising, told Michael Strogoff to draw near.

Michael advanced a few steps, and then stood motionless, ready to answer.

The Czar again looked him full in the face and their eyes met. Then in an
abrupt tone, "Thy name?" he asked.

"Michael Strogoff, sire."

"Thy rank?"

"Captain in the corps of couriers of the Czar."

"Thou dost know Siberia?"

"Tam a Siberian."

"A native of?"

"Omsk, sire."

"Hast thou relations there?"

"Yes sire."

"What relations?"

"My old mother."

The Czar suspended his questions for a moment. Then, pointing to the letter
which he held in his hand, "Here is a letter which I charge thee, Michael
Strogoff, to deliver into the hands of the Grand Duke, and to no other but him."

"T will deliver it, sire."

"The Grand Duke is at Irkutsk."

"T will go to Irkutsk."

"Thou wilt have to traverse a rebellious country, invaded by Tartars, whose
interest it will be to intercept this letter."


"T will traverse it."

"Above all, beware of the traitor, Ivan Ogareff, who will perhaps meet thee
on the way."

"T will beware of him."

"Wilt thou pass through Omsk?"

"Sire, that is my route."

"If thou dost see thy mother, there will be the risk of being recognized. Thou
must not see her!"

Michael Strogoff hesitated a moment.

"T will not see her," said he.

"Swear to me that nothing will make thee acknowledge who thou art, nor
whither thou art going.”

"I swear it."

"Michael Strogoff," continued the Czar, giving the letter to the young
courier, "take this letter; on it depends the safety of all Siberia, and perhaps the
life of my brother the Grand Duke."

"This letter shall be delivered to his Highness the Grand Duke."

"Then thou wilt pass whatever happens?"

"T shall pass, or they shall kill me."

"T want thee to live."

"T shall live, and I shall pass," answered Michael Strogoff.

The Czar appeared satisfied with Strogoff's calm and simple answer.

"Go then, Michael Strogoff," said he, "go for God, for Russia, for my
brother, and for myself!"

The courier, having saluted his sovereign, immediately left the imperial
cabinet, and, in a few minutes, the New Palace.

"You made a good choice there, General," said the Czar.

"I think so, sire," replied General Kissoff; "and your majesty may be sure
that Michael Strogoff will do all that a man can do."

"He is indeed a man," said the Czar.


CHAPTER IV FROM MOSCOW TO NIJNI-
NOVGOROD


THE distance between Moscow and Irkutsk, about to be traversed by
Michael Strogoff, was three thousand four hundred miles. Before the telegraph
wire extended from the Ural Mountains to the eastern frontier of Siberia, the
dispatch service was performed by couriers, those who traveled the most rapidly
taking eighteen days to get from Moscow to Irkutsk. But this was the exception,
and the journey through Asiatic Russia usually occupied from four to five
weeks, even though every available means of transport was placed at the
disposal of the Czar's messengers.

Michael Strogoff was a man who feared neither frost nor snow. He would
have preferred traveling during the severe winter season, in order that he might
perform the whole distance by sleighs. At that period of the year the difficulties
which all other means of locomotion present are greatly diminished, the wide
steppes being leveled by snow, while there are no rivers to cross, but simply
sheets of glass, over which the sleigh glides rapidly and easily.

Perhaps certain natural phenomena are most to be feared at that time, such as
long-continuing and dense fogs, excessive cold, fearfully heavy snowstorms,
which sometimes envelop whole caravans and cause their destruction. Hungry
wolves also roam over the plain in thousands. But it would have been better for
Michael Strogoff to face these risks; for during the winter the Tartar invaders
would have been stationed in the towns, any movement of their troops would
have been impracticable, and he could consequently have more easily performed
his journey. But it was not in his power to choose either weather or time.
Whatever the circumstances, he must accept them and set out.

Such were the difficulties which Michael Strogoff boldly confronted and
prepared to encounter.

In the first place, he must not travel as a courier of the Czar usually would.
No one must even suspect what he really was. Spies swarm in a rebellious
country; let him be recognized, and his mission would be in danger. Also, while
supplying him with a large sum of money, which was sufficient for his journey,
and would facilitate it in some measure, General Kissoff had not given him any
document notifying that he was on the Emperor's service, which is the Sesame
par excellence. He contented himself with furnishing him with a "podorojna."

This podorojna was made out in the name of Nicholas Korpanoff, merchant,
living at Irkutsk. It authorized Nicholas Korpanoff to be accompanied by one or


more persons, and, moreover, it was, by special notification, made available in
the event of the Muscovite government forbidding natives of any other countries
to leave Russia.

The podorojna is simply a permission to take post-horses; but Michael
Strogoff was not to use it unless he was sure that by so doing he would not excite
suspicion as to his mission, that is to say, whilst he was on European territory.
The consequence was that in Siberia, whilst traversing the insurgent provinces,
he would have no power over the relays, either in the choice of horses in
preference to others, or in demanding conveyances for his personal use; neither
was Michael Strogoff to forget that he was no longer a courier, but a plain
merchant, Nicholas Korpanoff, traveling from Moscow to Irkutsk, and, as such
exposed to all the impediments of an ordinary journey.

To pass unknown, more or less rapidly, but to pass somehow, such were the
directions he had received.

Thirty years previously, the escort of a traveler of rank consisted of not less
than two hundred mounted Cossacks, two hundred foot-soldiers, twenty-five
Baskir horsemen, three hundred camels, four hundred horses, twenty-five
wagons, two portable boats, and two pieces of cannon. All this was requisite for
a journey in Siberia.

Michael Strogoff, however, had neither cannon, nor horsemen, nor foot-
soldiers, nor beasts of burden. He would travel in a carriage or on horseback,
when he could; on foot, when he could not.

There would be no difficulty in getting over the first thousand miles, the
distance between Moscow and the Russian frontier. Railroads, post-carriages,
steamboats, relays of horses, were at everyone's disposal, and consequently at
the disposal of the courier of the Czar.

Accordingly, on the morning of the 16th of July, having doffed his uniform,
with a knapsack on his back, dressed in the simple Russian costume--tightly-
fitting tunic, the traditional belt of the Moujik, wide trousers, gartered at the
knees, and high boots--Michael Strogoff arrived at the station in time for the first
train. He carried no arms, openly at least, but under his belt was hidden a
revolver and in his pocket, one of those large knives, resembling both a cutlass
and a yataghan, with which a Siberian hunter can so neatly disembowel a bear,
without injuring its precious fur.

A crowd of travelers had collected at the Moscow station. The stations on the
Russian railroads are much used as places for meeting, not only by those who
are about to proceed by the train, but by friends who come to see them off. The
station resembles, from the variety of characters assembled, a small news
exchange.


The train in which Michael took his place was to set him down at Nijni-
Novgorod. There terminated at that time, the iron road which, uniting Moscow
and St. Petersburg, has since been continued to the Russian frontier. It was a
journey of under three hundred miles, and the train would accomplish it in ten
hours. Once arrived at Nijni-Novgorod, Strogoff would either take the land route
or the steamer on the Volga, so as to reach the Ural Mountains as soon as
possible.

Michael Strogoff ensconced himself in his corner, like a worthy citizen
whose affairs go well with him, and who endeavors to kill time by sleep.
Nevertheless, as he was not alone in his compartment, he slept with one eye
open, and listened with both his ears.

In fact, rumor of the rising of the Kirghiz hordes, and of the Tartar invasion
had transpired in some degree. The occupants of the carriage, whom chance had
made his traveling companions, discussed the subject, though with that caution
which has become habitual among Russians, who know that spies are ever on the
watch for any treasonable expressions which may be uttered.

These travelers, as well as the large number of persons in the train, were
merchants on their way to the celebrated fair of Nijni-Novgorod;--a very mixed
assembly, composed of Jews, Turks, Cossacks, Russians, Georgians, Kalmucks,
and others, but nearly all speaking the national tongue.

They discussed the pros and cons of the serious events which were taking
place beyond the Ural, and those merchants seemed to fear lest the government
should be led to take certain restrictive measures, especially in the provinces
bordering on the frontier--measures from which trade would certainly suffer.
They apparently thought only of the struggle from the single point of view of
their threatened interests. The presence of a private soldier, clad in his uniform--
and the importance of a uniform in Russia is great--would have certainly been
enough to restrain the merchants' tongues. But in the compartment occupied by
Michael Strogoff, there was no one who seemed a military man, and the Czar's
courier was not the person to betray himself. He listened, then.

"They say that caravan teas are up," remarked a Persian, known by his cap of
Astrakhan fur, and his ample brown robe, worn threadbare by use.

"Oh, there's no fear of teas falling,” answered an old Jew of sullen aspect.
"Those in the market at Nijni-Novgorod will be easily cleared off by the West;
but, unfortunately, it won't be the same with Bokhara carpets."

"What! are you expecting goods from Bokhara?" asked the Persian.

"No, but from Samarcand, and that is even more exposed. The idea of
reckoning on the exports of a country in which the khans are in a state of revolt
from Khiva to the Chinese frontier!"


"Well," replied the Persian, "if the carpets do not arrive, the drafts will not
arrive either, I suppose."

"And the profits, Father Abraham!" exclaimed the little Jew, "do you reckon
them as nothing?"

"You are right," said another; "goods from Central Asia run a great risk in the
market, and it will be the same with the tallow and shawls from the East."

"Why, look out, little father," said a Russian traveler, in a bantering tone;
"you'll grease your shawls terribly if you mix them up with your tallow."

"That amuses you," sharply answered the merchant, who had little relish for
that sort of joke.

"Well, if you tear your hair, or if you throw ashes on your head," replied the
traveler, "will that change the course of events? No; no more than the course of
the Exchange."

"One can easily see that you are not a merchant," observed the little Jew.

"Faith, no, worthy son of Abraham! I sell neither hops, nor eider-down, nor
honey, nor wax, nor hemp-seed, nor salt meat, nor caviare, nor wood, nor wool,
nor ribbons, nor, hemp, nor flax, nor morocco, nor furs."

"But do you buy them?" asked the Persian, interrupting the traveler's list.

"As little as I can, and only for my own private use," answered the other,
with a wink.

"He's a wag," said the Jew to the Persian.

"Or a spy," replied the other, lowering his voice. "We had better take care,
and not speak more than necessary. The police are not over-particular in these
times, and you never can know with whom you are traveling.”

In another corer of the compartment they were speaking less of mercantile
affairs, and more of the Tartar invasion and its annoying consequences.

"All the horses in Siberia will be requisitioned," said a traveler, "and
communication between the different provinces of Central Asia will become
very difficult."

"Is it true," asked his neighbor, "that the Kirghiz of the middle horde have
joined the Tartars?"

"So it is said," answered the traveler, lowering his voice; "but who can flatter
themselves that they know anything really of what is going on in this country?"

"I have heard speak of a concentration of troops on the frontier. The Don
Cossacks have already gathered along the course of the Volga, and they are to be
opposed to the rebel Kirghiz."

"If the Kirghiz descend the Irtish, the route to Irkutsk will not be safe,"
observed his neighbor. "Besides, yesterday I wanted to send a telegram to
Krasnoiarsk, and it could not be forwarded. It's to be feared that before long the


W


Tartar columns will have isolated Eastern Siberia."

"In short, little father," continued the first speaker, "these merchants have
good reason for being uneasy about their trade and transactions. After
requisitioning the horses, they will take the boats, carriages, every means of
transport, until presently no one will be allowed to take even one step in all the
empire."

"I'm much afraid that the Nijni-Novgorod fair won't end as brilliantly as it
has begun," responded the other, shaking his head. "But the safety and integrity
of the Russian territory before everything. Business is business."

If in this compartment the subject of conversation varied but little--nor did it,
indeed, in the other carriages of the train--in all it might have been observed that
the talkers used much circumspection. When they did happen to venture out of
the region of facts, they never went so far as to attempt to divine the intentions
of the Muscovite government, or even to criticize them.

This was especially remarked by a traveler in a carriage at the front part of
the train. This person--evidently a stranger--made good use of his eyes, and
asked numberless questions, to which he received only evasive answers. Every
minute leaning out of the window, which he would keep down, to the great
disgust of his fellow-travelers, he lost nothing of the views to the right. He
inquired the names of the most insignificant places, their position, what were
their commerce, their manufactures, the number of their inhabitants, the average
mortality, etc., and all this he wrote down in a note-book, already full.

This was the correspondent Alcide Jolivet, and the reason of his putting so
many insignificant questions was, that amongst the many answers he received,
he hoped to find some interesting fact "for his cousin." But, naturally enough, he
was taken for a spy, and not a word treating of the events of the day was uttered
in his hearing.

Finding, therefore, that he could learn nothing of the Tartar invasion, he
wrote in his book, "Travelers of great discretion. Very close as to political
matters."

Whilst Alcide Jolivet noted down his impressions thus minutely, his
confrere, in the same train, traveling for the same object, was devoting himself to
the same work of observation in another compartment. Neither of them had seen
each other that day at the Moscow station, and they were each ignorant that the
other had set out to visit the scene of the war. Harry Blount, speaking little, but
listening much, had not inspired his companions with the suspicions which
Alcide Jolivet had aroused. He was not taken for a spy, and therefore his
neighbors, without constraint, gossiped in his presence, allowing themselves
even to go farther than their natural caution would in most cases have allowed


them. The correspondent of the Daily Telegraph had thus an opportunity of
observing how much recent events preoccupied the merchants of Nijni-
Novgorod, and to what a degree the commerce with Central Asia was threatened
in its transit.

He therefore noted in his book this perfectly correct observation, "My
fellow-travelers extremely anxious. Nothing is talked of but war, and they speak
of it, with a freedom which is astonishing, as having broken out between the
Volga and the Vistula."

The readers of the Daily Telegraph would not fail to be as well informed as
Alcide Jolivet's "cousin." But as Harry Blount, seated at the left of the train, only
saw one part of the country, which was hilly, without giving himself the trouble
of looking at the right side, which was composed of wide plains, he added, with
British assurance, "Country mountainous between Moscow and Wladimir."

It was evident that the Russian government purposed taking severe measures
to guard against any serious eventualities even in the interior of the empire. The
rebel lion had not crossed the Siberian frontier, but evil influences might be
feared in the Volga provinces, so near to the country of the Kirghiz.

The police had as yet found no traces of Ivan Ogareff. It was not known
whether the traitor, calling in the foreigner to avenge his personal rancor, had
rejoined Feofar-Khan, or whether he was endeavoring to foment a revolt in the
government of Nijni-Novgorod, which at this time of year contained a
population of such diverse elements. Perhaps among the Persians, Armenians, or
Kalmucks, who flocked to the great market, he had agents, instructed to provoke
a rising in the interior. All this was possible, especially in such a country as
Russia. In fact, this vast empire, 4,000,000 square miles in extent, does not
possess the homogeneousness of the states of Western Europe. The Russian
territory in Europe and Asia contains more than seventy millions of inhabitants.
In it thirty different languages are spoken. The Sclavonian race predominates, no
doubt, but there are besides Russians, Poles, Lithuanians, Courlanders. Add to
these, Finns, Laplanders, Esthonians, several other northern tribes with
unpronounceable names, the Permiaks, the Germans, the Greeks, the Tartars, the
Caucasian tribes, the Mongol, Kalmuck, Samoid, Kamtschatkan, and Aleutian
hordes, and one may understand that the unity of so vast a state must be difficult
to maintain, and that it could only be the work of time, aided by the wisdom of
many successive rulers.

Be that as it may, Ivan Ogareff had hitherto managed to escape all search,
and very probably he might have rejoined the Tartar army. But at every station
where the train stopped, inspectors came forward who scrutinized the travelers
and subjected them all to a minute examination, as by order of the


superintendent of police, these officials were seeking Ivan Ogareff. The
government, in fact, believed it to be certain that the traitor had not yet been able
to quit European Russia. If there appeared cause to suspect any traveler, he was
carried off to explain himself at the police station, and in the meantime the train
went on its way, no person troubling himself about the unfortunate one left
behind.

With the Russian police, which is very arbitrary, it is absolutely useless to
argue. Military rank is conferred on its employees, and they act in military
fashion. How can anyone, moreover, help obeying, unhesitatingly, orders which
emanate from a monarch who has the right to employ this formula at the head of
his ukase: "We, by the grace of God, Emperor and Autocrat of all the Russias of
Moscow, Kiev, Wladimir, and Novgorod, Czar of Kasan and Astrakhan, Czar of
Poland, Czar of Siberia, Czar of the Tauric Chersonese, Seignior of Pskov,
Prince of Smolensk, Lithuania, Volkynia, Podolia, and Finland, Prince of
Esthonia, Livonia, Courland, and of Semigallia, of Bialystok, Karelia, Sougria,
Perm, Viatka, Bulgaria, and many other countries; Lord and Sovereign Prince of
the territory of Nijni-Novgorod, Tchemigoff, Riazan, Polotsk, Rostov, Jaroslavl,
Bielozersk, Oudoria, Obdoria, Kondinia, Vitepsk, and of Mstislaf, Governor of
the Hyperborean Regions, Lord of the countries of Iveria, Kartalinia, Grou-zinia,
Kabardinia, and Armenia, Hereditary Lord and Suzerain of the Scherkess
princes, of those of the mountains, and of others; heir of Norway, Duke of
Schleswig-Holstein, Stormarn, Dittmarsen, and Oldenburg." A powerful lord, in
truth, is he whose arms are an eagle with two heads, holding a scepter and a
globe, surrounded by the escutcheons of Novgorod, Wladimir, Kiev, Kasan,
Astrakhan, and of Siberia, and environed by the collar of the order of St.
Andrew, surmounted by a royal crown!

As to Michael Strogoff, his papers were in order, and he was, consequently,
free from all police supervision.

At the station of Wladimir the train stopped for several minutes, which
appeared sufficient to enable the correspondent of the Daily Telegraph to take a
twofold view, physical and moral, and to form a complete estimate of this
ancient capital of Russia.

At the Wladimir station fresh travelers joined the train. Among others, a
young girl entered the compartment occupied by Michael Strogoff. A vacant
place was found opposite the courier. The young girl took it, after placing by her
side a modest traveling-bag of red leather, which seemed to constitute all her
luggage. Then seating herself with downcast eyes, not even glancing at the
fellow-travelers whom chance had given her, she prepared for a journey which
was still to last several hours.


Michael Strogoff could not help looking attentively at his newly-arrived
fellow-traveler. As she was so placed as to travel with her back to the engine, he
even offered her his seat, which he might prefer to her own, but she thanked him
with a slight bend of her graceful neck.

The young girl appeared to be about sixteen or seventeen years of age. Her
head, truly charming, was of the purest Sclavonic type--slightly severe, and
likely in a few summers to unfold into beauty rather than mere prettiness. From
beneath a sort of kerchief which she wore on her head escaped in profusion light
golden hair. Her eyes were brown, soft, and expressive of much sweetness of
temper. The nose was straight, and attached to her pale and somewhat thin
cheeks by delicately mobile nostrils. The lips were finely cut, but it seemed as if
they had long since forgotten how to smile.

The young traveler was tall and upright, as far as could be judged of her
figure from the very simple and ample pelisse that covered her. Although she
was still a very young girl in the literal sense of the term, the development of her
high forehead and clearly-cut features gave the idea that she was the possessor of
great moral energy--a point which did not escape Michael Strogoff. Evidently
this young girl had already suffered in the past, and the future doubtless did not
present itself to her in glowing colors; but she had surely known how to struggle
still with the trials of life. Her energy was evidently both prompt and persistent,
and her calmness unalterable, even under circumstances in which a man would
be likely to give way or lose his self-command.

Such was the impression which she produced at first sight. Michael Strogoff,
being himself of an energetic temperament, was naturally struck by the character
of her physiognomy, and, while taking care not to cause her annoyance by a too
persistent gaze, he observed his neighbor with no small interest. The costume of
the young traveler was both extremely simple and appropriate. She was not rich-
-that could be easily seen; but not the slightest mark of negligence was to be
discerned in her dress. All her luggage was contained in the leather bag which,
for want of room, she held on her lap.

She wore a long, dark pelisse, gracefully adjusted at the neck by a blue tie.
Under this pelisse, a short skirt, also dark, fell over a robe which reached the
ankles. Half-boots of leather, thickly soled, as if chosen in anticipation of a long
journey, covered her small feet.

Michael Strogoff fancied that he recognized, by certain details, the fashion of
the costume of Livonia, and thought his neighbor a native of the Baltic
provinces.

But whither was this young girl going, alone, at an age when the fostering
care of a father, or the protection of a brother, is considered a matter of


necessity? Had she now come, after an already long journey, from the provinces
of Western Russia? Was she merely going to Nijni-Novgorod, or was the end of
her travels beyond the eastern frontiers of the empire? Would some relation,
some friend, await her arrival by the train? Or was it not more probable, on the
contrary, that she would find herself as much isolated in the town as she was in
this compartment? It was probable.

In fact, the effect of habits contracted in solitude was clearly manifested in
the bearing of the young girl. The manner in which she entered the carriage and
prepared herself for the journey, the slight disturbance she caused among those
around her, the care she took not to incommode or give trouble to anyone, all
showed that she was accustomed to be alone, and to depend on herself only.

Michael Strogoff observed her with interest, but, himself reserved, he sought
no opportunity of accosting her. Once only, when her neighbor--the merchant
who had jumbled together so imprudently in his remarks tallow and shawls--
being asleep, and threatening her with his great head, which was swaying from
one shoulder to the other, Michael Strogoff awoke him somewhat roughly, and
made him understand that he must hold himself upright.

The merchant, rude enough by nature, grumbled some words against "people
who interfere with what does not concern them," but Michael Strogoff cast on
him a glance so stern that the sleeper leant on the opposite side, and relieved the
young traveler from his unpleasant vicinity.

The latter looked at the young man for an instant, and mute and modest
thanks were in that look.

But a circumstance occurred which gave Strogoff a just idea of the character
of the maiden. Twelve versts before arriving at Nijni-Novgorod, at a sharp curve
of the iron way, the train experienced a very violent shock. Then, for a minute, it
ran onto the slope of an embankment.

Travelers more or less shaken about, cries, confusion, general disorder in the
carriages--such was the effect at first produced. It was to be feared that some
serious accident had happened. Consequently, even before the train had stopped,
the doors were opened, and the panic-stricken passengers thought only of getting
out of the carriages.

Michael Strogoff thought instantly of the young girl; but, while the
passengers in her compartment were precipitating themselves outside, screaming
and struggling, she had remained quietly in her place, her face scarcely changed
by a slight pallor.

She waited--Michael Strogoff waited also.

Both remained quiet.

"A determined nature!" thought Michael Strogoff.


However, all danger had quickly disappeared. A breakage of the coupling of
the luggage-van had first caused the shock to, and then the stoppage of, the train,
which in another instant would have been thrown from the top of the
embankment into a bog. There was an hour's delay. At last, the road being
cleared, the train proceeded, and at half-past eight in the evening arrived at the
station of Nijni-Novgorod.


Before anyone could get out of the carriages, the inspectors of police
presented themselves at the doors and examined the passengers.

Michael Strogoff showed his podorojna, made out in the name of Nicholas
Korpanoff. He had consequently no difficulty. As to the other travelers in the
compartment, all bound for Nijni-Novgorod, their appearance, happily for them,
was in nowise suspicious.

The young girl in her turn, exhibited, not a passport, since passports are no
longer required in Russia, but a permit indorsed with a private seal, and which
seemed to be of a special character. The inspector read the permit with attention.
Then, having attentively examined the person whose description it contained:

"You are from Riga?" he said.

"Yes," replied the young girl.

"You are going to Irkutsk?"

V¥@Ss"

"By what route?"

"By Perm."

"Good!" replied the inspector. "Take care to have your permit vised, at the
police station of Nijni-Novgorod."

The young girl bent her head in token of assent.

Hearing these questions and replies, Michael Strogoff experienced a mingled
sentiment both of surprise and pity. What! this young girl, alone, journeying to
that far-off Siberia, and at a time when, to its ordinary dangers, were added all
the perils of an invaded country and one in a state of insurrection! How would
she reach it? What would become of her?

The inspection ended, the doors of the carriages were then opened, but,
before Michael Strogoff could move towards her, the young Livonian, who had
been the first to descend, had disappeared in the crowd which thronged the
platforms of the railway station.


CHAPTER V THE TWO ANNOUNCEMENTS


NIJNI-NOVGOROD, Lower Novgorod, situate at the junction of the Volga
and the Oka, is the chief town in the district of the same name. It was here that
Michael Strogoff was obliged to leave the railway, which at the time did not go
beyond that town. Thus, as he advanced, his traveling would become first less
speedy and then less safe.

Nijni-Novgorod, the fixed population of which is only from thirty to thirty-
five thousand inhabitants, contained at that time more than three hundred
thousand; that is to say, the population was increased tenfold. This addition was
in consequence of the celebrated fair, which was held within the walls for three
weeks. Formerly Makariew had the benefit of this concourse of traders, but since
1817 the fair had been removed to Nijni-Novgorod.

Even at the late hour at which Michael Strogoff left the platform, there was
still a large number of people in the two towns, separated by the stream of the
Volga, which compose Nijni-Novgorod. The highest of these is built on a steep
rock, and defended by a fort called in Russia "kreml."

Michael Strogoff expected some trouble in finding a hotel, or even an inn, to
suit him. As he had not to start immediately, for he was going to take a steamer,
he was compelled to look out for some lodging; but, before doing so, he wished
to know exactly the hour at which the steamboat would start. He went to the
office of the company whose boats plied between Nijni-Novgorod and Perm.
There, to his great annoyance, he found that no boat started for Perm till the
following day at twelve o'clock. Seventeen hours to wait! It was very vexatious
to a man so pressed for time. However, he never senselessly murmured. Besides,
the fact was that no other conveyance could take him so quickly either to Perm
or Kasan. It would be better, then, to wait for the steamer, which would enable
him to regain lost time.

Here, then, was Michael Strogoff, strolling through the town and quietly
looking out for some inn in which to pass the night. However, he troubled
himself little on this score, and, but that hunger pressed him, he would probably
have wandered on till morning in the streets of Nijni-Novgorod. He was looking
for supper rather than a bed. But he found both at the sign of the City of
Constantinople. There, the landlord offered him a fairly comfortable room, with
little furniture, it is true, but not without an image of the Virgin, and a few saints
framed in yellow gauze.

A goose filled with sour stuffing swimming in thick cream, barley bread,


some curds, powdered sugar mixed with cinnamon, and a jug of kwass, the
ordinary Russian beer, were placed before him, and sufficed to satisfy his
hunger. He did justice to the meal, which was more than could be said of his
neighbor at table, who, having, in his character of "old believer" of the sect of
Raskalniks, made the vow of abstinence, rejected the potatoes in front of him,
and carefully refrained from putting sugar in his tea.

His supper finished, Michael Strogoff, instead of going up to his bedroom,
again strolled out into the town. But, although the long twilight yet lingered, the
crowd was already dispersing, the streets were gradually becoming empty, and at
length everyone retired to his dwelling.

Why did not Michael Strogoff go quietly to bed, as would have seemed more
reasonable after a long railway journey? Was he thinking of the young Livonian
girl who had been his traveling companion? Having nothing better to do, he
WAS thinking of her. Did he fear that, lost in this busy city, she might be
exposed to insult? He feared so, and with good reason. Did he hope to meet her,
and, if need were, to afford her protection? No. To meet would be difficult. As to
protection--what right had he--

"Alone," he said to himself, "alone, in the midst of these wandering tribes!
And yet the present dangers are nothing compared to those she must undergo.
Siberia! Irkutsk! I am about to dare all risks for Russia, for the Czar, while she is
about to do so--For whom? For what? She is authorized to cross the frontier! The
country beyond is in revolt! The steppes are full of Tartar bands!"

Michael Strogoff stopped for an instant, and reflected.

"Without doubt," thought he, "she must have determined on undertaking her
journey before the invasion. Perhaps she is even now ignorant of what is
happening. But no, that cannot be; the merchants discussed before her the
disturbances in Siberia--and she did not seem surprised. She did not even ask an
explanation. She must have known it then, and knowing it, is still resolute. Poor
girl! Her motive for the journey must be urgent indeed! But though she may be
brave--and she certainly is so--her strength must fail her, and, to say nothing of
dangers and obstacles, she will be unable to endure the fatigue of such a journey.
Never can she reach Irkutsk!"

Indulging in such reflections, Michael Strogoff wandered on as chance led
him; being well acquainted with the town, he knew that he could easily retrace
his steps.

Having strolled on for about an hour, he seated himself on a bench against
the wall of a large wooden cottage, which stood, with many others, on a vast
open space. He had scarcely been there five minutes when a hand was laid
heavily on his shoulder.


"What are you doing here?" roughly demanded a tall and powerful man, who
had approached unperceived.

"I am resting," replied Michael Strogoff.

"Do you mean to stay all night on the bench?"

"Yes, if I feel inclined to do so," answered Michael Strogoff, in a tone
somewhat too sharp for the simple merchant he wished to personate.

"Come forward, then, so I can see you," said the man.

Michael Strogoff, remembering that, above all, prudence was requisite,
instinctively drew back. "It is not necessary," he replied, and calmly stepped
back ten paces.

The man seemed, as Michael observed him well, to have the look of a
Bohemian, such as are met at fairs, and with whom contact, either physical or
moral, is unpleasant. Then, as he looked more attentively through the dusk, he
perceived, near the cottage, a large caravan, the usual traveling dwelling of the
Zingaris or gypsies, who swarm in Russia wherever a few copecks can be
obtained.

As the gypsy took two or three steps forward, and was about to interrogate
Michael Strogoff more closely, the door of the cottage opened. He could just see
a woman, who spoke quickly in a language which Michael Strogoff knew to be a
mixture of Mongol and Siberian.

"Another spy! Let him alone, and come to supper. The papluka is waiting for
you."

Michael Strogoff could not help smiling at the epithet bestowed on him,
dreading spies as he did above all else.

In the same dialect, although his accent was very different, the Bohemian
replied in words which signify, "You are right, Sangarre! Besides, we start to-
morrow."

"To-morrow?" repeated the woman in surprise.

"Yes, Sangarre," replied the Bohemian; "to-morrow, and the Father himself
sends us--where we are going!"

Thereupon the man and woman entered the cottage, and carefully closed the
door.

"Good!" said Michael Strogoff, to himself; "if these gipsies do not wish to be
understood when they speak before me, they had better use some other
language."

From his Siberian origin, and because he had passed his childhood in the
Steppes, Michael Strogoff, it has been said, understood almost all the languages
in usage from Tartary to the Sea of Ice. As to the exact signification of the words
he had heard, he did not trouble his head. For why should it interest him?


It was already late when he thought of returning to his inn to take some
repose. He followed, as he did so, the course of the Volga, whose waters were
almost hidden under the countless number of boats floating on its bosom.

An hour after, Michael Strogoff was sleeping soundly on one of those
Russian beds which always seem so hard to strangers, and on the morrow, the
17th of July, he awoke at break of day.

He had still five hours to pass in Nijni-Novgorod; it seemed to him an age.
How was he to spend the morning unless in wandering, as he had done the
evening before, through the streets? By the time he had finished his breakfast,
strapped up his bag, had his podorojna inspected at the police office, he would
have nothing to do but start. But he was not a man to lie in bed after the sun had
risen; so he rose, dressed himself, placed the letter with the imperial arms on it
carefully at the bottom of its usual pocket within the lining of his coat, over
which he fastened his belt; he then closed his bag and threw it over his shoulder.
This done, he had no wish to return to the City of Constantinople, and intending
to breakfast on the bank of the Volga near the wharf, he settled his bill and left
the inn. By way of precaution, Michael Strogoff went first to the office of the
steam-packet company, and there made sure that the Caucasus would start at the
appointed hour. As he did so, the thought for the first time struck him that, since
the young Livonian girl was going to Perm, it was very possible that her
intention was also to embark in the Caucasus, in which case he should
accompany her.

The town above with its kremlin, whose circumference measures two versts,
and which resembles that of Moscow, was altogether abandoned. Even the
governor did not reside there. But if the town above was like a city of the dead,
the town below, at all events, was alive.

Michael Strogoff, having crossed the Volga on a bridge of boats, guarded by
mounted Cossacks, reached the square where the evening before he had fallen in
with the gipsy camp. This was somewhat outside the town, where the fair of
Nijni-Novgorod was held. In a vast plain rose the temporary palace of the
governor-general, where by imperial orders that great functionary resided during
the whole of the fair, which, thanks to the people who composed it, required an
ever-watchful surveillance.

This plain was now covered with booths symmetrically arranged in such a
manner as to leave avenues broad enough to allow the crowd to pass without a
crush.

Each group of these booths, of all sizes and shapes, formed a separate quarter
particularly dedicated to some special branch of commerce. There was the iron
quarter, the furriers' quarter, the woolen quarter, the quarter of the wood


merchants, the weavers' quarter, the dried fish quarter, etc. Some booths were
even built of fancy materials, some of bricks of tea, others of masses of salt
meat--that is to say, of samples of the goods which the owners thus announced
were there to the purchasers--a singular, and somewhat American, mode of
advertisement.

In the avenues and long alleys there was already a large assemblage of
people--the sun, which had risen at four o'clock, being well above the horizon--
an extraordinary mixture of Europeans and Asiatics, talking, wrangling,
haranguing, and bargaining. Everything which can be bought or sold seemed to
be heaped up in this square. Furs, precious stones, silks, Cashmere shawls,
Turkey carpets, weapons from the Caucasus, gauzes from Smyrna and Ispahan.
Tiflis armor, caravan teas. European bronzes, Swiss clocks, velvets and silks
from Lyons, English cottons, harness, fruits, vegetables, minerals from the Ural,
malachite, lapis-lazuli, spices, perfumes, medicinal herbs, wood, tar, rope, horn,
pumpkins, water-melons, etc--all the products of India, China, Persia, from the
shores of the Caspian and the Black Sea, from America and Europe, were united
at this corner of the globe.

It is scarcely possible truly to portray the moving mass of human beings
surging here and there, the excitement, the confusion, the hubbub; demonstrative
as were the natives and the inferior classes, they were completely outdone by
their visitors. There were merchants from Central Asia, who had occupied a year
in escorting their merchandise across its vast plains, and who would not again
see their shops and counting-houses for another year to come. In short, of such
importance is this fair of Nijni-Novgorod, that the sum total of its transactions
amounts yearly to nearly a hundred million dollars.

On one of the open spaces between the quarters of this temporary city were
numbers of mountebanks of every description; gypsies from the mountains,
telling fortunes to the credulous fools who are ever to be found in such
assemblies; Zingaris or Tsiganes--a name which the Russians give to the gypsies
who are the descendants of the ancient Copts--singing their wildest melodies and
dancing their most original dances; comedians of foreign theaters, acting
Shakespeare, adapted to the taste of spectators who crowded to witness them. In
the long avenues the bear showmen accompanied their four-footed dancers,
menageries resounded with the hoarse cries of animals under the influence of the
stinging whip or red-hot irons of the tamer; and, besides all these numberless
performers, in the middle of the central square, surrounded by a circle four deep
of enthusiastic amateurs, was a band of "mariners of the Volga," sitting on the
ground, as on the deck of their vessel, imitating the action of rowing, guided by
the stick of the master of the orchestra, the veritable helmsman of this imaginary


vessel! A whimsical and pleasing custom!

Suddenly, according to a time-honored observance in the fair of Nijni-
Novgorod, above the heads of the vast concourse a flock of birds was allowed to
escape from the cages in which they had been brought to the spot. In return for a
few copecks charitably offered by some good people, the bird-fanciers opened
the prison doors of their captives, who flew out in hundreds, uttering their joyous
notes.

It should be mentioned that England and France, at all events, were this year
represented at the great fair of Nijni-Novgorod by two of the most distinguished
products of modern civilization, Messrs. Harry Blount and Alcide Jolivet.
Jolivet, an optimist by nature, found everything agreeable, and as by chance both
lodging and food were to his taste, he jotted down in his book some memoranda
particularly favorable to the town of Nijni-Novgorod. Blount, on the contrary,
having in vain hunted for a supper, had been obliged to find a resting-place in the
open air. He therefore looked at it all from another point of view, and was
preparing an article of the most withering character against a town in which the
landlords of the inns refused to receive travelers who only begged leave to be
flayed, "morally and physically."

Michael Strogoff, one hand in his pocket, the other holding his cherry-
stemmed pipe, appeared the most indifferent and least impatient of men; yet,
from a certain contraction of his eyebrows every now and then, a careful
observer would have seen that he was burning to be off.

For two hours he kept walking about the streets, only to find himself
invariably at the fair again. As he passed among the groups of buyers and sellers
he discovered that those who came from countries on the confines of Asia
manifested great uneasiness. Their trade was visibly suffering. Another symptom
also was marked. In Russia military uniforms appear on every occasion. Soldiers
are wont to mix freely with the crowd, the police agents being almost invariably
aided by a number of Cossacks, who, lance on shoulder, keep order in the crowd
of three hundred thousand strangers. But on this occasion the soldiers, Cossacks
and the rest, did not put in an appearance at the great market. Doubtless, a
sudden order to move having been foreseen, they were restricted to their
barracks.

Moreover, while no soldiers were to be seen, it was not so with their officers.
Since the evening before, aides-decamp, leaving the governor's palace, galloped
in every direction. An unusual movement was going forward which a serious
state of affairs could alone account for. There were innumerable couriers on the
roads both to Wladimir and to the Ural Mountains. The exchange of telegraphic
dispatches with Moscow was incessant.


Michael Strogoff found himself in the central square when the report spread
that the head of police had been summoned by a courier to the palace of the
governor-general. An important dispatch from Moscow, it was said, was the
cause of it.

"The fair is to be closed," said one.

"The regiment of Nijni-Novgorod has received the route," declared another.

"They say that the Tartars menace Tomsk!"

"Here is the head of police!" was shouted on every side. A loud clapping of
hands was suddenly raised, which subsided by degrees, and finally was
succeeded by absolute silence. The head of police arrived in the middle of the
central square, and it was seen by all that he held in his hand a dispatch.

Then, in a loud voice, he read the following announcements: "By order of the
Governor of Nijni-Novgorod.

"1st. All Russian subjects are forbidden to quit the province upon any pretext
whatsoever.

"2nd. All strangers of Asiatic origin are commanded to leave the province
within twenty-four hours."


CHAPTER VI BROTHER AND SISTER


HOWEVER disastrous these measures might be to private interests, they
were, under the circumstances, perfectly justifiable.

"All Russian subjects are forbidden to leave the province;" if Ivan Ogareff
was still in the province, this would at any rate prevent him, unless with the
greatest difficulty, from rejoining Feofar-Khan, and becoming a very formidable
lieutenant to the Tartar chief.

"All foreigners of Asiatic origin are ordered to leave the province in four-
and-twenty hours;" this would send off in a body all the traders from Central
Asia, aS well as the bands of Bohemians, gipsies, etc., having more or less
sympathy with the Tartars. So many heads, so many spies--undoubtedly affairs
required their expulsion.

It is easy to understand the effect produced by these two thunderclaps
bursting over a town like Nijni-Novgorod, so densely crowded with visitors, and
with a commerce so greatly surpassing that of all other places in Russia. The
natives whom business called beyond the Siberian frontier could not leave the
province for a time at least. The tenor of the first article of the order was express;
it admitted of no exception. All private interests must yield to the public weal.
As to the second article of the proclamation, the order of expulsion which it
contained admitted of no evasion either. It only concerned foreigners of Asiatic
origin, but these could do nothing but pack up their merchandise and go back the
way they came. As to the mountebanks, of which there were a considerable
number, they had nearly a thousand versts to go before they could reach the
nearest frontier. For them it was simply misery.

At first there rose against this unusual measure a murmur of protestation, a
cry of despair, but this was quickly suppressed by the presence of the Cossacks
and agents of police. Immediately, what might be called the exodus from the
immense plain began. The awnings in front of the stalls were folded up; the
theaters were taken to pieces; the fires were put out; the acrobats' ropes were
lowered; the old broken-winded horses of the traveling vans came back from
their sheds. Agents and soldiers with whip or stick stimulated the tardy ones, and
made nothing of pulling down the tents even before the poor Bohemians had left
them.

Under these energetic measures the square of Nijni-Novgorod would, it was
evident, be entirely evacuated before the evening, and to the tumult of the great
fair would succeed the silence of the desert.


It must again be repeated--for it was a necessary aggravation of these severe
measures--that to all those nomads chiefly concerned in the order of expulsion
even the steppes of Siberia were forbidden, and they would be obliged to hasten
to the south of the Caspian Sea, either to Persia, Turkey, or the plains of
Turkestan. The post of the Ural, and the mountains which form, as it were, a
prolongation of the river along the Russian frontier, they were not allowed to
pass. They were therefore under the necessity of traveling six hundred miles
before they could tread a free soil.

Just as the reading of the proclamation by the head of the police came to an
end, an idea darted instinctively into the mind of Michael Strogoff. "What a
singular coincidence," thought he, "between this proclamation expelling all
foreigners of Asiatic origin, and the words exchanged last evening between those
two gipsies of the Zingari race. "The Father himself sends us where we wish to
go,’ that old man said. But 'the Father’ is the emperor! He is never called
anything else among the people. How could those gipsies have foreseen the
measure taken against them? how could they have known it beforehand, and
where do they wish to go? Those are suspicious people, and it seems to me that
to them the government proclamation must be more useful than injurious."

But these reflections were completely dispelled by another which drove
every other thought out of Michael's mind. He forgot the Zingaris, their
suspicious words, the strange coincidence which resulted from the proclamation.
The remembrance of the young Livonian girl suddenly rushed into his mind.
"Poor child!" he thought to himself. "She cannot now cross the frontier."

In truth the young girl was from Riga; she was Livonian, consequently
Russian, and now could not leave Russian territory! The permit which had been
given her before the new measures had been promulgated was no longer
available. All the routes to Siberia had just been pitilessly closed to her, and,
whatever the motive taking her to Irkutsk, she was now forbidden to go there.

This thought greatly occupied Michael Strogoff. He said to himself, vaguely
at first, that, without neglecting anything of what was due to his important
mission, it would perhaps be possible for him to be of some use to this brave
girl; and this idea pleased him. Knowing how serious were the dangers which he,
an energetic and vigorous man, would have personally to encounter, he could not
conceal from himself how infinitely greater they would prove to a young
unprotected girl. As she was going to Irkutsk, she would be obliged to follow the
same road as himself, she would have to pass through the bands of invaders, as
he was about to attempt doing himself. If, moreover, she had at her disposal only
the money necessary for a journey taken under ordinary circumstances, how
could she manage to accomplish it under conditions which made it not only


perilous but expensive?

"Well," said he, "if she takes the route to Perm, it is nearly impossible but
that I shall fall in with her. Then, I will watch over her without her suspecting it;
and as she appears to me as anxious as myself to reach Irkutsk, she will cause
me no delay."

But one thought leads to another. Michael Strogoff had till now thought only
of doing a kind action; but now another idea flashed into his brain; the question
presented itself under quite a new aspect.

"The fact is," said he to himself, "that I have much more need of her than she
can have of me. Her presence will be useful in drawing off suspicion from me. A
man traveling alone across the steppe, may be easily guessed to be a courier of
the Czar. If, on the contrary, this young girl accompanies me, I shall appear, in
the eyes of all, the Nicholas Korpanoff of my podorojna. Therefore, she must
accompany me. Therefore, I must find her again at any cost. It is not probable
that since yesterday evening she has been able to get a carriage and leave Nijni-
Novgorod. I must look for her. And may God guide me!"

Michael left the great square of Nijni-Novgorod, where the tumult produced
by the carrying out of the prescribed measures had now reached its height.
Recriminations from the banished strangers, shouts from the agents and
Cossacks who were using them so brutally, together made an indescribable
uproar. The girl for whom he searched could not be there. It was now nine
o'clock in the morning. The steamboat did not start till twelve. Michael Strogoff
had therefore nearly two hours to employ in searching for her whom he wished
to make his traveling companion.

He crossed the Volga again and hunted through the quarters on the other side,
where the crowd was much less considerable. He entered the churches, the
natural refuge for all who weep, for all who suffer. Nowhere did he meet with
the young Livonian.

"And yet," he repeated, "she could not have left Nijni-Novgorod yet. We'll
have another look." He wandered about thus for two hours. He went on without
stopping, feeling no fatigue, obeying a potent instinct which allowed no room for
thought. All was in vain.

It then occurred to him that perhaps the girl had not heard of the order--
though this was improbable enough, for such a thunderclap could not have burst
without being heard by all. Evidently interested in knowing the smallest news
from Siberia, how could she be ignorant of the measures taken by the governor,
measures which concerned her so directly?

But, if she was ignorant of it, she would come in an hour to the quay, and
there some merciless agent would refuse her a passage! At any cost, he must see


her beforehand, and enable her to avoid such a repulse.

But all his endeavors were in vain, and he at length almost despaired of
finding her again. It was eleven o'clock, and Michael thought of presenting his
podorojna at the office of the head of police. The proclamation evidently did not
concern him, since the emergency had been foreseen for him, but he wished to
make sure that nothing would hinder his departure from the town.

Michael then returned to the other side of the Volga, to the quarter in which
was the office of the head of police. An immense crowd was collected there; for
though all foreigners were ordered to quit the province, they had notwithstanding
to go through certain forms before they could depart.

Without this precaution, some Russian more or less implicated in the Tartar
movement would have been able, in a disguise, to pass the frontier--just those
whom the order wished to prevent going. The strangers were sent away, but still
had to gain permission to go.

Mountebanks, gypsies, Tsiganes, Zingaris, mingled with merchants from
Persia, Turkey, India, Turkestan, China, filled the court and offices of the police
station.

Everyone was in a hurry, for the means of transport would be much sought
after among this crowd of banished people, and those who did not set about it
soon ran a great risk of not being able to leave the town in the prescribed time,
which would expose them to some brutal treatment from the governor's agents.

Owing to the strength of his elbows Michael was able to cross the court. But
to get into the office and up to the clerk's littke window was a much more
difficult business. However, a word into an inspector's ear and a few judiciously
given roubles were powerful enough to gain him a passage. The man, after
taking him into the waiting-room, went to call an upper clerk. Michael Strogoff
would not be long in making everything right with the police and being free in
his movements.

Whilst waiting, he looked about him, and what did he see? There, fallen,
rather than seated, on a bench, was a girl, prey to a silent despair, although her
face could scarcely be seen, the profile alone being visible against the wall.
Michael Strogoff could not be mistaken. He instantly recognized the young
Livonian.

Not knowing the governor's orders, she had come to the police office to get
her pass signed. They had refused to sign it. No doubt she was authorized to go
to Irkutsk, but the order was peremptory--it annulled all previous authorizations,
and the routes to Siberia were closed to her. Michael, delighted at having found
her again, approached the girl.

She looked up for a moment and her face brightened on recognizing her


traveling companion. She instinctively rose and, like a drowning man who
clutches at a spar, she was about to ask his help.

At that moment the agent touched Michael on the shoulder, "The head of
police will see you," he said.

"Good," returned Michael. And without saying a word to her for whom he
had been searching all day, without reassuring her by even a gesture, which
might compromise either her or himself, he followed the man.

The young Livonian, seeing the only being to whom she could look for help
disappear, fell back again on her bench.

Three minutes had not passed before Michael Strogoff reappeared,
accompanied by the agent. In his hand he held his podorojna, which threw open
the roads to Siberia for him. He again approached the young Livonian, and
holding out his hand: "Sister," said he.

She understood. She rose as if some sudden inspiration prevented her from
hesitating a moment.

"Sister," repeated Michael Strogoff, "we are authorized to continue our
journey to Irkutsk. Will you come with me?"

"I will follow you, brother," replied the girl, putting her hand into that of
Michael Strogoff. And together they left the police station.


CHAPTER VII GOING DOWN THE VOLGA


A LITTLE before midday, the steamboat's bell drew to the wharf on the
Volga an unusually large concourse of people, for not only were those about to
embark who had intended to go, but the many who were compelled to go
contrary to their wishes. The boilers of the Caucasus were under full pressure; a
slight smoke issued from its funnel, whilst the end of the escape-pipe and the
lids of the valves were crowned with white vapor. It is needless to say that the
police kept a close watch over the departure of the Caucasus, and showed
themselves pitiless to those travelers who did not satisfactorily answer their
questions.

Numerous Cossacks came and went on the quay, ready to assist the agents,
but they had not to interfere, as no one ventured to offer the slightest resistance
to their orders. Exactly at the hour the last clang of the bell sounded, the
powerful wheels of the steamboat began to beat the water, and the Caucasus
passed rapidly between the two towns of which Nijni-Novgorod is composed.

Michael Strogoff and the young Livonian had taken a passage on board the
Caucasus. Their embarkation was made without any difficulty. As is known, the
podorojna, drawn up in the name of Nicholas Korpanoff, authorized this
merchant to be accompanied on his journey to Siberia. They appeared, therefore,
to be a brother and sister traveling under the protection of the imperial police.
Both, seated together at the stern, gazed at the receding town, so disturbed by the
governor's order. Michael had as yet said nothing to the girl, he had not even
questioned her. He waited until she should speak to him, when that was
necessary. She had been anxious to leave that town, in which, but for the
providential intervention of this unexpected protector, she would have remained
imprisoned. She said nothing, but her looks spoke her thanks.

The Volga, the Rha of the ancients, the largest river in all Europe, is almost
three thousand miles in length. Its waters, rather unwholesome in its upper part,
are improved at Nijni-Novgorod by those of the Oka, a rapid affluent, issuing
from the central provinces of Russia. The system of Russian canals and rivers
has been justly compared to a gigantic tree whose branches spread over every
part of the empire. The Volga forms the trunk of this tree, and it has for roots
seventy mouths opening into the Caspian Sea. It is navigable as far as Rjef, a
town in the government of Tver, that is, along the greater part of its course.

The steamboats plying between Perm and Nijni-Novgorod rapidly perform
the two hundred and fifty miles which separate this town from the town of


Kasan. It is true that these boats have only to descend the Volga, which adds
nearly two miles of current per hour to their own speed; but on arriving at the
confluence of the Kama, a little below Kasan, they are obliged to quit the Volga
for the smaller river, up which they ascend to Perm. Powerful as were her
machines, the Caucasus could not thus, after entering the Kama, make against
the current more than ten miles an hour. Including an hour's stoppage at Kasan,
the voyage from Nijni-Novgorod to Perm would take from between sixty to
sixty-two hours.

The steamer was very well arranged, and the passengers, according to their
condition or resources, occupied three distinct classes on board. Michael
Strogoff had taken care to engage two first-class cabins, so that his young
companion might retire into hers whenever she liked.

The Caucasus was loaded with passengers of every description. A number of
Asiatic traders had thought it best to leave Nijni-Novgorod immediately. In that
part of the steamer reserved for the first-class might be seen Armenians in long
robes and a sort of miter on their heads; Jews, known by their conical caps; rich
Chinese in their traditional costume, a very wide blue, violet, or black robe;
Turks, wearing the national turban; Hindoos, with square caps, and a simple
string for a girdle, some of whom, hold in their hands all the traffic of Central
Asia; and, lastly, Tartars, wearing boots, ornamented with many-colored braid,
and the breast a mass of embroidery. All these merchants had been obliged to
pile up their numerous bales and chests in the hold and on the deck; and the
transport of their baggage would cost them dear, for, according to the
regulations, each person had only a right to twenty pounds' weight.

In the bows of the Caucasus were more numerous groups of passengers, not
only foreigners, but also Russians, who were not forbidden by the order to go
back to their towns in the province. There were mujiks with caps on their heads,
and wearing checked shirts under their wide pelisses; peasants of the Volga, with
blue trousers stuffed into their boots, rose-colored cotton shirts, drawn in by a
cord, felt caps; a few women, habited in flowery-patterned cotton dresses, gay-
colored aprons, and bright handkerchiefs on their heads. These were principally
third-class passengers, who were, happily, not troubled by the prospect of a long
return voyage. The Caucasus passed numerous boats being towed up the stream,
carrying all sorts of merchandise to Nijni-Novgorod. Then passed rafts of wood
interminably long, and barges loaded to the gunwale, and nearly sinking under
water. A bootless voyage they were making, since the fair had been abruptly
broken up at its outset.

The waves caused by the steamer splashed on the banks, covered with flocks
of wild duck, who flew away uttering deafening cries. A little farther, on the dry


fields, bordered with willows, and aspens, were scattered a few cows, sheep, and
herds of pigs. Fields, sown with thin buckwheat and rye, stretched away to a
background of half-cultivated hills, offering no remarkable prospect. The pencil
of an artist in quest of the picturesque would have found nothing to reproduce in
this monotonous landscape.

The Caucasus had been steaming on for almost two hours, when the young
Livonian, addressing herself to Michael, said, "Are you going to Irkutsk,
brother?"

"Yes, sister," answered the young man. "We are going the same way.
Consequently, where I go, you shall go."

"To-morrow, brother, you shall know why I left the shores of the Baltic to go
beyond the Ural Mountains."

"I ask you nothing, sister."

"You shall know all," replied the girl, with a faint smile. "A sister should hide
nothing from her brother. But I cannot to-day. Fatigue and sorrow have broken
me."

"Will you go and rest in your cabin?" asked Michael Strogoff.

"Yes--yes; and to-morrow--"

"Come then--"

He hesitated to finish his sentence, as if he had wished to end it by the name
of his companion, of which he was still ignorant.

"Nadia," said she, holding out her hand.

"Come, Nadia," answered Michael, "and make what use you like of your
brother Nicholas Korpanoff." And he led the girl to the cabin engaged for her off
the saloon.

Michael Strogoff returned on deck, and eager for any news which might bear
on his journey, he mingled in the groups of passengers, though without taking
any part in the conversation. Should he by any chance be questioned, and
obliged to reply, he would announce himself as the merchant Nicholas
Korpanoff, going back to the frontier, for he did not wish it to be suspected that a
special permission authorized him to travel to Siberia.

The foreigners in the steamer could evidently speak of nothing but the
occurrences of the day, of the order and its consequences. These poor people,
scarcely recovered from the fatigue of a journey across Central Asia, found
themselves obliged to return, and if they did not give loud vent to their anger and
despair, it was because they dared not. Fear, mingled with respect, restrained
them. It was possible that inspectors of police, charged with watching the
passengers, had secretly embarked on board the Caucasus, and it was just as well
to keep silence; expulsion, after all, was a good deal preferable to imprisonment


in a fortress. Therefore the men were either silent, or spoke with so much caution
that it was scarcely possible to get any useful information.

Michael Strogoff thus could learn nothing here; but if mouths were often
shut at his approach--for they did not know him--his ears were soon struck by
the sound of one voice, which cared little whether it was heard or not.

The man with the hearty voice spoke Russian, but with a French accent; and
another speaker answered him more reservedly. "What," said the first, "are you
on board this boat, too, my dear fellow; you whom I met at the imperial fete in
Moscow, and just caught a glimpse of at Nijni-Novgorod?"

"Yes, it's I," answered the second drily.

"Really, I didn't expect to be so closely followed."

"I am not following you sir; I am preceding you."

"Precede! precede! Let us march abreast, keeping step, like two soldiers on
parade, and for the time, at least, let us agree, if you will, that one shall not pass
the other."

"On the contrary, I shall pass you."

"We shall see that, when we are at the seat of war; but till then, why, let us be
traveling companions. Later, we shall have both time and occasion to be rivals."

"Enemies."

"Enemies, if you like. There is a precision in your words, my dear fellow,
particularly agreeable to me. One may always know what one has to look for,
with you."

"What is the harm?"

"No harm at all. So, in my turn, I will ask your permission to state our
respective situations."

"State away."

"You are going to Perm--like me?"

"Like you."

"And probably you will go from Perm to Ekaterenburg, since that is the best
and safest route by which to cross the Ural Mountains?"

"Probably."

"Once past the frontier, we shall be in Siberia, that is to say in the midst of
the invasion."

"We shall be there."

"Well! then, and only then, will be the time to say, Each for himself, and God
for--"

"For me."

"For you, all by yourself! Very well! But since we have a week of neutral
days before us, and since it is very certain that news will not shower down upon


us on the way, let us be friends until we become rivals again."

"Enemies."

"Yes; that's right, enemies. But till then, let us act together, and not try and
ruin each other. All the same, I promise you to keep to myself all that I can see--

"And I, all that I can hear."

"Is that agreed?"

"It is agreed."

"Your hand?"

"Here it is." And the hand of the first speaker, that is to say, five wide-open
fingers, vigorously shook the two fingers coolly extended by the other.

"By the bye," said the first, "I was able this morning to telegraph the very
words of the order to my cousin at seventeen minutes past ten."

"And I sent it to the Daily Telegraph at thirteen minutes past ten."

"Bravo, Mr. Blount!"

"Very good, M. Jolivet."

"T will try and match that!"

"Tt will be difficult."

"IT can try, however."

So saying, the French correspondent familiarly saluted the Englishman, who
bowed stiffly. The governor's proclamation did not concern these two news-
hunters, as they were neither Russians nor foreigners of Asiatic origin. However,
being urged by the same instinct, they had left Nijni-Novgorod together. It was
natural that they should take the same means of transport, and that they should
follow the same route to the Siberian steppes. Traveling companions, whether
enemies or friends, they had a week to pass together before "the hunt would be
open." And then success to the most expert! Alcide Jolivet had made the first
advances, and Harry Blount had accepted them though he had done so coldly.

That very day at dinner the Frenchman open as ever and even too loquacious,
the Englishman still silent and grave, were seen hobnobbing at the same table,
drinking genuine Cliquot, at six roubles the bottle, made from the fresh sap of
the birch-trees of the country. On hearing them chatting away together, Michael
Strogoff said to himself: "Those are inquisitive and indiscreet fellows whom I
shall probably meet again on the way. It will be prudent for me to keep them at a
distance."

The young Livonian did not come to dinner. She was asleep in her cabin, and
Michael did not like to awaken her. It was evening before she reappeared on the
deck of the Caucasus. The long twilight imparted a coolness to the atmosphere
eagerly enjoyed by the passengers after the stifling heat of the day. As the


evening advanced, the greater number never even thought of going into the
saloon. Stretched on the benches, they inhaled with delight the slight breeze
caused by the speed of the steamer. At this time of year, and under this latitude,
the sky scarcely darkened between sunset and dawn, and left the steersman light
enough to guide his steamer among the numerous vessels going up or down the
Volga.

Between eleven and two, however, the moon being new, it was almost dark.
Nearly all the passengers were then asleep on the deck, and the silence was
disturbed only by the noise of the paddles striking the water at regular intervals.
Anxiety kept Michael Strogoff awake. He walked up and down, but always in
the stern of the steamer. Once, however, he happened to pass the engine-room.
He then found himself in the part reserved for second and third-class passengers.

There, everyone was lying asleep, not only on the benches, but also on the
bales, packages, and even the deck itself. Some care was necessary not to tread
on the sleepers, who were lying about everywhere. They were chiefly mujiks,
accustomed to hard couches, and quite satisfied with the planks of the deck. But
no doubt they would, all the same, have soundly abused the clumsy fellow who
roused them with an accidental kick.

Michael Strogoff took care, therefore, not to disturb anyone. By going thus to
the end of the boat, he had no other idea but that of striving against sleep by a
rather longer walk. He reached the forward deck, and was already climbing the
forecastle ladder, when he heard someone speaking near him. He stopped. The
voices appeared to come from a group of passengers enveloped in cloaks and
wraps. It was impossible to recognize them in the dark, though it sometimes
happened that, when the steamer's chimney sent forth a plume of ruddy flames,
the sparks seemed to fall amongst the group as though thousands of spangles had
been suddenly illuminated.

Michael was about to step up the ladder, when a few words reached his ear,
uttered in that strange tongue which he had heard during the night at the fair.
Instinctively he stopped to listen. Protected by the shadow of the forecastle, he
could not be perceived himself. As to seeing the passengers who were talking,
that was impossible. He must confine himself to listening.

The first words exchanged were of no importance--to him at least--but they
allowed him to recognize the voices of the man and woman whom he had heard
at Nijni-Novgorod. This, of course, made him redouble his attention. It was,
indeed, not at all impossible that these same Tsiganes, now banished, should be
on board the Caucasus.

And it was well for him that he listened, for he distinctly heard this question
and answer made in the Tartar idiom: "It is said that a courier has set out from


Moscow for Irkutsk."

"It is so said, Sangarre; but either this courier will arrive too late, or he will
not arrive at all."

Michael Strogoff started involuntarily at this reply, which concerned him so
directly. He tried to see if the man and woman who had just spoken were really
those whom he suspected, but he could not succeed.

In a few moments Michael Strogoff had regained the stern of the vessel
without having been perceived, and, taking a seat by himself, he buried his face
in his hands. It might have been supposed that he was asleep.

He was not asleep, however, and did not even think of sleeping. He was
reflecting, not without a lively apprehension: "Who is it knows of my departure,
and who can have any interest in knowing it?"


CHAPTER VIII GOING UP THE KAMA


THE next day, the 18th of July, at twenty minutes to seven in the morning,
the Caucasus reached the Kasan quay, seven versts from the town.

Kasan is situated at the confluence of the Volga and Kasanka. It is an
important chief town of the government, and a Greek archbishopric, as well as
the seat of a university. The varied population preserves an Asiatic character.
Although the town was so far from the landing-place, a large crowd was
collected on the quay. They had come for news. The governor of the province
had published an order identical with that of Nijni-Novgorod. Police officers and
a few Cossacks kept order among the crowd, and cleared the way both for the
passengers who were disembarking and also for those who were embarking on
board the Caucasus, minutely examining both classes of travelers. The one were
the Asiatics who were being expelled; the other, mujiks stopping at Kasan.

Michael Strogoff unconcernedly watched the bustle which occurs at all
quays on the arrival of a steam vessel. The Caucasus would stay for an hour to
renew her fuel. Michael did not even think of landing. He was unwilling to leave
the young Livonian girl alone on board, as she had not yet reappeared on deck.

The two journalists had risen at dawn, as all good huntsmen should do. They
went on shore and mingled with the crowd, each keeping to his own peculiar
mode of proceeding; Harry Blount, sketching different types, or noting some
observation; Alcide Jolivet contenting himself with asking questions, confiding
in his memory, which never failed him.

There was a report along all the frontier that the insurrection and invasion
had reached considerable proportions. Communication between Siberia and the
empire was already extremely difficult. All this Michael Strogoff heard from the
new arrivals. This information could not but cause him great uneasiness, and
increase his wish of being beyond the Ural Mountains, so as to judge for himself
of the truth of these rumors, and enable him to guard against any possible
contingency. He was thinking of seeking more direct intelligence from some
native of Kasan, when his attention was suddenly diverted.

Among the passengers who were leaving the Caucasus, Michael recognized
the troop of Tsiganes who, the day before, had appeared in the Nijni-Novgorod
fair. There, on the deck of the steamboat were the old Bohemian and the woman.
With them, and no doubt under their direction, landed about twenty dancers and
singers, from fifteen to twenty years of age, wrapped in old cloaks, which
covered their spangled dresses. These dresses, just then glancing in the first rays


of the sun, reminded Michael of the curious appearance which he had observed
during the night. It must have been the glitter of those spangles in the bright
flames issuing from the steamboat's funnel which had attracted his attention.

"Evidently," said Michael to himself, "this troop of Tsiganes, after remaining
below all day, crouched under the forecastle during the night. Were these gipsies
trying to show themselves as little as possible? Such is not according to the usual
custom of their race."

Michael Strogoff no longer doubted that the expressions he had heard, had
proceeded from this tawny group, and had been exchanged between the old
gypsy and the woman to whom he gave the Mongolian name of Sangarre.
Michael involuntarily moved towards the gangway, as the Bohemian troop was
leaving the steamboat.

The old Bohemian was there, in a humble attitude, little conformable with
the effrontery natural to his race. One would have said that he was endeavoring
rather to avoid attention than to attract it. His battered hat, browned by the suns
of every clime, was pulled forward over his wrinkled face. His arched back was
bent under an old cloak, wrapped closely round him, notwithstanding the heat. It
would have been difficult, in this miserable dress, to judge of either his size or
face. Near him was the Tsigane, Sangarre, a woman about thirty years old. She
was tall and well made, with olive complexion, magnificent eyes, and golden
hair.

Many of the young dancers were remarkably pretty, all possessing the clear-
cut features of their race. These Tsiganes are generally very attractive, and more
than one of the great Russian nobles, who try to vie with the English in
eccentricity, has not hesitated to choose his wife from among these gypsy girls.
One of them was humming a song of strange rhythm, which might be thus
rendered:

"Glitters brightly the gold In my raven locks streaming Rich coral around
My graceful neck gleaming; Like a bird of the air, Through the wide world I
roam."

The laughing girl continued her song, but Michael Strogoff ceased to listen.
It struck him just then that the Tsigane, Sangarre, was regarding him with a
peculiar gaze, as if to fix his features indelibly in her memory.

It was but for a few moments, when Sangarre herself followed the old man
and his troop, who had already left the vessel. "That's a bold gypsy," said
Michael to himself. "Could she have recognized me as the man whom she saw at
Nijni-Novgorod? These confounded Tsiganes have the eyes of a cat! They can
see in the dark; and that woman there might well know--"

Michael Strogoff was on the point of following Sangarre and the gypsy band,


but he stopped. "No," thought he, "no unguarded proceedings. If I were to stop
that old fortune teller and his companions my incognito would run a risk of
being discovered. Besides, now they have landed, before they can pass the
frontier I shall be far beyond it. They may take the route from Kasan to Ishim,
but that affords no resources to travelers. Besides a tarantass, drawn by good
Siberian horses, will always go faster than a gypsy cart! Come, friend Korpanoff,
be easy."

By this time the man and Sangarre had disappeared.

Kasan is justly called the "Gate of Asia" and considered as the center of
Siberian and Bokharian commerce; for two roads begin here and lead across the
Ural Mountains. Michael Strogoff had very judiciously chosen the one by Perm
and Ekaterenburg. It is the great stage road, well supplied with relays kept at the
expense of the government, and is prolonged from Ishim to Irkutsk.

It is true that a second route--the one of which Michael had just spoken--
avoiding the slight detour by Perm, also connects Kasan with Ishim. It is perhaps
shorter than the other, but this advantage is much diminished by the absence of
post-houses, the bad roads, and lack of villages. Michael Strogoff was right in
the choice he had made, and if, as appeared probable, the gipsies should follow
the second route from Kasan to Ishim, he had every chance of arriving before
them.

An hour afterwards the bell rang on board the Caucasus, calling the new
passengers, and recalling the former ones. It was now seven o'clock in the
morning. The requisite fuel had been received on board. The whole vessel began
to vibrate from the effects of the steam. She was ready to start. Passengers going
from Kasan to Perm were crowding on the deck.

Michael noticed that of the two reporters Blount alone had rejoined the
steamer. Was Alcide Jolivet about to miss his passage?

But just as the ropes were being cast off, Jolivet appeared, tearing along. The
steamer was already sheering off, the gangway had been drawn onto the quay,
but Alcide Jolivet would not stick at such a little thing as that, so, with a bound
like a harlequin, he alighted on the deck of the Caucasus almost in his rival's
arms.

"IT thought the Caucasus was going without you,” said the latter.

"Bah!" answered Jolivet, "I should soon have caught you up again, by
chartering a boat at my cousin's expense, or by traveling post at twenty copecks
a verst, and on horseback. What could I do? It was so long a way from the quay
to the telegraph office."

"Have you been to the telegraph office?" asked Harry Blount, biting his lips.

"That's exactly where I have been!" answered Jolivet, with his most amiable


smile.

"And is it still working to Kolyvan?"

"That I don't know, but I can assure you, for instance, that it is working from
Kasan to Paris."

"You sent a dispatch to your cousin?"

"With enthusiasm."

"You had learnt then--?"

"Look here, little father, as the Russians say," replied Alcide Jolivet, "I'm a
good fellow, and I don't wish to keep anything from you. The Tartars, and
Feofar-Khan at their head, have passed Semipolatinsk, and are descending the
Irtish. Do what you like with that!"

What! such important news, and Harry Blount had not known it; and his
rival, who had probably learned it from some inhabitant of Kasan, had already
transmitted it to Paris. The English paper was distanced! Harry Blount, crossing
his hands behind him, walked off and seated himself in the stern without uttering
a word.

About ten o'clock in the morning, the young Livonian, leaving her cabin,
appeared on deck. Michael Strogoff went forward and took her hand. "Look,
sister!" said he, leading her to the bows of the Caucasus.

The view was indeed well worth seeing. The Caucasus had reached the
confluence of the Volga and the Kama. There she would leave the former river,
after having descended it for nearly three hundred miles, to ascend the latter for
a full three hundred.

The Kama was here very wide, and its wooded banks lovely. A few white
sails enlivened the sparkling water. The horizon was closed by a line of hills
covered with aspens, alders, and sometimes large oaks.

But these beauties of nature could not distract the thoughts of the young
Livonian even for an instant. She had left her hand in that of her companion, and
turning to him, "At what distance are we from Moscow?" she asked.

"Nine hundred versts,"" answered Michael.

"Nine hundred, out of seven thousand!" murmured the girl.

The bell now announced the breakfast hour. Nadia followed Michael
Strogoff to the restaurant. She ate little, and as a poor girl whose means are small
would do. Michael thought it best to content himself with the fare which
satisfied his companion; and in less than twenty minutes he and Nadia returned
on deck. There they seated themselves in the stern, and without preamble, Nadia,
lowering her voice to be heard by him alone, began:

"Brother, I am the daughter of an exile. My name is Nadia Fedor. My mother
died at Riga scarcely a month ago, and I am going to Irkutsk to rejoin my father


and share his exile."

"I, too, am going to Irkutsk," answered Michael, "and I shall thank Heaven if
it enables me to give Nadia Fedor safe and sound into her father's hands."

"Thank you, brother," replied Nadia.

Michael Strogoff then added that he had obtained a special podorojna for
Siberia, and that the Russian authorities could in no way hinder his progress.

Nadia asked nothing more. She saw in this fortunate meeting with Michael a
means only of accelerating her journey to her father.

"T had," said she, "a permit which authorized me to go to Irkutsk, but the new
order annulled that; and but for you, brother, I should have been unable to leave
the town, in which, without doubt, I should have perished."

"And dared you, alone, Nadia," said Michael, "attempt to cross the steppes of
Siberia?"

"The Tartar invasion was not known when I left Riga. It was only at Moscow
that I learnt the news."

"And despite it, you continued your journey?"

"Tt was my duty."

The words showed the character of the brave girl.

She then spoke of her father, Wassili Fedor. He was a much-esteemed
physician at Riga. But his connection with some secret society having been
asserted, he received orders to start for Irkutsk. The police who brought the order
conducted him without delay beyond the frontier.

Wassili Fedor had but time to embrace his sick wife and his daughter, so
soon to be left alone, when, shedding bitter tears, he was led away. A year and a
half after her husband's departure, Madame Fedor died in the arms of her
daughter, who was thus left alone and almost penniless. Nadia Fedor then asked,
and easily obtained from the Russian government, an authorization to join her
father at Irkutsk. She wrote and told him she was starting. She had barely enough
money for this long journey, and yet she did not hesitate to undertake it. She
would do what she could. God would do the rest.


CHAPTER IX DAY AND NIGHT IN A TARANTASS

THE next day, the 19th of July, the Caucasus reached Perm, the last place at
which she touched on the Kama.

The government of which Perm is the capital is one of the largest in the
Russian Empire, and, extending over the Ural Mountains, encroaches on
Siberian territory. Marble quarries, mines of salt, platina, gold, and coal are
worked here on a large scale. Although Perm, by its situation, has become an


important town, it is by no means attractive, being extremely dirty, and without
resources. This want of comfort is of no consequence to those going to Siberia,
for they come from the more civilized districts, and are supplied with all
necessaries.

At Perm travelers from Siberia resell their vehicles, more or less damaged by
the long journey across the plains. There, too, those passing from Europe to Asia
purchase carriages, or sleighs in the winter season.

Michael Strogoff had already sketched out his programme. A vehicle
carrying the mail usually runs across the Ural Mountains, but this, of course, was
discontinued. Even if it had not been so, he would not have taken it, as he
wished to travel as fast as possible, without depending on anyone. He wisely
preferred to buy a carriage, and journey by stages, stimulating the zeal of the
postillions by well-applied "na vodkou," or tips.

Unfortunately, in consequence of the measures taken against foreigners of
Asiatic origin, a large number of travelers had already left Perm, and therefore
conveyances were extremely rare. Michael was obliged to content himself with
what had been rejected by others. As to horses, as long as the Czar's courier was
not in Siberia, he could exhibit his podorojna, and the postmasters would give
him the preference. But, once out of Europe, he had to depend alone on the
power of his roubles.

But to what sort of a vehicle should he harness his horses? To a telga or to a
tarantass? The telga is nothing but an open four-wheeled cart, made entirely of
wood, the pieces fastened together by means of strong rope. Nothing could be
more primitive, nothing could be less comfortable; but, on the other hand, should
any accident happen on the way, nothing could be more easily repaired. There is
no want of firs on the Russian frontier, and axle-trees grow naturally in forests.
The post extraordinary, known by the name of "perck-ladnoi," is carried by the
telga, as any road is good enough for it. It must be confessed that sometimes the
ropes which fasten the concern together break, and whilst the hinder part
remains stuck in some bog, the forepart arrives at the post-house on two wheels;
but this result is considered quite satisfactory.

Michael Strogoff would have been obliged to employ a telga, if he had not
been lucky enough to discover a tarantass. It is to be hoped that the invention of
Russian coach-builders will devise some improvement in this last-named
vehicle. Springs are wanting in it as well as in the telga; in the absence of iron,
wood is not spared; but its four wheels, with eight or nine feet between them,
assure a certain equilibrium over the jolting rough roads. A splash-board protects
the travelers from the mud, and a strong leathern hood, which may be pulled
quite over the occupiers, shelters them from the great heat and violent storms of


the summer. The tarantass is as solid and as easy to repair as the telga, and is,
moreover, less addicted to leaving its hinder part in the middle of the road.

It was not without careful search that Michael managed to discover this
tarantass, and there was probably not a second to be found in all Perm. He
haggled long about the price, for form's sake, to act up to his part as Nicholas
Korpanoff, a plain merchant of Irkutsk.

Nadia had followed her companion in his search after a suitable vehicle.
Although the object of each was different, both were equally anxious to arrive at
their goal. One would have said the same will animated them both.

"Sister," said Michael, "I wish I could have found a more comfortable
conveyance for you."

"Do you say that to me, brother, when I would have gone on foot, if need
were, to rejoin my father?"

"I do not doubt your courage, Nadia, but there are physical fatigues a woman
may be unable to endure."

"I shall endure them, whatever they be," replied the girl. "If you ever hear a
complaint from me you may leave me in the road, and continue your journey
alone."

Half an hour later, the podorojna being presented by Michael, three post-
horses were harnessed to the tarantass. These animals, covered with long hair,
were very like long-legged bears. They were small but spirited, being of Siberian
breed. The way in which the iemschik harnessed them was thus: one, the largest,
was secured between two long shafts, on whose farther end was a hoop carrying
tassels and bells; the two others were simply fastened by ropes to the steps of the
tarantass. This was the complete harness, with mere strings for reins.

Neither Michael Strogoff nor the young Livonian girl had any baggage. The
rapidity with which one wished to make the journey, and the more than modest
resources of the other, prevented them from embarrassing themselves with
packages. It was a fortunate thing, under the circumstances, for the tarantass
could not have carried both baggage and travelers. It was only made for two
persons, without counting the iemschik, who kept his equilibrium on his narrow
seat in a marvelous manner.

The iemschik is changed at every relay. The man who drove the tarantass
during the first stage was, like his horses, a Siberian, and no less shaggy than
they; long hair, cut square on the forehead, hat with a turned-up brim, red belt,
coat with crossed facings and buttons stamped with the imperial cipher. The
iemschik, on coming up with his team, threw an inquisitive glance at the
passengers of the tarantass. No luggage!--and had there been, where in the world
could he have stowed it? Rather shabby in appearance too. He looked


contemptuous.

"Crows," said he, without caring whether he was overheard or not; "crows, at
six copecks a verst!"

"No, eagles!" said Michael, who understood the iemschik's slang perfectly;
"eagles, do you hear, at nine copecks a verst, and a tip besides."

He was answered by a merry crack of the whip.

In the language of the Russian postillions the "crow" is the stingy or poor
traveler, who at the post-houses only pays two or three copecks a verst for the
horses. The "eagle" is the traveler who does not mind expense, to say nothing of
liberal tips. Therefore the crow could not claim to fly as rapidly as the imperial
bird.

Nadia and Michael immediately took their places in the tarantass. A small
store of provisions was put in the box, in case at any time they were delayed in
reaching the post-houses, which are very comfortably provided under direction
of the State. The hood was pulled up, as it was insupport-ably hot, and at twelve
o'clock the tarantass left Perm in a cloud of dust.

The way in which the iemschik kept up the pace of his team would have
certainly astonished travelers who, being neither Russians nor Siberians, were
not accustomed to this sort of thing. The leader, rather larger than the others,
kept to a steady long trot, perfectly regular, whether up or down hill. The two
other horses seemed to know no other pace than the gallop, though they
performed many an eccentric curvette as they went along. The iemschik,
however, never touched them, only urging them on by startling cracks of his
whip. But what epithets he lavished on them, including the names of all the
saints in the calendar, when they behaved like docile and conscientious animals!
The string which served as reins would have had no influence on the spirited
beasts, but the words "na pravo," to the right, "na levo," to the left, pronounced
in a guttural tone, were more effectual than either bridle or snaffle.

And what amiable expressions! "Go on, my doves!" the iemschik would say.
"Go on, pretty swallows! Fly, my little pigeons! Hold up, my cousin on the left!
Gee up, my little father on the right!"

But when the pace slackened, what insulting expressions, instantly
understood by the sensitive animals! "Go on, you wretched snail! Confound you,
you slug! I'll roast you alive, you tortoise, you!"

Whether or not it was from this way of driving, which requires the iemschiks
to possess strong throats more than muscular arms, the tarantass flew along at a
rate of from twelve to fourteen miles an hour. Michael Strogoff was accustomed
both to the sort of vehicle and the mode of traveling. Neither jerks nor jolts
incommoded him. He knew that a Russian driver never even tries to avoid either


stones, ruts, bogs, fallen trees, or trenches, which may happen to be in the road.
He was used to all that. His companion ran a risk of being hurt by the violent
jolts of the tarantass, but she would not complain.

For a little while Nadia did not speak. Then possessed with the one thought,
that of reaching her journey's end, "I have calculated that there are three hundred
versts between Perm and Ekaterenburg, brother," said she. "Am I right?"

"You are quite right, Nadia," answered Michael; "and when we have reached
Ekaterenburg, we shall be at the foot of the Ural Mountains on the opposite
side."

"How long will it take to get across the mountains?"

"Forty-eight hours, for we shall travel day and night. I say day and night,
Nadia," added he, "for I cannot stop even for a moment; I go on without rest to
Irkutsk."

"T shall not delay you, brother; no, not even for an hour, and we will travel
day and night."

"Well then, Nadia, if the Tartar invasion has only left the road open, we shall
arrive in twenty days."

"You have made this journey before?" asked Nadia.

"Many times."

"During winter we should have gone more rapidly and surely, should we
not?"

"Yes, especially with more rapidity, but you would have suffered much from
the frost and snow."

"What matter! Winter is the friend of Russia."

"Yes, Nadia, but what a constitution anyone must have to endure such
friendship! I have often seen the temperature in the Siberian steppes fall to more
than forty degrees below freezing point! I have felt, notwithstanding my reindeer
coat, my heart growing chill, my limbs stiffening, my feet freezing in triple
woolen socks; I have seen my sleigh horses covered with a coating of ice, their
breath congealed at their nostrils. I have seen the brandy in my flask change into
hard stone, on which not even my knife could make an impression. But my
sleigh flew like the wind. Not an obstacle on the plain, white and level farther
than the eye could reach! No rivers to stop one! Hard ice everywhere, the route
open, the road sure! But at the price of what suffering, Nadia, those alone could
say, who have never returned, but whose bodies have been covered up by the
snow storm."

"However, you have returned, brother," said Nadia.

"Yes, but Iam a Siberian, and, when quite a child, I used to follow my father
to the chase, and so became inured to these hardships. But when you said to me,


Nadia, that winter would not have stopped you, that you would have gone alone,
ready to struggle against the frightful Siberian climate, I seemed to see you lost
in the snow and falling, never to rise again."

"How many times have you crossed the steppe in winter?" asked the young
Livonian.

"Three times, Nadia, when I was going to Omsk."

"And what were you going to do at Omsk?"

"See my mother, who was expecting me."

"And I am going to Irkutsk, where my father expects me. I am taking him my
mother's last words. That is as much as to tell you, brother, that nothing would
have prevented me from setting out."

"You are a brave girl, Nadia," replied Michael. "God Himself would have led

you."
All day the tarantass was driven rapidly by the iemschiks, who succeeded
each other at every stage. The eagles of the mountain would not have found their
name dishonored by these "eagles" of the highway. The high price paid for each
horse, and the tips dealt out so freely, recommended the travelers in a special
way. Perhaps the postmasters thought it singular that, after the publication of the
order, a young man and his sister, evidently both Russians, could travel freely
across Siberia, which was closed to everyone else, but their papers were all en
regle and they had the right to pass.

However, Michael Strogoff and Nadia were not the only travelers on their
way from Perm to Ekaterenburg. At the first stages, the courier of the Czar had
learnt that a carriage preceded them, but, as there was no want of horses, he did
not trouble himself about that.

During the day, halts were made for food alone. At the post-houses could be
found lodging and provision. Besides, if there was not an inn, the house of the
Russian peasant would have been no less hospitable. In the villages, which are
almost all alike, with their white-walled, green-roofed chapels, the traveler might
knock at any door, and it would be opened to him. The moujik would come out,
smiling and extending his hand to his guest. He would offer him bread and salt,
the burning charcoal would be put into the "samovar," and he would be made
quite at home. The family would turn out themselves rather than that he should
not have room. The stranger is the relation of all. He is "one sent by God."

On arriving that evening Michael instinctively asked the postmaster how
many hours ago the carriage which preceded them had passed that stage.

"Two hours ago, little father," replied the postmaster.

"Is it a berlin?"

"No, a telga."


"How many travelers?"

"Two."

"And they are going fast?"

"Eagles!"

"Let them put the horses to as soon as possible."

Michael and Nadia, resolved not to stop even for an hour, traveled all night.
The weather continued fine, though the atmosphere was heavy and becoming
charged with electricity. It was to be hoped that a storm would not burst whilst
they were among the mountains, for there it would be terrible. Being accustomed
to read atmospheric signs, Michael Strogoff knew that a struggle of the elements
was approaching.

The night passed without incident. Notwithstanding the jolting of the
tarantass, Nadia was able to sleep for some hours. The hood was partly raised so
as to give as much air as there was in the stifling atmosphere.

Michael kept awake all night, mistrusting the iemschiks, who are apt to sleep
at their posts. Not an hour was lost at the relays, not an hour on the road.

The next day, the 20th of July, at about eight o'clock in the morning, they
caught the first glimpse of the Ural Mountains in the east. This important chain
which separates Russia from Siberia was still at a great distance, and they could
not hope to reach it until the end of the day. The passage of the mountains must
necessarily be performed during the next night. The sky was cloudy all day, and
the temperature was therefore more bearable, but the weather was very
threatening.

It would perhaps have been more prudent not to have ascended the
mountains during the night, and Michael would not have done so, had he been
permitted to wait; but when, at the last stage, the iemschik drew his attention to a
peal of thunder reverberating among the rocks, he merely said:

"Is a telga still before us?"

"Yes."

"How long is it in advance?"

"Nearly an hour."

"Forward, and a triple tip if we are at Ekaterenburg to-morrow morning."


CHAPTER X A STORM IN THE URAL MOUNTAINS

THE Ural Mountains extend in a length of over two thousand miles between
Europe and Asia. Whether they are called the Urals, which is the Tartar, or the
Poyas, which is the Russian name, they are correctly so termed; for these names
signify "belt" in both languages. Rising on the shores of the Arctic Sea, they


reach the borders of the Caspian. This was the barrier to be crossed by Michael
Strogoff before he could enter Siberian Russia. The mountains could be crossed
in one night, if no accident happened. Unfortunately, thunder muttering in the
distance announced that a storm was at hand. The electric tension was such that
it could not be dispersed without a tremendous explosion, which in the peculiar
state of the atmosphere would be very terrible.

Michael took care that his young companion should be as well protected as
possible. The hood, which might have been easily blown away, was fastened
more securely with ropes, crossed above and at the back. The traces were
doubled, and, as an additional precaution, the nave-boxes were stuffed with
straw, as much to increase the strength of the wheels as to lessen the jolting,
unavoidable on a dark night. Lastly, the fore and hinder parts, connected simply
by the axles to the body of the tarantass, were joined one to the other by a
crossbar, fixed by means of pins and screws.

Nadia resumed her place in the cart, and Michael took his seat beside her.
Before the lowered hood hung two leathern curtains, which would in some
degree protect the travelers against the wind and rain. Two great lanterns,
suspended from the iemschik's seat, threw a pale glimmer scarcely sufficient to
light the way, but serving as warning lights to prevent any other carriage from
running into them.

It was well that all these precautions were taken, in expectation of a rough
night. The road led them up towards dense masses of clouds, and should the
clouds not soon resolve into rain, the fog would be such that the tarantass would
be unable to advance without danger of falling over some precipice.

The Ural chain does not attain any very great height, the highest summit not
being more than five thousand feet. Eternal snow is there unknown, and what is
piled up by the Siberian winter is soon melted by the summer sun. Shrubs and
trees grow to a considerable height. The iron and copper mines, as well as those
of precious stones, draw a considerable number of workmen to that region. Also,
those villages termed "gavody" are there met with pretty frequently, and the road
through the great passes is easily practicable for post-carriages.

But what is easy enough in fine weather and broad daylight, offers
difficulties and perils when the elements are engaged in fierce warfare, and the
traveler is in the midst of it. Michael Strogoff knew from former experience
what a storm in the mountains was, and perhaps this would be as terrible as the
snowstorms which burst forth with such vehemence in the winter.

Rain was not yet falling, so Michael raised the leathern curtains which
protected the interior of the tarantass and looked out, watching the sides of the
road, peopled with fantastic shadows, caused by the wavering light of the


lanterns. Nadia, motionless, her arms folded, gazed forth also, though without
leaning forward, whilst her companion, his body half out of the carriage,
examined both sky and earth.

The calmness of the atmosphere was very threatening, the air being perfectly
still. It was just as if Nature were half stifled, and could no longer breathe; her
lungs, that is to say those gloomy, dense clouds, not being able to perform their
functions. The silence would have been complete but for the grindings of the
wheels of the tarantass over the road, the creaking of the axles, the snorting of
the horses, and the clattering of their iron hoofs among the pebbles, sparks flying
out on every side.

The road was perfectly deserted. The tarantass encountered neither
pedestrians nor horsemen, nor a vehicle of any description, in the narrow defiles
of the Ural, on this threatening night. Not even the fire of a charcoal-burner was
visible in the woods, not an encampment of miners near the mines, not a hut
among the brushwood.

Under these peculiar circumstances it might have been allowable to postpone
the journey till the morning. Michael Strogoff, however, had not hesitated, he
had no right to stop, but then--and it began to cause him some anxiety--what
possible reason could those travelers in the telga ahead have for being so
imprudent?

Michael remained thus on the look-out for some time. About eleven o'clock
lightning began to blaze continuously in the sky. The shadows of huge pines
appeared and disappeared in the rapid light. Sometimes when the tarantass
neared the side of the road, deep gulfs, lit up by the flashes, could be seen
yawning beneath them. From time to time, on their vehicle giving a worse lurch
than usual, they knew that they were crossing a bridge of roughly-hewn planks
thrown over some chasm, thunder appearing actually to be rumbling below
them. Besides this, a booming sound filled the air, which increased as they
mounted higher. With these different noises rose the shouts of the iemschik,
sometimes scolding, sometimes coaxing his poor beasts, who were suffering
more from the oppression of the air than the roughness of the roads. Even the
bells on the shafts could no longer rouse them, and they stumbled every instant.

"At what time shall we reach the top of the ridge?" asked Michael of the
iemschik.

"At one o'clock in the morning if we ever get there at all," replied he, with a
shake of his head.

"Why, my friend, this will not be your first storm in the mountains, will it?"

"No, and pray God it may not be my last!"

"Are you afraid?"


"No, I'm not afraid, but I repeat that I think you were wrong in starting."

"I should have been still more wrong had I stayed."

"Hold up, my pigeons!" cried the iemschik; it was his business to obey, not
to question.

Just then a distant noise was heard, shrill whistling through the atmosphere,
so calm a minute before. By the light of a dazzling flash, almost immediately
followed by a tremendous clap of thunder, Michael could see huge pines on a
high peak, bending before the blast. The wind was unchained, but as yet it was
the upper air alone which was disturbed. Successive crashes showed that many
of the trees had been unable to resist the burst of the hurricane. An avalanche of
shattered trunks swept across the road and dashed over the precipice on the left,
two hundred feet in front of the tarantass.

The horses stopped short.

"Get up, my pretty doves!" cried the iemschik, adding the cracking of his
whip to the rumbling of the thunder.

Michael took Nadia's hand. "Are you asleep, sister?"

"No, brother."

"Be ready for anything; here comes the storm!"

"T am ready."

Michael Strogoff had only just time to draw the leathern curtains, when the
storm was upon them.

The iemschik leapt from his seat and seized the horses' heads, for terrible
danger threatened the whole party.

The tarantass was at a standstill at a turning of the road, down which swept
the hurricane; it was absolutely necessary to hold the animals' heads to the wind,
for if the carriage was taken broadside it must infallibly capsize and be dashed
over the precipice. The frightened horses reared, and their driver could not
manage to quiet them. His friendly expressions had been succeeded by the most
insulting epithets. Nothing was of any use. The unfortunate animals, blinded by
the lightning, terrified by the incessant peals of thunder, threatened every instant
to break their traces and flee. The iemschik had no longer any control over his
team.

At that moment Michael Strogoff threw himself from the tarantass and
rushed to his assistance. Endowed with more than common strength, he
managed, though not without difficulty, to master the horses.

The storm now raged with redoubled fury. A perfect avalanche of stones and
trunks of trees began to roll down the slope above them.

"We cannot stop here," said Michael.

"We cannot stop anywhere," returned the iemschik, all his energies


apparently overcome by terror. "The storm will soon send us to the bottom of the
mountain, and that by the shortest way."

"Take you that horse, coward," returned Michael, "I'll look after this one."

A fresh burst of the storm interrupted him. The driver and he were obliged to
crouch upon the ground to avoid being blown down. The carriage,
notwithstanding their efforts and those of the horses, was gradually blown back,
and had it not been stopped by the trunk of a tree, it would have gone over the
edge of the precipice.

"Do not be afraid, Nadia!" cried Michael Strogoff.

"I'm not afraid," replied the young Livonian, her voice not betraying the
slightest emotion.

The rumbling of the thunder ceased for an instant, the terrible blast had
swept past into the gorge below.

"Will you go back?" said the iemschik.

"No, we must go on! Once past this turning, we shall have the shelter of the
slope."

"But the horses won't move!"

"Do as I do, and drag them on."

"The storm will come back!"

"Do you mean to obey?"

"Do you order it?"

"The Father orders it!" answered Michael, for the first time invoking the all-
powerful name of the Emperor.

"Forward, my swallows!" cried the iemschik, seizing one horse, while
Michael did the same to the other.

Thus urged, the horses began to struggle onward. They could no longer rear,
and the middle horse not being hampered by the others, could keep in the center
of the road. It was with the greatest difficulty that either man or beasts could
stand against the wind, and for every three steps they took in advance, they lost
one, and even two, by being forced backwards. They slipped, they fell, they got
up again. The vehicle ran a great risk of being smashed. If the hood had not been
securely fastened, it would have been blown away long before. Michael Strogoff
and the iemschik took more than two hours in getting up this bit of road, only
half a verst in length, so directly exposed was it to the lashing of the storm. The
danger was not only from the wind which battered against the travelers, but from
the avalanche of stones and broken trunks which were hurtling through the air.

Suddenly, during a flash of lightning, one of these masses was seen crashing
and rolling down the mountain towards the tarantass. The iemschik uttered a cry.

Michael Strogoff in vain brought his whip down on the team, they refused to


move.

A few feet farther on, and the mass would pass behind them! Michael saw
the tarantass struck, his companion crushed; he saw there was no time to drag
her from the vehicle.

Then, possessed in this hour of peril with superhuman strength, he threw
himself behind it, and planting his feet on the ground, by main force placed it out
of danger.

The enormous mass as it passed grazed his chest, taking away his breath as
though it had been a cannon-ball, then crushing to powder the flints on the road,
it bounded into the abyss below.

"Oh, brother!" cried Nadia, who had seen it all by the light of the flashes.

"Nadia!" replied Michael, "fear nothing!"

"Tt is not on my own account that I fear!"

"God is with us, sister!"

"With me truly, brother, since He has sent thee in my way!" murmured the
young girl.

The impetus the tarantass had received was not to be lost, and the tired
horses once more moved forward. Dragged, so to speak, by Michael and the
iemschik, they toiled on towards a narrow pass, lying north and south, where
they would be protected from the direct sweep of the tempest. At one end a huge
rock jutted out, round the summit of which whirled an eddy. Behind the shelter
of the rock there was a comparative calm; yet once within the circumference of
the cyclone, neither man nor beast could resist its power.

Indeed, some firs which towered above this protection were in a trice shorn
of their tops, as though a gigantic scythe had swept across them. The storm was
now at its height. The lightning filled the defile, and the thunderclaps had
become one continued peal. The ground, struck by the concussion, trembled as
though the whole Ural chain was shaken to its foundations.

Happily, the tarantass could be so placed that the storm might strike it
obliquely. But the counter-currents, directed towards it by the slope, could not be
so well avoided, and so violent were they that every instant it seemed as though
it would be dashed to pieces.

Nadia was obliged to leave her seat, and Michael, by the light of one of the
lanterns, discovered an excavation bearing the marks of a miner's pick, where the
young girl could rest in safety until they could once more start.

Just then--it was one o'clock in the morning--the rain began to fall in torrents,
and this in addition to the wind and lightning, made the storm truly frightful. To
continue the journey at present was utterly impossible. Besides, having reached
this pass, they had only to descend the slopes of the Ural Mountains, and to


descend now, with the road torn up by a thousand mountain torrents, in these
eddies of wind and rain, was utter madness.

"To wait is indeed serious," said Michael, "but it must certainly be done, to
avoid still longer detentions. The very violence of the storm makes me hope that
it will not last long. About three o'clock the day will begin to break, and the
descent, which we cannot risk in the dark, we shall be able, if not with ease, at
least without such danger, to attempt after sunrise."

"Let us wait, brother," replied Nadia; "but if you delay, let it not be to spare
me fatigue or danger."

"Nadia, I know that you are ready to brave everything, but, in exposing both
of us, I risk more than my life, more than yours, I am not fulfilling my task, that
duty which before everything else I must accomplish."

"A duty!" murmured Nadia.

Just then a bright flash lit up the sky; a loud clap followed. The air was filled
with sulphurous suffocating vapor, and a clump of huge pines, struck by the
electric fluid, scarcely twenty feet from the tarantass, flared up like a gigantic
torch.

The iemschik was struck to the ground by a counter-shock, but, regaining his
feet, found himself happily unhurt.

Just as the last growlings of the thunder were lost in the recesses of the
mountain, Michael felt Nadia's hand pressing his, and he heard her whisper these
words in his ear: "Cries, brother! Listen!"


CHAPTER XI TRAVELERS IN DISTRESS


DURING the momentary lull which followed, shouts could be distinctly
heard from farther on, at no great distance from the tarantass. It was an earnest
appeal, evidently from some traveler in distress.

Michael listened attentively. The iemschik also listened, but shook his head,
as though it was impossible to help.

"They are travelers calling for aid," cried Nadia.

"They can expect nothing," replied the iemschik.

"Why not?” cried Michael. "Ought not we do for them what they would for
us under similar circumstances?"

"Surely you will not risk the carriage and horses!"

"I will go on foot," replied Michael, interrupting the iemschik.

"I will go, too, brother," said the young girl.

"No, remain here, Nadia. The iemschik will stay with you. I do not wish to
leave him alone."

"I will stay," replied Nadia.

"Whatever happens, do not leave this spot."

"You will find me where I now am."

Michael pressed her hand, and, turning the corner of the slope, disappeared
in the darkness.

"Your brother is wrong," said the iemschik.

"He is right," replied Nadia simply.

Meanwhile Strogoff strode rapidly on. If he was in a great hurry to aid the
travelers, he was also very anxious to know who it was that had not been
hindered from starting by the storm; for he had no doubt that the cries came from
the telga, which had so long preceded him.

The rain had stopped, but the storm was raging with redoubled fury. The
shouts, borne on the air, became more distinct. Nothing was to be seen of the
pass in which Nadia remained. The road wound along, and the squalls, checked
by the corners, formed eddies highly dangerous, to pass which, without being
taken off his legs, Michael had to use his utmost strength.

He soon perceived that the travelers whose shouts he had heard were at no
great distance. Even then, on account of the darkness, Michael could not see
them, yet he heard distinctly their words.

This is what he heard, and what caused him some surprise: "Are you coming
back, blockhead?"


"You shall have a taste of the knout at the next stage."

"Do you hear, you devil's postillion! Hullo! Below!"

"This is how a carriage takes you in this country!"

"Yes, this is what you call a telga!"

"Oh, that abominable driver! He goes on and does not appear to have
discovered that he has left us behind!"

"To deceive me, too! Me, an honorable Englishman! I will make a complaint
at the chancellor's office and have the fellow hanged."

This was said in a very angry tone, but was suddenly interrupted by a burst
of laughter from his companion, who exclaimed, "Well! this is a good joke, I
must say."

"You venture to laugh!" said the Briton angrily.


"Certainly, my dear confrere, and that most heartily. "Pon my word I never
saw anything to come up to it."

Just then a crashing clap of thunder re-echoed through the defile, and then
died away among the distant peaks. When the sound of the last growl had
ceased, the merry voice went on: "Yes, it undoubtedly is a good joke. This
machine certainly never came from France."

"Nor from England," replied the other.

On the road, by the light of the flashes, Michael saw, twenty yards from him,
two travelers, seated side by side in a most peculiar vehicle, the wheels of which
were deeply imbedded in the ruts formed in the road.

He approached them, the one grinning from ear to ear, and the other
gloomily contemplating his situation, and recognized them as the two reporters
who had been his companions on board the Caucasus.

"Good-morning to you, sir," cried the Frenchman. "Delighted to see you
here. Let me introduce you to my intimate enemy, Mr. Blount."

The English reporter bowed, and was about to introduce in his turn his
companion, Alcide Jolivet, in accordance with the rules of society, when
Michael interrupted him.

"Perfectly unnecessary, sir; we already know each other, for we traveled
together on the Volga."

"Ah, yes! exactly so! Mr.--"

"Nicholas Korpanoff, merchant, of Irkutsk. But may I know what has
happened which, though a misfortune to your companion, amuses you so
much?"

"Certainly, Mr. Korpanoff," replied Alcide. "Fancy! our driver has gone off
with the front part of this confounded carriage, and left us quietly seated in the
back part! So here we are in the worse half of a telga; no driver, no horses. Is it
not a joke?"

"No joke at all," said the Englishman.

"Indeed it is, my dear fellow. You do not know how to look at the bright side
of things."

"How, pray, are we to go on?" asked Blount.

"That is the easiest thing in the world," replied Alcide. "Go and harness
yourself to what remains of our cart; I will take the reins, and call you my little
pigeon, like a true iemschik, and you will trot off like a real post-horse."

"Mr. Jolivet," replied the Englishman, "this joking is going too far, it passes
all limits and--"

"Now do be quiet, my dear sir. When you are done up, I will take your place;
and call me a broken-winded snail and faint-hearted tortoise if I don't take you


over the ground at a rattling pace."

Alcide said all this with such perfect good-humor that Michael could not
help smiling. "Gentlemen," said he, "here is a better plan. We have now reached
the highest ridge of the Ural chain, and thus have merely to descend the slopes of
the mountain. My carriage is close by, only two hundred yards behind. I will
lend you one of my horses, harness it to the remains of the telga, and to-mor-
how, if no accident befalls us, we will arrive together at Ekaterenburg."

"That, Mr. Korpanoff," said Alcide, "is indeed a generous proposal."

"Indeed, sir," replied Michael, "I would willingly offer you places in my
tarantass, but it will only hold two, and my sister and I already fill it."

"Really, sir," answered Alcide, "with your horse and our demi-telga we will
go to the world's end."

"Sir," said Harry Blount, "we most willingly accept your kind offer. And, as
to that iemschik--"

"Oh! I assure you that you are not the first travelers who have met with a
similar misfortune," replied Michael.

"But why should not our driver come back? He knows perfectly well that he
has left us behind, wretch that he is!"

"He! He never suspected such a thing."

"What! the fellow not know that he was leaving the better half of his telga
behind?"

"Not a bit, and in all good faith is driving the fore part into Ekaterenburg."

"Did I not tell you that it was a good joke, confrere?" cried Alcide.

"Then, gentlemen, if you will follow me," said Michael, "we will return to
my carriage, and--"

"But the telga," observed the Englishman.

"There is not the slightest fear that it will fly away, my dear Blount!"
exclaimed Alcide; "it has taken such good root in the ground, that if it were left
here until next spring it would begin to bud."

"Come then, gentlemen," said Michael Strogoff, "and we will bring up the
tarantass."

The Frenchman and the Englishman, descending from their seats, no longer
the hinder one, since the front had taken its departure, followed Michael.

Walking along, Alcide Jolivet chattered away as usual, with his invariable
good-humor. "Faith, Mr. Korpanoff," said he, "you have indeed got us out of a
bad scrape."

"I have only done, sir," replied Michael, "what anyone would have done in
my place."

"Well, sir, you have done us a good turn, and if you are going farther we may


possibly meet again, and--"

Alcide Jolivet did not put any direct question to Michael as to where he was
going, but the latter, not wishing it to be suspected that he had anything to
conceal, at once replied, "I am bound for Omsk, gentlemen."

"Mr. Blount and I," replied Alcide, "go where danger is certainly to be found,
and without doubt news also."

"To the invaded provinces?" asked Michael with some earnestness.

"Exactly so, Mr. Korpanoff; and we may possibly meet there."

"Indeed, sir," replied Michael, "I have little love for cannon-balls or lance
points, and am by nature too great a lover of peace to venture where fighting is
going on."

"I am sorry, sir, extremely sorry; we must only regret that we shall separate
so soon! But on leaving Ekaterenburg it may be our fortunate fate to travel
together, if only for a few days?"

"Do you go on to Omsk?" asked Michael, after a moment's reflection.

"We know nothing as yet," replied Alcide; "but we shall certainly go as far as
Ishim, and once there, our movements must depend on circumstances."

"Well then, gentlemen," said Michael, "we will be fellow-travelers as far as
Ishim."

Michael would certainly have preferred to travel alone, but he could not,
without appearing at least singular, seek to separate himself from the two
reporters, who were taking the same road that he was. Besides, since Alcide and
his companion intended to make some stay at Ishim, he thought it rather
convenient than otherwise to make that part of the journey in their company.

Then in an indifferent tone he asked, "Do you know, with any certainty,
where this Tartar invasion is?"

"Indeed, sir," replied Alcide, "we only know what they said at Perm. Feofar-
Khan's Tartars have invaded the whole province of Semipolatinsk, and for some
days, by forced marches, have been descending the Irtish. You must hurry if you
wish to get to Omsk before them."

"Indeed I must," replied Michael.

"It is reported also that Colonel Ogareff has succeeded in passing the frontier
in disguise, and that he will not be slow in joining the Tartar chief in the revolted
country."

"But how do they know it?" asked Michael, whom this news, more or less
true, so directly concerned.

"Oh! as these things are always known," replied Alcide; "it is in the air."

"Then have you really reason to think that Colonel Ogareff is in Siberia?"

"I myself have heard it said that he was to take the road from Kasan to


Ekaterenburg."

"Ah! you know that, Mr. Jolivet?" said Harry Blount, roused from his
silence.

"I knew it," replied Alcide.

"And do you know that he went disguised as a gypsy!" asked Blount.

"As a gypsy!" exclaimed Michael, almost involuntarily, and he suddenly
remembered the look of the old Bohemian at Nijni-Novgorod, his voyage on
board the Caucasus, and his disembarking at Kasan.

"Just well enough to make a few remarks on the subject in a letter to my
cousin," replied Alcide, smiling.

"You lost no time at Kasan," dryly observed the Englishman.

"No, my dear fellow! and while the Caucasus was laying in her supply of
fuel, I was employed in obtaining a store of information."

Michael no longer listened to the repartee which Harry Blount and Alcide
exchanged. He was thinking of the gypsy troupe, of the old Tsigane, whose face
he had not been able to see, and of the strange woman who accompanied him,
and then of the peculiar glance which she had cast at him. Suddenly, close by he
heard a pistol-shot.

"Ah! forward, sirs!" cried he.

"Hullo!" said Alcide to himself, "this quiet merchant who always avoids
bullets is in a great hurry to go where they are flying about just now!"

Quickly followed by Harry Blount, who was not a man to be behind in
danger, he dashed after Michael. In another instant the three were opposite the
projecting rock which protected the tarantass at the turning of the road.

The clump of pines struck by the lightning was still burning. There was no
one to be seen. However, Michael was not mistaken. Suddenly a dreadful
growling was heard, and then another report.

"A bear;" cried Michael, who could not mistake the growling. "Nadia;
Nadia!" And drawing his cutlass from his belt, Michael bounded round the
buttress behind which the young girl had promised to wait.

The pines, completely enveloped in flames, threw a wild glare on the scene.
As Michael reached the tarantass, a huge animal retreated towards him.

It was a monstrous bear. The tempest had driven it from the woods, and it
had come to seek refuge in this cave, doubtless its habitual retreat, which Nadia
then occupied.

Two of the horses, terrified at the presence of the enormous creature,
breaking their traces, had escaped, and the iemschik, thinking only of his beasts,
leaving Nadia face to face with the bear, had gone in pursuit of them.

But the brave girl had not lost her presence of mind. The animal, which had


not at first seen her, was attacking the remaining horse. Nadia, leaving the shelter
in which she had been crouching, had run to the carriage, taken one of Michael's
revolvers, and, advancing resolutely towards the bear, had fired close to it.

The animal, slightly wounded in the shoulder, turned on the girl, who rushed
for protection behind the tarantass, but then, seeing that the horse was attempting
to break its traces, and knowing that if it did so, and the others were not
recovered, their journey could not be continued, with the most perfect coolness
she again approached the bear, and, as it raised its paws to strike her down, gave
it the contents of the second barrel.

This was the report which Michael had just heard. In an instant he was on the
spot. Another bound and he was between the bear and the girl. His arm made
one movement upwards, and the enormous beast, ripped up by that terrible knife,
fell to the ground a lifeless mass. He had executed in splendid style the famous
blow of the Siberian hunters, who endeavor not to damage the precious fur of the
bear, which fetches a high price.

"You are not wounded, sister?" said Michael, springing to the side of the
young girl.

"No, brother,” replied Nadia.

At that moment the two journalists came up. Alcide seized the horse's head,
and, in an instant, his strong wrist mastered it. His companion and he had seen
Michael's rapid stroke. "Bravo!" cried Alcide; "for a simple merchant, Mr.
Korpanoff, you handle the hunter's knife in a most masterly fashion."

"Most masterly, indeed," added Blount.

"In Siberia," replied Michael, "we are obliged to do a little of everything."

Alcide regarded him attentively. Seen in the bright glare, his knife dripping
with blood, his tall figure, his foot firm on the huge carcass, he was indeed worth
looking at.

"A formidable fellow," said Alcide to himself. Then advancing respectfully,
he saluted the young girl.

Nadia bowed slightly.

Alcide turned towards his companion. "The sister worthy of the brother!"
said he. "Now, were I a bear, I should not meddle with two so brave and so
charming."

Harry Blount, perfectly upright, stood, hat in hand, at some distance. His
companion's easy manners only increased his usual stiffness.

At that moment the iemschik, who had succeeded in recapturing his two
horses, reappeared. He cast a regretful glance at the magnificent animal lying on
the ground, loth to leave it to the birds of prey, and then proceeded once more to
harness his team.


Michael acquainted him with the travelers’ situation, and his intention of
loaning one of the horses.

"As you please," replied the iemschik. "Only, you know, two carriages
instead of one."

"All right, my friend," said Alcide, who understood the insinuation, "we will
pay double."

"Then gee up, my turtle-doves!" cried the iemschik.

Nadia again took her place in the tarantass. Michael and his companions
followed on foot. It was three o'clock. The storm still swept with terrific violence
across the defile. When the first streaks of daybreak appeared the tarantass had
reached the telga, which was still conscientiously imbedded as far as the center
of the wheel. Such being the case, it can be easily understood how a sudden jerk
would separate the front from the hinder part. One of the horses was now
harnessed by means of cords to the remains of the telga, the reporters took their
place on the singular equipage, and the two carriages started off. They had now
only to descend the Ural slopes, in doing which there was not the slightest
difficulty.

Six hours afterwards the two vehicles, the tarantass preceding the telga,
arrived at Ekaterenburg, nothing worthy of note having happened in the descent.

The first person the reporters perceived at the door of the post-house was
their iemschik, who appeared to be waiting for them. This worthy Russian had a
fine open countenance, and he smilingly approached the travelers, and, holding
out his hand, in a quiet tone he demanded the usual "pour-boire."

This very cool request roused Blount's ire to its highest pitch, and had not the
iemschik prudently retreated, a straight-out blow of the fist, in true British
boxing style, would have paid his claim of "na vodkou."

Alcide Jolivet, at this burst of anger, laughed as he had never laughed before.

"But the poor devil is quite right!" he cried. "He is perfectly right, my dear
fellow. It is not his fault if we did not know how to follow him!"

Then drawing several copecks from his pocket, "Here my friend," said he,
handing them to the iemschik; "take them. If you have not earned them, that is
not your fault.”

This redoubled Mr. Blount's irritation. He even began to speak of a lawsuit
against the owner of the telga.

"A lawsuit in Russia, my dear fellow!" cried Alcide. "Things must indeed
change should it ever be brought to a conclusion! Did you never hear the story of
the wet-nurse who claimed payment of twelve months' nursing of some poor
little infant?"

"T never heard it," replied Harry Blount.


"Then you do not know what that suckling had become by the time judgment
was given in favor of the nurse?"

"What was he, pray?"

"Colonel of the Imperial Guard!"

At this reply all burst into a laugh.

Alcide, enchanted with his own joke, drew out his notebook, and in it wrote
the following memorandum, destined to figure in a forthcoming French and
Russian dictionary: "Telga, a Russian carriage with four wheels, that is when it
starts; with two wheels, when it arrives at its destination."


CHAPTER XII PROVOCATION


EKATERENBURG, geographically, is an Asiatic city; for it is situated
beyond the Ural Mountains, on the farthest eastern slopes of the chain.
Nevertheless, it belongs to the government of Perm; and, consequently, is
included in one of the great divisions of European Russia. It is as though a
morsel of Siberia lay in Russian jaws.

Neither Michael nor his companions were likely to experience the slightest
difficulty in obtaining means of continuing their journey in so large a town as
Ekaterenburg. It was founded in 1723, and has since become a place of
considerable size, for in it is the chief mint of the empire. There also are the
headquarters of the officials employed in the management of the mines. Thus the
town is the center of an important district, abounding in manufactories
principally for the working and refining of gold and platina.

Just now the population of Ekaterenburg had greatly increased; many
Russians and Siberians, menaced by the Tartar invasion, having collected there.
Thus, though it had been so troublesome a matter to find horses and vehicles
when going to Ekaterenburg, there was no difficulty in leaving it; for under
present circumstances few travelers cared to venture on the Siberian roads.

So it happened that Blount and Alcide had not the slightest trouble in
replacing, by a sound telga, the famous demi-carriage which had managed to
take them to Ekaterenburg. As to Michael, he retained his tarantass, which was
not much the worse for its journey across the Urals; and he had only to harness
three good horses to it to take him swiftly over the road to Irkutsk.

As far as Tioumen, and even up to Novo-Zaimskoe, this road has slight
inclines, which gentle undulations are the first signs of the slopes of the Ural
Mountains. But after Novo-Zaimskoe begins the immense steppe.

At Ichim, as we have said, the reporters intended to stop, that is at about four
hundred and twenty miles from Ekaterenburg. There they intended to be guided
by circumstances as to their route across the invaded country, either together or
separately, according as their news-hunting instinct set them on one track or
another.

This road from Ekaterenburg to Ichim--which passes through Irkutsk--was
the only one which Michael could take. But, as he did not run after news, and
wished, on the contrary, to avoid the country devastated by the invaders, he
determined to stop nowhere.

"IT am very happy to make part of my journey in your company," said he to


his new companions, "but I must tell you that I am most anxious to reach Omsk;
for my sister and I are going to rejoin our mother. Who can say whether we shall
arrive before the Tartars reach the town! I must therefore stop at the post-houses
only long enough to change horses, and must travel day and night."

"That is exactly what we intend doing," replied Blount.

"Good," replied Michael; "but do not lose an instant. Buy or hire a carriage
whose--"

"Whose hind wheels," added Alcide, "are warranted to arrive at the same
time as its front wheels."

Half an hour afterwards the energetic Frenchman had found a tarantass in
which he and his companion at once seated themselves. Michael and Nadia once
more entered their own carriage, and at twelve o'clock the two vehicles left the
town of Ekaterenburg together.

Nadia was at last in Siberia, on that long road which led to Irkutsk. What
must then have been the thoughts of the young girl? Three strong swift horses
were taking her across that land of exile where her parent was condemned to
live, for how long she knew not, and so far from his native land. But she scarcely
noticed those long steppes over which the tarantass was rolling, and which at one
time she had despaired of ever seeing, for her eyes were gazing at the horizon,
beyond which she knew her banished father was. She saw nothing of the country
across which she was traveling at the rate of fifteen versts an hour; nothing of
these regions of Western Siberia, so different from those of the east. Here,
indeed, were few cultivated fields; the soil was poor, at least at the surface, but in
its bowels lay hid quantities of iron, copper, platina, and gold. How can hands be
found to cultivate the land, when it pays better to burrow beneath the earth? The
pickaxe is everywhere at work; the spade nowhere.

However, Nadia's thoughts sometimes left the provinces of Lake Baikal, and
returned to her present situation. Her father's image faded away, and was
replaced by that of her generous companion as he first appeared on the Vladimir
railroad. She recalled his attentions during that journey, his arrival at the police-
station, the hearty simplicity with which he had called her sister, his kindness to
her in the descent of the Volga, and then all that he did for her on that terrible
night of the storm in the Urals, when he saved her life at the peril of his own.

Thus Nadia thought of Michael. She thanked God for having given her such
a gallant protector, a friend so generous and wise. She knew that she was safe
with him, under his protection. No brother could have done more than he. All
obstacles seemed cleared away; the performance of her journey was but a matter
of time.

Michael remained buried in thought. He also thanked God for having


brought about this meeting with Nadia, which at the same time enabled him to
do a good action, and afforded him additional means for concealing his true
character. He delighted in the young girl's calm intrepidity. Was she not indeed
his sister? His feeling towards his beautiful and brave companion was rather
respect than affection. He felt that hers was one of those pure and rare hearts
which are held by all in high esteem.

However, Michael's dangers were now beginning, since he had reached
Siberian ground. If the reporters were not mistaken, if Ivan Ogareff had really
passed the frontier, all his actions must be made with extreme caution. Things
were now altered; Tartar spies swarmed in the Siberian provinces. His incognito
once discovered, his character as courier of the Czar known, there was an end of
his journey, and probably of his life. Michael felt now more than ever the weight
of his responsibility.

While such were the thoughts of those occupying the first carriage, what was
happening in the second? Nothing out of the way. Alcide spoke in sentences;
Blount replied by monosyllables. Each looked at everything in his own light, and
made notes of such incidents as occurred on the journey--few and but slightly
varied--while they crossed the provinces of Western Siberia.

At each relay the reporters descended from their carriage and found
themselves with Michael. Except when meals were to be taken at the post-
houses, Nadia did not leave the tarantass. When obliged to breakfast or dine, she
sat at table, but was always very reserved, and seldom joined in conversation.

Alcide, without going beyond the limits of strict propriety, showed that he
was greatly struck by the young girl. He admired the silent energy which she
showed in bearing all the fatigues of so difficult a journey.

The forced stoppages were anything but agreeable to Michael; so he
hastened the departure at each relay, roused the innkeepers, urged on the
iemschiks, and expedited the harnessing of the tarantass. Then the hurried meal
over--always much too hurried to agree with Blount, who was a methodical
eater--they started, and were driven as eagles, for they paid like princes.

It need scarcely be said that Blount did not trouble himself about the girl at
table. That gentleman was not in the habit of doing two things at once. She was
also one of the few subjects of conversation which he did not care to discuss
with his companion.

Alcide having asked him, on one occasion, how old he thought the girl,
"What girl?" he replied, quite seriously.

"Why, Nicholas Korpanoff's sister."

"Is she his sister?"

"No; his grandmother!" replied Alcide, angry at his indifference. "What age


should you consider her?"

"Had I been present at her birth I might have known."

Very few of the Siberian peasants were to be seen in the fields. These
peasants are remarkable for their pale, grave faces, which a celebrated traveler
has compared to those of the Castilians, without the haughtiness of the latter.
Here and there some villages already deserted indicated the approach of the
Tartar hordes. The inhabitants, having driven off their flocks of sheep, their
camels, and their horses, were taking refuge in the plains of the north. Some
tribes of the wandering Kirghiz, who remained faithful, had transported their
tents beyond the Irtych, to escape the depredations of the invaders.

Happily, post traveling was as yet uninterrupted; and_ telegraphic
communication could still be effected between places connected with the wire.
At each relay horses were to be had on the usual conditions. At each telegraphic
station the clerks transmitted messages delivered to them, delaying for State
dispatches alone.

Thus far, then, Michael's journey had been accomplished satisfactorily. The
courier of the Czar had in no way been impeded; and, if he could only get on to
Krasnoiarsk, which seemed the farthest point attained by Feofar-Khan's Tartars,
he knew that he could arrive at Irkutsk, before them. The day after the two
carriages had left Ekaterenburg they reached the small town of Toulouguisk at
seven o'clock in the morning, having covered two hundred and twenty versts, no
event worthy of mention having occurred. The same evening, the 22d of July,
they arrived at Tioumen.

Tioumen, whose population is usually ten thousand inhabitants, then
contained double that number. This, the first industrial town established by the
Russians in Siberia, in which may be seen a fine metal-refining factory and a
bell foundry, had never before presented such an animated appearance. The
correspondents immediately went off after news. That brought by Siberian
fugitives from the seat of war was far from reassuring. They said, amongst other
things, that Feofar-Khan's army was rapidly approaching the valley of the Ichim,
and they confirmed the report that the Tartar chief was soon to be joined by
Colonel Ogareff, if he had not been so already. Hence the conclusion was that
operations would be pushed in Eastern Siberia with the greatest activity.
However, the loyal Cossacks of the government of Tobolsk were advancing by
forced marches towards Tomsk, in the hope of cutting off the Tartar columns.

At midnight the town of Novo-Saimsk was reached; and the travelers now
left behind them the country broken by tree-covered hills, the last remains of the
Urals.

Here began the regular Siberian steppe which extends to the neighborhood of


Krasnoiarsk. It is a boundless plain, a vast grassy desert; earth and sky here form
a circle as distinct as that traced by a sweep of the compasses. The steppe
presents nothing to attract notice but the long line of the telegraph posts, their
wires vibrating in the breeze like the strings of a harp. The road could be
distinguished from the rest of the plain only by the clouds of fine dust which
rose under the wheels of the tarantass. Had it not been for this white riband,
which stretched away as far as the eye could reach, the travelers might have
thought themselves in a desert.

Michael and his companions again pressed rapidly forward. The horses,
urged on by the iemschik, seemed to fly over the ground, for there was not the
slightest obstacle to impede them. The tarantass was going straight for Ichim,
where the two correspondents intended to stop, if nothing happened to make
them alter their plans.

A hundred and twenty miles separated Novo-Saimsk from the town of Ichim,
and before eight o'clock the next evening the distance could and should be
accomplished if no time was lost. In the opinion of the iemschiks, should the
travelers not be great lords or high functionaries, they were worthy of being so,
if it was only for their generosity in the matter of "na vodkou."

On the afternoon of the next day, the 23rd of July, the two carriages were not
more than thirty versts from Ichim. Suddenly Michael caught sight of a carriage-
-scarcely visible among the clouds of dust--preceding them along the road. As
his horses were evidently less fatigued than those of the other traveler, he would
not be long in overtaking it. This was neither a tarantass nor a telga, but a post-
berlin, which looked as if it had made a long journey. The postillion was
thrashing his horses with all his might, and only kept them at a gallop by dint of
abuse and blows. The berlin had certainly not passed through Novo-Saimsk, and
could only have struck the Irkutsk road by some less frequented route across the
steppe.

Our travelers’ first thought, on seeing this berlin, was to get in front of it, and
arrive first at the relay, so as to make sure of fresh horses. They said a word to
their iemschiks, who soon brought them up with the berlin.

Michael Strogoff came up first. As he passed, a head was thrust out of the
window of the berlin.

He had not time to see what it was like, but as he dashed by he distinctly
heard this word, uttered in an imperious tone: "Stop!"

But they did not stop; on the contrary, the berlin was soon distanced by the
two tarantasses.

It now became a regular race; for the horses of the berlin--no doubt excited
by the sight and pace of the others--recovered their strength and kept up for


some minutes. The three carriages were hidden in a cloud of dust. From this
cloud issued the cracking of whips mingled with excited shouts and
exclamations of anger.

Nevertheless, the advantage remained with Michael and his companions,
which might be very important to them if the relay was poorly provided with
horses. Two carriages were perhaps more than the postmaster could provide for,
at least in a short space of time.

Half an hour after the berlin was left far behind, looking only a speck on the
horizon of the steppe.

It was eight o'clock in the evening when the two carriages reached Ichim.
The news was worse and worse with regard to the invasion. The town itself was
menaced by the Tartar vanguard; and two days before the authorities had been
obliged to retreat to Tobolsk. There was not an officer nor a soldier left in Ichim.

On arriving at the relay, Michael Strogoff immediately asked for horses. He
had been fortunate in distancing the berlin. Only three horses were fit to be
harnessed. The others had just come in worn out from a long stage.

As the two correspondents intended to stop at Ichim, they had not to trouble
themselves to find transport, and had their carriage put away. In ten minutes
Michael was told that his tarantass was ready to start.

"Good," said he.

Then turning to the two reporters: "Well, gentlemen, the time is come for us
to separate."

"What, Mr. Korpanoff," said Alcide Jolivet, "shall you not stop even for an
hour at Ichim?"

"No, sir; and I also wish to leave the post-house before the arrival of the
berlin which we distanced."

"Are you afraid that the traveler will dispute the horses with you?"

"I particularly wish to avoid any difficulty."

"Then, Mr. Korpanoff," said Jolivet, "it only remains for us to thank you
once more for the service you rendered us, and the pleasure we have had in
traveling with you."

"It is possible that we shall meet you again in a few days at Omsk," added
Blount.

"It is possible," answered Michael, "since I am going straight there."

"Well, I wish you a safe journey, Mr. Korpanoff," said Alcide, "and Heaven
preserve you from telgas."

The two reporters held out their hands to Michael with the intention of
cordially shaking his, when the sound of a carriage was heard outside. Almost
immediately the door was flung open and a man appeared.


It was the traveler of the berlin, a military-looking man, apparently about
forty years of age, tall, robust in figure, broad-shouldered, with a strongly-set
head, and thick mus-taches meeting red whiskers. He wore a plain uniform. A
cavalry saber hung at his side, and in his hand he held a short-handled whip.

"Horses," he demanded, with the air of a man accustomed to command.

"I have no more disposable horses," answered the postmaster, bowing.

"I must have some this moment."

"It is impossible."

"What are those horses which have just been harnessed to the tarantass I saw
at the door?"

"They belong to this traveler," answered the postmaster, pointing to Michael
Strogoff.

"Take them out!" said the traveler in a tone which admitted of no reply.

Michael then advanced.

"These horses are engaged by me," he said.

"What does that matter? I must have them. Come, be quick; I have no time to
lose."

"IT have no time to lose either," replied Michael, restraining himself with
difficulty.

Nadia was near him, calm also, but secretly uneasy at a scene which it would
have been better to avoid.

"Enough!" said the traveler. Then, going up to the postmaster, "Let the horses
be put into my berlin," he exclaimed with a threatening gesture.

The postmaster, much embarrassed, did not know whom to obey, and looked
at Michael, who evidently had the right to resist the unjust demands of the
traveler.

Michael hesitated an instant. He did not wish to make use of his podorojna,
which would have drawn attention to him, and he was most unwilling also, by
giving up his horses, to delay his journey, and yet he must not engage in a
struggle which might compromise his mission.

The two reporters looked at him ready to support him should he appeal to
them.

"My horses will remain in my carriage," said Michael, but without raising his
tone more than would be suitable for a plain Irkutsk merchant.

The traveler advanced towards Michael and laid his hand heavily on his
shoulder. "Is it so?" he said roughly. "You will not give up your horses to me?"

"No," answered Michael.

"Very well, they shall belong to whichever of us is able to start. Defend
yourself; I shall not spare you!"


So saying, the traveler drew his saber from its sheath, and Nadia threw
herself before Michael.

Blount and Alcide Jolivet advanced towards him.

"I shall not fight," said Michael quietly, folding his arms across his chest.

"You will not fight?"

"No."

"Not even after this?" exclaimed the traveler. And before anyone could
prevent him, he struck Michael's shoulder with the handle of the whip. At this
insult Michael turned deadly pale. His hands moved convulsively as if he would
have knocked the brute down. But by a tremendous effort he mastered himself. A
duel! it was more than a delay; it was perhaps the failure of his mission. It would
be better to lose some hours. Yes; but to swallow this affront!

"Will you fight now, coward?" repeated the traveler, adding coarseness to
brutality.

"No," answered Michael, without moving, but looking the other straight in
the face.

"The horses this moment," said the man, and left the room.

The postmaster followed him, after shrugging his shoulders and bestowing
on Michael a glance of anything but approbation.

The effect produced on the reporters by this incident was not to Michael's
advantage. Their discomfiture was visible. How could this strong young man
allow himself to be struck like that and not demand satisfaction for such an
insult? They contented themselves with bowing to him and retired, Jolivet
remarking to Harry Blount

"I could not have believed that of a man who is so skillful in finishing up
Ural Mountain bears. Is it the case that a man can be courageous at one time and
a coward at another? It is quite incomprehensible."

A moment afterwards the noise of wheels and whip showed that the berlin,
drawn by the tarantass' horses, was driving rapidly away from the post-house.

Nadia, unmoved, and Michael, still quivering, remained alone in the room.
The courier of the Czar, his arms crossed over his chest was seated motionless as
a statue. A color, which could not have been the blush of shame, had replaced the
paleness on his countenance.

Nadia did not doubt that powerful reasons alone could have allowed him to
suffer so great a humiliation from such a man. Going up to him as he had come
to her in the police-station at Nijni-Novgorod:

"Your hand, brother," said she.

And at the same time her hand, with an almost maternal gesture, wiped away
a tear which sprang to her companion's eye.


CHAPTER XIII DUTY BEFORE EVERYTHING


NADIA, with the clear perception of a right-minded woman, guessed that
some secret motive directed all Michael Strogoff's actions; that he, for a reason
unknown to her, did not belong to himself; and that in this instance especially he
had heroically sacrificed to duty even his resentment at the gross injury he had
received.

Nadia, therefore, asked no explanation from Michael. Had not the hand
which she had extended to him already replied to all that he might have been
able to tell her?

Michael remained silent all the evening. The postmaster not being able to
supply them with fresh horses until the next morning, a whole night must be
passed at the house. Nadia could profit by it to take some rest, and a room was
therefore prepared for her.

The young girl would no doubt have preferred not to leave her companion,
but she felt that he would rather be alone, and she made ready to go to her room.

Just as she was about to retire she could not refrain from going up to Michael
to say good-night.

"Brother," she whispered. But he checked her with a gesture. The girl sighed
and left the room.

Michael Strogoff did not lie down. He could not have slept even for an hour.
The place on which he had been struck by the brutal traveler felt like a burn.

"For my country and the Father," he muttered as he ended his evening prayer.

He especially felt a great wish to know who was the man who had struck
him, whence he came, and where he was going. As to his face, the features of it
were so deeply engraven on his memory that he had no fear of ever forgetting
them.

Michael Strogoff at last asked for the postmaster. The latter, a Siberian of the
old type, came directly, and looking rather contemptuously at the young man,
waited to be questioned.

"You belong to the country?" asked Michael.

"Yes."

"Do you know that man who took my horses?"

"No."

"Had you never seen him before?"

"Never."

"Who do you think he was?"


"A man who knows how to make himself obeyed."

Michael fixed his piercing gaze upon the Siberian, but the other did not quail
before it.

"Do you dare to judge me?" exclaimed Michael.

"Yes," answered the Siberian, "there are some things even a plain merchant
cannot receive without returning."

"Blows?"

"Blows, young man. I am of an age and strength to tell you so."

Michael went up to the postmaster and laid his two powerful hands on his
shoulders.

Then in a peculiarly calm tone, "Be off, my friend," said he: "be off! I could
kill you."

The postmaster understood. "I like him better for that," he muttered and
retired without another word.

At eight o'clock the next morning, the 24th of July, three strong horses were
harnessed to the tarantass. Michael Strogoff and Nadia took their places, and
Ichim, with its disagreeable remembrances, was soon left far behind.

At the different relays at which they stopped during the day Strogoff
ascertained that the berlin still preceded them on the road to Irkutsk, and that the
traveler, as hurried as they were, never lost a minute in pursuing his way across
the steppe.

At four o'clock in the evening they reached Abatskaia, fifty miles farther on,
where the Ichim, one of the principal affluents of the Irtych, had to be crossed.
This passage was rather more difficult than that of the Tobol. Indeed the current
of the Ichim was very rapid just at that place. During the Siberian winter, the
rivers being all frozen to a thickness of several feet, they are easily practicable,
and the traveler even crosses them without being aware of the fact, for their beds
have disappeared under the snowy sheet spread uniformly over the steppe; but in
summer the difficulties of crossing are sometimes great.

In fact, two hours were taken up in making the passage of the Ichim, which
much exasperated Michael, especially as the boatmen gave them alarming news
of the Tartar invasion. Some of Feofar-Khan's scouts had already appeared on
both banks of the lower Ichim, in the southern parts of the government of
Tobolsk. Omsk was threatened. They spoke of an engagement which had taken
place between the Siberian and Tartar troops on the frontier of the great Kirghese
horde--an engagement not to the advantage of the Russians, who were weak in
numbers. The troops had retreated thence, and in consequence there had been a
general emigration of all the peasants of the province. The boatmen spoke of
horrible atrocities committed by the invaders--pillage, theft, incendiarism,


murder. Such was the system of Tartar warfare.

The people all fled before Feofar-Khan. Michael Strogoff's great fear was
lest, in the depopulation of the towns, he should be unable to obtain the means of
transport. He was therefore extremely anxious to reach Omsk. Perhaps there they
would get the start of the Tartar scouts, who were coming down the valley of the
Irtych, and would find the road open to Irkutsk.

Just at the place where the tarantass crossed the river ended what is called, in
military language, the "Ichim chain"--a chain of towers, or little wooden forts,
extending from the southern frontier of Siberia for a distance of nearly four
hundred versts. Formerly these forts were occupied by detachments of Cossacks,
and they protected the country against the Kirghese, as well as against the
Tartars. But since the Muscovite Government had believed these hordes reduced
to absolute submission, they had been abandoned, and now could not be used;
just at the time when they were needed. Many of these forts had been reduced to
ashes; and the boatmen even pointed out the smoke to Michael, rising in the
southern horizon, and showing the approach of the Tartar advance-guard.

As soon as the ferryboat landed the tarantass on the right bank of the Ichim,
the journey across the steppe was resumed with all speed. Michael Strogoff
remained very silent. He was, however, always attentive to Nadia, helping her to
bear the fatigue of this long journey without break or rest; but the girl never
complained. She longed to give wings to the horses. Something told her that her
companion was even more anxious than herself to reach Irkutsk; and how many
versts were still between!

It also occurred to her that if Omsk was entered by the Tartars, Michael's
mother, who lived there, would be in danger, and that this was sufficient to
explain her son's impatience to get to her.

Nadia at last spoke to him of old Marfa, and of how unprotected she would
be in the midst of all these events.

"Have you received any news of your mother since the beginning of the
invasion?" she asked.

"None, Nadia. The last letter my mother wrote to me contained good news.
Marfa is a brave and energetic Siberian woman. Notwithstanding her age, she
has preserved all her moral strength. She knows how to suffer."

"T shall see her, brother," said Nadia quickly. "Since you give me the name of
sister, | am Marfa's daughter."

And as Michael did not answer she added:

"Perhaps your mother has been able to leave Omsk?"

"It is possible, Nadia," replied Michael; "and I hope she may have reached
Tobolsk. Marfa hates the Tartars. She knows the steppe, and would have no fear


in just taking her staff and going down the banks of the Irtych. There is not a
spot in all the province unknown to her. Many times has she traveled all over the
country with my father; and many times I myself, when a mere child, have
accompanied them across the Siberian desert. Yes, Nadia, I trust that my mother
has left Omsk."

"And when shall you see her?"

"T shall see her--on my return."

"If, however, your mother is still at Omsk, you will be able to spare an hour
to go to her?"

"T shall not go and see her."

"You will not see her?"

"No, Nadia," said Michael, his chest heaving as he felt he could not go on
replying to the girl's questions.

"You say no! Why, brother, if your mother is still at Omsk, for what reason
could you refuse to see her?"

"For what reason, Nadia? You ask me for what reason," exclaimed Michael,
in so changed a voice that the young girl started. "For the same reason as that
which made me patient even to cowardice with the villain who--" He could not
finish his sentence.

"Calm yourself, brother," said Nadia in a gentle voice. "I only know one
thing, or rather I do not know it, I feel it. It is that all your conduct is now
directed by the sentiment of a duty more sacred--if there can be one--than that
which unites the son to the mother."

Nadia was silent, and from that moment avoided every subject which in any
way touched on Michael's peculiar situation. He had a secret motive which she
must respect. She respected it.

The next day, July 25th, at three o'clock in the morning, the tarantass arrived
at Tioukalmsk, having accomplished a distance of eighty miles since it had
crossed the Ichim. They rapidly changed horses. Here, however, for the first
time, the iemschik made difficulties about starting, declaring that detachments of
Tartars were roving across the steppe, and that travelers, horses, and carriages
would be a fine prize for them.

Only by dint of a large bribe could Michael get over the unwillingness of the
iemschik, for in this instance, as in many others, he did not wish to show his
podorojna. The last ukase, having been transmitted by telegraph, was known in
the Siberian provinces; and a Russian specially exempted from obeying these
words would certainly have drawn public attention to himself--a thing above all
to be avoided by the Czar's courier. As to the iemschik's hesitation, either the
rascal traded on the traveler's impatience or he really had good reason to fear.


However, at last the tarantass started, and made such good way that by three
in the afternoon it had reached Koulatsinskoe, fifty miles farther on. An hour
after this it was on the banks of the Irtych. Omsk was now only fourteen miles
distant.

The Irtych is a large river, and one of the principal of those which flow
towards the north of Asia. Rising in the Altai Mountains, it flows from the
southeast to the northwest and empties itself into the Obi, after a course of four
thousand miles.

At this time of year, when all the rivers of the Siberian basin are much
swollen, the waters of the Irtych were very high. In consequence the current was
changed to a regular torrent, rendering the passage difficult enough. A swimmer
could not have crossed, however powerful; and even in a ferryboat there would
be some danger.

But Michael and Nadia, determined to brave all perils whatever they might
be, did not dream of shrinking from this one. Michael proposed to his young
companion that he should cross first, embarking in the ferryboat with the
tarantass and horses, as he feared that the weight of this load would render it less
safe. After landing the carriage he would return and fetch Nadia.

The girl refused. It would be the delay of an hour, and she would not, for her
safety alone, be the cause of it.

The embarkation was made not without difficulty, for the banks were partly
flooded and the boat could not get in near enough. However, after half an hour's
exertion, the boatmen got the tarantass and the three horses on board. The
passengers embarked also, and they shoved off.

For a few minutes all went well. A little way up the river the current was
broken by a long point projecting from the bank, and forming an eddy easily
crossed by the boat. The two boatmen propelled their barge with long poles,
which they handled cleverly; but as they gained the middle of the stream it grew
deeper and deeper, until at last they could only just reach the bottom. The ends
of the poles were only a foot above the water, which rendered their use difficult.
Michael and Nadia, seated in the stern of the boat, and always in dread of a
delay, watched the boatmen with some uneasiness.

"Look out!" cried one of them to his comrade.

The shout was occasioned by the new direction the boat was rapidly taking.
It had got into the direct current and was being swept down the river. By diligent
use of the poles, putting the ends in a series of notches cut below the gunwale,
the boatmen managed to keep the craft against the stream, and slowly urged it in
a slanting direction towards the right bank.

They calculated on reaching it some five or six versts below the landing


place; but, after all, that would not matter so long as men and beasts could
disembark without accident. The two stout boatmen, stimulated moreover by the
promise of double fare, did not doubt of succeeding in this difficult passage of
the Irtych.

But they reckoned without an accident which they were powerless to
prevent, and neither their zeal nor their skillfulness could, under the
circumstances, have done more.

The boat was in the middle of the current, at nearly equal distances from
either shore, and being carried down at the rate of two versts an hour, when
Michael, springing to his feet, bent his gaze up the river.

Several boats, aided by oars as well as by the current, were coming swiftly
down upon them.

Michael's brow contracted, and a cry escaped him.

"What is the matter?" asked the girl.

But before Michael had time to reply one of the boatmen exclaimed in an
accent of terror:

"The Tartars! the Tartars!"

There were indeed boats full of soldiers, and in a few minutes they must
reach the ferryboat, it being too heavily laden to escape from them.

The terrified boatmen uttered exclamations of despair and dropped their
poles.

"Courage, my friends!" cried Michael; "courage! Fifty roubles for you if we
reach the right bank before the boats overtake us."

Incited by these words, the boatmen again worked manfully but it soon
become evident that they could not escape the Tartars.

It was scarcely probable that they would pass without attacking them. On the
contrary, there was everything to be feared from robbers such as these.

"Do not be afraid, Nadia," said Michael; "but be ready for anything."

"T am ready," replied Nadia.

"Even to leap into the water when I tell you?"

"Whenever you tell me."

"Have confidence in me, Nadia."

"T have, indeed!"

The Tartar boats were now only a hundred feet distant. They carried a
detachment of Bokharian soldiers, on their way to reconnoiter around Omsk.

The ferryboat was still two lengths from the shore. The boatmen redoubled
their efforts. Michael himself seized a pole and wielded it with superhuman
strength. If he could land the tarantass and horses, and dash off with them, there
was some chance of escaping the Tartars, who were not mounted.


But all their efforts were in vain. "Saryn na kitchou!" shouted the soldiers
from the first boat.

Michael recognized the Tartar war-cry, which is usually answered by lying
flat on the ground. As neither he nor the boatmen obeyed a volley was let fly,
and two of the horses were mortally wounded.

At the next moment a violent blow was felt. The boats had run into the
ferryboat.

"Come, Nadia!" cried Michael, ready to jump overboard.

The girl was about to follow him, when a blow from a lance struck him, and
he was thrown into the water. The current swept him away, his hand raised for an
instant above the waves, and then he disappeared.

Nadia uttered a cry, but before she had time to throw herself after him she
was seized and dragged into one of the boats. The boatmen were killed, the
ferryboat left to drift away, and the Tartars continued to descend the Irtych.


CHAPTER XIV MOTHER AND SON


OMSK is the official capital of Western Siberia. It is not the most important
city of the government of that name, for Tomsk has more inhabitants and is
larger. But it is at Omsk that the Governor-General of this the first half of Asiatic
Russia resides. Omsk, properly so called, is composed of two distinct towns: one
which is exclusively inhabited by the authorities and officials; the other more
especially devoted to the Siberian merchants, although, indeed, the trade of the
town is of small importance.

This city has about 12,000 to 13,000 inhabitants. It is defended by walls, but
these are merely of earth, and could afford only insufficient protection. The
Tartars, who were well aware of this fact, consequently tried at this period to
carry it by main force, and in this they succeeded, after an investment of a few
days.

The garrison of Omsk, reduced to two thousand men, resisted valiantly. But
driven back, little by little, from the mercantile portion of the place, they were
compelled to take refuge in the upper town.

It was there that the Governor-General, his officers, and soldiers had
entrenched themselves. They had made the upper quarter of Omsk a kind of
citadel, and hitherto they held out well in this species of improvised "kreml," but
without much hope of the promised succor. The Tartar troops, who were
descending the Irtych, received every day fresh reinforcements, and, what was
more serious, they were led by an officer, a traitor to his country, but a man of
much note, and of an audacity equal to any emergency. This man was Colonel
Ivan Ogareff.

Ivan Ogareff, terrible as any of the most savage Tartar chieftains, was an
educated soldier. Possessing on his mother's side some Mongolian blood, he
delighted in deceptive strategy and ambuscades, stopping short of nothing when
he desired to fathom some secret or to set some trap. Deceitful by nature, he
willingly had recourse to the vilest trickery; lying when occasion demanded,
excelling in the adoption of all disguises and in every species of deception.
Further, he was cruel, and had even acted as an executioner. Feofar-Khan
possessed in him a lieutenant well capable of seconding his designs in this
Savage wal.

When Michael Strogoff arrived on the banks of the Irtych, Ivan Ogareff was
already master of Omsk, and was pressing the siege of the upper quarter of the
town all the more eagerly because he must hasten to Tomsk, where the main


body of the Tartar army was concentrated.

Tomsk, in fact, had been taken by Feofar-Khan some days previously, and it
was thence that the invaders, masters of Central Siberia, were to march upon
Irkutsk.

Irkutsk was the real object of Ivan Ogareff. The plan of the traitor was to
reach the Grand Duke under a false name, to gain his confidence, and to deliver
into Tartar hands the town and the Grand Duke himself. With such a town, and
such a hostage, all Asiatic Siberia must necessarily fall into the hands of the
invaders. Now it was known that the Czar was acquainted with this conspiracy,
and that it was for the purpose of baffling it that a courier had been intrusted
with the important warning. Hence, therefore, the very stringent instructions
which had been given to the young courier to pass incognito through the invaded
district.

This mission he had so far faithfully performed, but now could he carry it to
a successful completion?

The blow which had struck Michael Strogoff was not mortal. By swimming
in a manner by which he had effectually concealed himself, he had reached the
right bank, where he fell exhausted among the bushes.

When he recovered his senses, he found himself in the cabin of a mujik, who
had picked him up and cared for him. For how long a time had he been the guest
of this brave Siberian? He could not guess. But when he opened his eyes he saw
the handsome bearded face bending over him, and regarding him with pitying
eyes. "Do not speak, little father," said the mujik, "Do not speak! Thou art still
too weak. I will tell thee where thou art and everything that has passed."

And the mujik related to Michael Strogoff the different incidents of the
struggle which he had witnessed--the attack upon the ferry by the Tartar boats,
the pillage of the tarantass, and the massacre of the boatmen.

But Michael Strogoff listened no longer, and slipping his hand under his
garment he felt the imperial letter still secured in his breast. He breathed a sigh
of relief.

But that was not all. "A young girl accompanied me," said he.

"They have not killed her," replied the mujik, anticipating the anxiety which
he read in the eyes of his guest. "They have carried her off in their boat, and
have continued the descent of Irtych. It is only one prisoner more to join the
many they are taking to Tomsk!"

Michael Strogoff was unable to reply. He pressed his hand upon his heart to
restrain its beating. But, notwithstanding these many trials, the sentiment of duty
mastered his whole soul. "Where am I?" asked he.

"Upon the right bank of the Irtych, only five versts from Omsk," replied the


mujik.

"What wound can I have received which could have thus prostrated me? It
was not a gunshot wound?"

"No; a lance-thrust in the head, now healing," replied the mujik. "After a few
days' rest, little father, thou wilt be able to proceed. Thou didst fall into the river;
but the Tartars neither touched nor searched thee; and thy purse is still in thy
pocket."

Michael Strogoff gripped the mujik's hand. Then, recovering himself with a
sudden effort, "Friend," said he, "how long have I been in thy hut?"

"Three days."

"Three days lost!"

"Three days hast thou lain unconscious."

"Hast thou a horse to sell me?"

"Thou wishest to go?"

"At once."

"I have neither horse nor carriage, little father. Where the Tartar has passed
there remains nothing!"

"Well, I will go on foot to Omsk to find a horse."

"A few more hours of rest, and thou wilt be in a better condition to pursue
thy journey."

"Not an hour!"

"Come now," replied the mujik, recognizing the fact that it was useless to
struggle against the will of his guest, "I will guide thee myself. Besides," he
added, "the Russians are still in great force at Omsk, and thou couldst, perhaps,
pass unperceived."

"Friend," replied Michael Strogoff, "Heaven reward thee for all thou hast
done for me!"

"Only fools expect reward on earth," replied the mujik.

Michael Strogoff went out of the hut. When he tried to walk he was seized
with such faintness that, without the assistance of the mujik, he would have
fallen; but the fresh air quickly revived him. He then felt the wound in his head,
the violence of which his fur cap had lessened. With the energy which he
possessed, he was not a man to succumb under such a trifle. Before his eyes lay
a single goal--far-distant Irkutsk. He must reach it! But he must pass through
Omsk without stopping there.

"God protect my mother and Nadia!" he murmured. "I have no longer the
right to think of them!"

Michael Strogoff and the mujik soon arrived in the mercantile quarter of the
lower town. The surrounding earthwork had been destroyed in many places, and


there were the breaches through which the marauders who followed the armies
of Feofar-Khan had penetrated. Within Omsk, in its streets and squares, the
Tartar soldiers swarmed like ants; but it was easy to see that a hand of iron
imposed upon them a discipline to which they were little accustomed. They
walked nowhere alone, but in armed groups, to defend themselves against
surprise.

In the chief square, transformed into a camp, guarded by many sentries,
2,000 Tartars bivouacked. The horses, picketed but still saddled, were ready to
start at the first order. Omsk could only be a temporary halting-place for this
Tartar cavalry, which preferred the rich plains of Eastern Siberia, where the
towns were more wealthy, and, consequently, pillage more profitable.

Above the mercantile town rose the upper quarter, which Ivan Ogareff,
notwithstanding several assaults vigorously made but bravely repelled, had not
yet been able to reduce. Upon its embattled walls floated the national colors of
Russia.

It was not without a legitimate pride that Michael Strogoff and his guide,
vowing fidelity, saluted them.

Michael Strogoff was perfectly acquainted with the town of Omsk, and he
took care to avoid those streets which were much frequented. This was not from
any fear of being recognized. In the town his old mother only could have called
him by name, but he had sworn not to see her, and he did not. Besides--and he
wished it with his whole heart--she might have fled into some quiet portion of
the steppe.

The mujik very fortunately knew a postmaster who, if well paid, would not
refuse at his request either to let or to sell a carriage or horses. There remained
the difficulty of leaving the town, but the breaches in the fortifications would, of
course, facilitate his departure.

The mujik was accordingly conducting his guest straight to the posting-
house, when, in a narrow street, Michael Strogoff, coming to a sudden stop
sprang behind a jutting wall.

"What is the matter?" asked the astonished mujik.

"Silence!" replied Michael, with his finger on his lips. At this moment a
detachment debouched from the principal square into the street which Michael
Strogoff and his companion had just been following.

At the head of the detachment, composed of twenty horsemen, was an officer
dressed in a very simple uniform. Although he glanced rapidly from one side to
the other he could not have seen Michael Strogoff, owing to his precipitous
retreat.

The detachment went at full trot into the narrow street. Neither the officer


nor his escort concerned themselves about the inhabitants. Several unlucky ones
had scarcely time to make way for their passage. There were a few half-stifled
cries, to which thrusts of the lance gave an instant reply, and the street was
immediately cleared.

When the escort had disappeared, "Who is that officer?" asked Michael
Strogoff. And while putting the question his face was pale as that of a corpse.

"It is Ivan Ogareff," replied the Siberian, in a deep voice which breathed
hatred.

"He!" cried Michael Strogoff, from whom the word escaped with a fury he
could not conquer. He had just recognized in this officer the traveler who had
struck him at the posting-house of Ichim. And, although he had only caught a
glimpse of him, it burst upon his mind, at the same time, that this traveler was
the old Zingari whose words he had overheard in the market place of Nijni-
Novgorod.

Michael Strogoff was not mistaken. The two men were one and the same. It
was under the garb of a Zingari, mingling with the band of Sangarre, that Ivan
Ogareff had been able to leave the town of Nijni-Novgorod, where he had gone
to seek his confidants. Sangarre and her Zingari, well paid spies, were absolutely
devoted to him. It was he who, during the night, on the fair-ground had uttered
that singular sentence, which Michael Strogoff could not understand; it was he
who was voyaging on board the Caucasus, with the whole of the Bohemian
band; it was he who, by this other route, from Kasan to Ichim, across the Urals,
had reached Omsk, where now he held supreme authority.

Ivan Ogareff had been barely three days at Omsk, and had it not been for
their fatal meeting at Ichim, and for the event which had detained him three days
on the banks of the Irtych, Michael Strogoff would have evidently beaten him on
the way to Irkutsk.

And who knows how many misfortunes would have been avoided in the
future! In any case--and now more than ever--Michael Strogoff must avoid Ivan
Ogareff, and contrive not to be seen. When the moment of encountering him face
to face should arrive, he knew how to meet it, even should the traitor be master
of the whole of Siberia.

The mujik and Michael resumed their way and arrived at the posting-house.
To leave Omsk by one of the breaches would not be difficult after nightfall. As
for purchasing a carriage to replace the tarantass, that was impossible. There
were none to be let or sold. But what want had Michael Strogoff now for a
carriage? Was he not alone, alas? A horse would suffice him; and, very
fortunately, a horse could be had. It was an animal of strength and mettle, and
Michael Strogoff, accomplished horseman as he was, could make good use of it.


It was four o'clock in the afternoon. Michael Strogoff, compelled to wait till
nightfall, in order to pass the fortifications, but not desiring to show himself,
remained in the posting-house, and there partook of food.

There was a great crowd in the public room. They were talking of the
expected arrival of a corps of Muscovite troops, not at Omsk, but at Tomsk--a
corps intended to recapture that town from the Tartars of Feofar-Khan.

Michael Strogoff lent an attentive ear, but took no part in the conversation.
Suddenly a cry made him tremble, a cry which penetrated to the depths of his
soul, and these two words rushed into his ear: "My son!"

His mother, the old woman Marfa, was before him! Trembling, she smiled
upon him. She stretched forth her arms to him. Michael Strogoff arose. He was
about to throw himself--

The thought of duty, the serious danger for his mother and himself in this
unfortunate meeting, suddenly stopped him, and such was his command over
himself that not a muscle of his face moved. There were twenty people in the
public room. Among them were, perhaps, spies, and was it not known in the
town that the son of Marfa Strogoff belonged to the corps of the couriers of the
Czar?

Michael Strogoff did not move.

"Michael!" cried his mother.

"Who are you, my good lady?" Michael Strogoff stammered, unable to speak
in his usual firm tone.

"Who am I, thou askest! Dost thou no longer know thy mother?"

"You are mistaken," coldly replied Michael Strogoff. "A resemblance
deceives you."

The old Marfa went up to him, and, looking straight into his eyes, said,
"Thou art not the son of Peter and Marfa Strogoff?"

Michael Strogoff would have given his life to have locked his mother in his
arms; but if he yielded it was all over with him, with her, with his mission, with
his oath! Completely master of himself, he closed his eyes, in order not to see
the inexpressible anguish which agitated the revered countenance of his mother.
He drew back his hands, in order not to touch those trembling hands which
sought him. "I do not know in truth what it is you say, my good woman," he
replied, stepping back.

"Michael!" again cried his aged mother.

"My name is not Michael. I never was your son! I am Nicholas Korpanoff, a
merchant at Irkutsk."

And suddenly he left the public room, whilst for the last time the words re-
echoed, "My son! my son!"


Michael Strogoff, by a desperate effort, had gone. He did not see his old
mother, who had fallen back almost inanimate upon a bench. But when the
postmaster hastened to assist her, the aged woman raised herself. Suddenly a
thought occurred to her. She denied by her son! It was not possible. As for being
herself deceived, and taking another for him, equally impossible. It was certainly
her son whom she had just seen; and if he had not recognized her it was because
he would not, it was because he ought not, it was because he had some cogent
reasons for acting thus! And then, her mother's feelings arising within her, she
had only one thought--"Can I, unwittingly, have ruined him?"

"IT am mad," she said to her interrogators. "My eyes have deceived me! This
young man is not my child. He had not his voice. Let us think no more of it; if
we do I shall end by finding him everywhere."

Less than ten minutes afterwards a Tartar officer appeared in the posting-
house. "Marfa Strogoff?" he asked.

"Tt is I," replied the old woman, in a tone so calm, and with a face so tranquil,
that those who had witnessed the meeting with her son would not have known
her.

"Come," said the officer.

Marfa Strogoff, with firm step, followed the Tartar. Some moments
afterwards she found herself in the chief square in the presence of Ivan Ogareff,
to whom all the details of this scene had been immediately reported.

Ogareff, suspecting the truth, interrogated the old Siberian woman. "Thy
name?" he asked in a rough voice.

"Marfa Strogoff."

"Thou hast a son?"

"Yes."

"He is a courier of the Czar?"

"Yes."

"Where is he?"

"At Moscow."

"Thou hast no news of him?"

"No news."

"Since how long?"

"Since two months."

"Who, then, was that young man whom thou didst call thy son a few
moments ago at the posting-house?"

"A young Siberian whom I took for him," replied Marfa Strogoff. "This is the
tenth man in whom I have thought I recognized my son since the town has been
so full of strangers. I think I see him everywhere."


"So this young man was not Michael Strogoff?"

"Tt was not Michael Strogoff."

"Dost thou know, old woman, that I can torture thee until thou avowest the
truth?"

"I have spoken the truth, and torture will not cause me to alter my words in
any way."

"This Siberian was not Michael Strogoff?" asked a second time Ivan Ogareff.

"No, it was not he," replied a second time Marfa Strogoff. "Do you think that
for anything in the world I would deny a son whom God has given me?"

Ivan Ogareff regarded with an evil eye the old woman who braved him to the
face. He did not doubt but that she had recognized her son in this young
Siberian. Now if this son had first renounced his mother, and if his mother
renounced him in her turn, it could occur only from the most weighty motive.
Ogareff had therefore no doubt that the pretended Nicholas Korpanoff was
Michael Strogoff, courier of the Czar, seeking concealment under a false name,
and charged with some mission which it would have been important for him to
know. He therefore at once gave orders for his pursuit. Then "Let this woman be
conducted to Tomsk," he said.

While the soldiers brutally dragged her off, he added between his teeth,
"When the moment arrives I shall know how to make her speak, this old
sorceress!"


CHAPTER XV THE MARSHES OF THE BARABA

IT was fortunate that Michael Strogoff had left the posting-house so
promptly. The orders of Ivan Ogareff had been immediately transmitted to all the
approaches of the city, and a full description of Michael sent to all the various
commandants, in order to prevent his departure from Omsk. But he had already
passed through one of the breaches in the wall; his horse was galloping over the
steppe, and the chances of escape were in his favor.

It was on the 29th of July, at eight o'clock in the evening, that Michael
Strogoff had left Omsk. This town is situated about halfway between Moscow
and Irkutsk, where it was necessary that he should arrive within ten days if he
wished to get ahead of the Tartar columns. It was evident that the unlucky
chance which had brought him into the presence of his mother had betrayed his
incognito. Ivan Ogareff was no longer ignorant of the fact that a courier of the
Czar had just passed Omsk, taking the direction of Irkutsk. The dispatches which
this courier bore must have been of immense importance. Michael Strogoff
knew, therefore, that every effort would be made to capture him.


But what he did not know, and could not know, was that Marfa Strogoff was
in the hands of Ivan Ogareff, and that she was about to atone, perhaps with her
life, for that natural exhibition of her feelings which she had been unable to
restrain when she suddenly found herself in the presence of her son. And it was
fortunate that he was ignorant of it. Could he have withstood this fresh trial?

Michael Strogoff urged on his horse, imbuing him with all his own feverish
impatience, requiring of him one thing only, namely, to bear him rapidly to the
next posting-house, where he could be exchanged for a quicker conveyance.

At midnight he had cleared fifty miles, and halted at the station of
Koulikovo. But there, as he had feared, he found neither horses nor carriages.
Several Tartar detachments had passed along the highway of the steppe.
Everything had been stolen or requisitioned both in the villages and in the
posting-houses. It was with difficulty that Michael Strogoff was even able to
obtain some refreshment for his horse and himself.

It was of great importance, therefore, to spare his horse, for he could not tell
when or how he might be able to replace it. Desiring, however, to put the
greatest possible distance between himself and the horsemen who had no doubt
been dispatched in pursuit, he resolved to push on. After one hour's rest he
resumed his course across the steppe.

Hitherto the weather had been propitious for his journey. The temperature
was endurable. The nights at this time of the year are very short, and as they are
lighted by the moon, the route over the steppe is practicable. Michael Strogoff,
moreover, was a man certain of his road and devoid of doubt or hesitation, and in
spite of the melancholy thoughts which possessed him he had preserved his
clearness of mind, and made for his destined point as though it were visible upon
the horizon. When he did halt for a moment at some turn in the road it was to
breathe his horse. Now he would dismount to ease his steed for a moment, and
again he would place his ear to the ground to listen for the sound of galloping
horses upon the steppe. Nothing arousing his suspicions, he resumed his way.

On the 30th of July, at nine o'clock in the morning, Michael Strogoff passed
through the station of Touroumoff and entered the swampy district of the Baraba.

There, for a distance of three hundred versts, the natural obstacles would be
extremely great. He knew this, but he also knew that he would certainly
surmount them.

These vast marshes of the Baraba, form the reservoir to all the rain-water
which finds no outlet either towards the Obi or towards the Irtych. The soil of
this vast depression is entirely argillaceous, and therefore impermeable, so that
the waters remain there and make of it a region very difficult to cross during the
hot season. There, however, lies the way to Irkutsk, and it is in the midst of


ponds, pools, lakes, and swamps, from which the sun draws poisonous
exhalations, that the road winds, and entails upon the traveler the greatest fatigue
and danger.

Michael Strogoff spurred his horse into the midst of a grassy prairie,
differing greatly from the close-cropped sod of the steppe, where feed the
immense Siberian herds. The grass here was five or six feet in height, and had
made room for swamp-plants, to which the dampness of the place, assisted by
the heat of summer, had given giant proportions. These were principally canes
and rushes, which formed a tangled network, an impenetrable undergrowth,
sprinkled everywhere with a thousand flowers remarkable for the brightness of
their color.

Michael Strogoff, galloping amongst this undergrowth of cane, was no
longer visible from the swamps which bordered the road. The tall grass rose
above him, and his track was indicated only by the flight of innumerable aquatic
birds, which rose from the side of the road and dispersed into the air in
screaming flocks.

The way, however, was clearly traceable. Now it would lie straight between
the dense thicket of marsh-plants; again it would follow the winding shores of
vast pools, some of which, several versts in length and breadth, deserve the name
of lakes. In other localities the stagnant waters through which the road lay had
been avoided, not by bridges, but by tottering platforms ballasted with thick
layers of clay, whose joists shook like a too weak plank thrown across an abyss.
Some of these platforms extended over three hundred feet, and travelers by
tarantass, when crossing them have experienced a nausea like sea-sickness.

Michael Strogoff, whether the soil beneath his feet was solid or whether it
sank under him, galloped on without halt, leaping the space between the rotten
joists; but however fast they traveled the horse and the horseman were unable to
escape from the sting of the two-winged insects which infest this marshy
country.

Travelers who are obliged to cross the Baraba during the summer take care to
provide themselves with masks of horse-hair, to which is attached a coat of mail
of very fine wire, which covers their shoulders. Notwithstanding these
precautions, there are few who come out of these marshes without having their
faces, necks, and hands covered with red spots. The atmosphere there seems to
bristle with fine needles, and one would almost say that a knight's armor would
not protect him against the darts of these dipterals. It is a dreary region, which
man dearly disputes with tipulae, gnats, mosquitos, horse-flies, and millions of
microscopic insects which are not visible to the naked eye; but, although they are
not seen, they make themselves felt by their intolerable stinging, to which the


most callous Siberian hunters have never been able to inure themselves.

Michael Strogoff's horse, stung by these venomous insects, sprang forward
as if the rowels of a thousand spurs had pierced his flanks. Mad with rage, he
tore along over verst after verst with the speed of an express train, lashing his
sides with his tail, seeking by the rapidity of his pace an alleviation of his
torture.

It required as good a horseman as Michael Strogoff not to be thrown by the
plungings of his horse, and the sudden stops and bounds which he made to
escape from the stings of his persecutors. Having become insensible, so to speak,
to physical suffering, possessed only with the one desire to arrive at his
destination at whatever cost, he saw during this mad race only one thing--that the
road flew rapidly behind him.

Who would have thought that this district of the Baraba, so unhealthy during
the summer, could have afforded an asylum for human beings? Yet it did so.
Several Siberian hamlets appeared from time to time among the giant canes.
Men, women, children, and old men, clad in the skins of beasts, their faces
covered with hardened blisters of skin, pastured their poor herds of sheep. In
order to preserve the animals from the attack of the insects, they drove them to
the leeward of fires of green wood, which were kept burning night and day, and
the pungent smoke of which floated over the vast swamp.

When Michael Strogoff perceived that his horse, tired out, was on the point
of succumbing, he halted at one of these wretched hamlets, and there, forgetting
his own fatigue, he himself rubbed the wounds of the poor animal with hot
grease according to the Siberian custom; then he gave him a good feed; and it
was only after he had well groomed and provided for him that he thought of
himself, and recruited his strength by a hasty meal of bread and meat and a glass
of kwass. One hour afterwards, or at the most two, he resumed with all speed the
interminable road to Irkutsk.

On the 30th of July, at four o'clock in the afternoon, Michael Strogoff,
insensible of every fatigue, arrived at Elamsk. There it became necessary to give
a night's rest to his horse. The brave animal could no longer have continued the
journey. At Elamsk, as indeed elsewhere, there existed no means of transport,--
for the same reasons as at the previous villages, neither carriages nor horses were
to be had.

Michael Strogoff resigned himself therefore to pass the night at Elamsk, to
give his horse twelve hours' rest. He recalled the instructions which had been
given to him at Moscow--to cross Siberia incognito, to arrive at Irkutsk, but not
to sacrifice success to the rapidity of the journey; and consequently it was
necessary that he should husband the sole means of transport which remained to


him.

On the morrow, Michael Strogoff left Elamsk at the moment when the first
Tartar scouts were signaled ten versts behind upon the road to the Baraba, and he
plunged again into the swampy region. The road was level, which made it easy,
but very tortuous, and therefore long. It was impossible, moreover, to leave it,
and to strike a straight line across that impassable network of pools and bogs.

On the next day, the 1st of August, eighty miles farther, Michael Strogoff
arrived at midday at the town of Spaskoe, and at two o'clock he halted at
Pokrowskoe. His horse, jaded since his departure from Elamsk, could not have
taken a single step more.

There Michael Strogoff was again compelled to lose, for necessary rest, the
end of that day and the entire night; but starting again on the following morning,
and still traversing the semi-inundated soil, on the 2nd of August, at four o'clock
in the afternoon, after a stage of fifty miles he reached Kamsk.

The country had changed. This little village of Kamsk lies, like an island,
habitable and healthy, in the midst of the uninhabitable district. It is situated in
the very center of the Baraba. The emigration caused by the Tartar invasion had
not yet depopulated this little town of Kamsk. Its inhabitants probably fancied
themselves safe in the center of the Baraba, whence at least they thought they
would have time to flee if they were directly menaced.

Michael Strogoff, although exceedingly anxious for news, could ascertain
nothing at this place. It would have been rather to him that the Governor would
have addressed himself had he known who the pretended merchant of Irkutsk
really was. Kamsk, in fact, by its very situation seemed to be outside the
Siberian world and the grave events which troubled it.

Besides, Michael Strogoff showed himself little, if at all. To be unperceived
was not now enough for him: he would have wished to be invisible. The
experience of the past made him more and more circumspect in the present and
the future. Therefore he secluded himself, and not caring to traverse the streets
of the village, he would not even leave the inn at which he had halted.

As for his horse, he did not even think of exchanging him for another animal.
He had become accustomed to this brave creature. He knew to what extent he
could rely upon him. In buying him at Omsk he had been lucky, and in taking
him to the postmaster the generous mujik had rendered him a great service.
Besides, if Michael Strogoff had already become attached to his horse, the horse
himself seemed to become inured, by degrees, to the fatigue of such a journey,
and provided that he got several hours of repose daily, his rider might hope that
he would carry him beyond the invaded provinces.

So, during the evening and night of the 2nd of August, Michael Strogoff


remained confined to his inn, at the entrance of the town; which was little
frequented and out of the way of the importunate and curious.

Exhausted with fatigue, he went to bed after having seen that his horse
lacked nothing; but his sleep was broken. What he had seen since his departure
from Moscow showed him the importance of his mission. The rising was an
extremely serious one, and the treachery of Ogareff made it still more
formidable. And when his eyes fell upon the letter bearing upon it the authority
of the imperial seal--the letter which, no doubt, contained the remedy for so
many evils, the safety of all this war-ravaged country--Michael Strogoff felt
within himself a fierce desire to dash on across the steppe, to accomplish the
distance which separated him from Irkutsk as the crow would fly it, to be an
eagle that he might overtop all obstacles, to be a hurricane that he might sweep
through the air at a hundred versts an hour, and to be at last face to face with the
Grand Duke, and to exclaim: "Your highness, from his Majesty the Czar!"

On the next morning at six o'clock, Michael Strogoff started off again.
Thanks to his extreme prudence this part of the journey was signalized by no
incident whatever. At Oubinsk he gave his horse a whole night's rest, for he
wished on the next day to accomplish the hundred versts which lie between
Oubinsk and Ikoulskoe without halting. He started therefore at dawn; but
unfortunately the Baraba proved more detestable than ever.

In fact, between Oubinsk and Kamakore the very heavy rains of some
previous weeks were retained by this shallow depression as in a water-tight
bowl. There was, for a long distance, no break in the succession of swamps,
pools, and lakes. One of these lakes--large enough to warrant its geographical
nomenclature--Tchang, Chinese in name, had to be coasted for more than twenty
versts, and this with the greatest difficulty. Hence certain delays occurred, which
all the impatience of Michael Strogoff could not avoid. He had been well
advised in not taking a carriage at Kamsk, for his horse passed places which
would have been impracticable for a conveyance on wheels.

In the evening, at nine o'clock, Michael Strogoff arrived at Ikoulskoe, and
halted there over night. In this remote village of the Baraba news of the war was
utterly wanting. From its situation, this part of the province, lying in the fork
formed by the two Tartar columns which had bifurcated, one upon Omsk and the
other upon Tomsk, had hitherto escaped the horrors of the invasion.

But the natural obstacles were now about to disappear, for, if he experienced
no delay, Michael Strogoff should on the morrow be free of the Baraba and
arrive at Kolyvan. There he would be within eighty miles of Tomsk. He would
then be guided by circumstances, and very probably he would decide to go
around Tomsk, which, if the news were true, was occupied by Feofar-Khan.


But if the small towns of Ikoulskoe and Karguinsk, which he passed on the
next day, were comparatively quiet, owing to their position in the Baraba, was it
not to be dreaded that, upon the right banks of the Obi, Michael Strogoff would
have much more to fear from man? It was probable. However, should it become
necessary, he would not hesitate to abandon the beaten path to Irkutsk. To
journey then across the steppe he would, no doubt, run the risk of finding
himself without supplies. There would be, in fact, no longer a well-marked road.
Still, there must be no hesitation.

Finally, towards half past three in the afternoon, Michael Strogoff left the last
depressions of the Baraba, and the dry and hard soil of Siberia rang out once
more beneath his horse's hoofs.

He had left Moscow on the 15th of July. Therefore on this day, the 5th of
August, including more than seventy hours lost on the banks of the Irtych,
twenty days had gone by since his departure.

One thousand miles still separated him from Irkutsk.


CHAPTER XVI A FINAL EFFORT


MICHAEL'S fear of meeting the Tartars in the plains beyond the Baraba was
by no means ungrounded. The fields, trodden down by horses' hoofs, afforded
but too clear evidence that their hordes had passed that way; the same, indeed,
might be said of these barbarians as of the Turks: "Where the Turk goes, no grass
gTOWS."

Michael saw at once that in traversing this country the greatest caution was
necessary. Wreaths of smoke curling upwards on the horizon showed that huts
and hamlets were still burning. Had these been fired by the advance guard, or
had the Emir's army already advanced beyond the boundaries of the province?
Was Feofar-Khan himself in the government of Yeniseisk? Michael could settle
on no line of action until these questions were answered. Was the country so
deserted that he could not discover a single Siberian to enlighten him?

Michael rode on for two versts without meeting a human being. He looked
carefully for some house which had not been deserted. Every one was tenantless.

One hut, however, which he could just see between the trees, was still
smoking. As he approached he perceived, at some yards from the ruins of the
building, an old man surrounded by weeping children. A woman still young,
evidently his daughter and the mother of the poor children, kneeling on the
ground, was gazing on the scene of desolation. She had at her breast a baby but a
few months old; shortly she would have not even that nourishment to give it.
Ruin and desolation were all around!

Michael approached the old man.

"Will you answer me a few questions?" he asked.

"Speak," replied the old man.

"Have the Tartars passed this way?"

"Yes, for my house is in flames."

"Was it an army or a detachment?"

"An army, for, as far as eye can reach, our fields are laid waste."

"Commanded by the Emir?"

"By the Emir; for the Obi's waters are red."

"Has Feofar-Khan entered Tomsk?"

"He has."

"Do you know if his men have entered Kolyvan?"

"No; for Kolyvan does not yet burn."

"Thanks, friend. Can I aid you and yours?"


"No."

"Good-by."

"Farewell."

And Michael, having presented five and twenty roubles to the unfortunate
woman, who had not even strength to thank him, put spurs to his horse once
more.

One thing he knew; he must not pass through Tomsk. To go to Kolyvan,
which the Tartars had not yet reached, was possible. Yes, that is what he must
do; there he must prepare himself for another long stage. There was nothing for
it but, having crossed the Obi, to take the Irkutsk road and avoid Tomsk.

This new route decided on, Michael must not delay an instant. Nor did he,
but, putting his horse into a steady gallop, he took the road towards the left bank
of the Obi, which was still forty versts distant. Would there be a ferry boat there,
or should he, finding that the Tartars had destroyed all the boats, be obliged to
swim across?

As to his horse, it was by this time pretty well worn out, and Michael
intended to make it perform this stage only, and then to exchange it for a fresh
one at Kolyvan. Kolyvan would be like a fresh starting point, for on leaving that
town his journey would take a new form. So long as he traversed a devastated
country the difficulties must be very great; but if, having avoided Tomsk, he
could resume the road to Irkutsk across the province of Yeniseisk, which was not
yet laid waste, he would finish his journey in a few days.

Night came on, bringing with it refreshing coolness after the heat of the day.
At midnight the steppe was profoundly dark. The sound of the horses's hoofs
alone was heard on the road, except when, every now and then, its master spoke
a few encouraging words. In such darkness as this great care was necessary lest
he should leave the road, bordered by pools and streams, tributaries of the Obi.
Michael therefore advanced as quickly as was consistent with safety. He trusted
no less to the excellence of his eyes, which penetrated the gloom, than to the
well-proved sagacity of his horse.

Just as Michael dismounted to discover the exact direction of the road, he
heard a confused murmuring sound from the west. It was like the noise of horses'
hoofs at some distance on the parched ground. Michael listened attentively,
putting his ear to the ground.

"It is a detachment of cavalry coming by the road from Omsk," he said to
himself. "They are marching very quickly, for the noise is increasing. Are they
Russians or Tartars?"

Michael again listened. "Yes," said he, "they are at a sharp trot. My horse
cannot outstrip them. If they are Russians I will join them; if Tartars I must avoid


them. But how? Where can I hide in this steppe?"

He gave a look around, and, through the darkness, discovered a confused
mass at a hundred paces before him on the left of the road. "There is a copse!" he
exclaimed. "To take refuge there is to run the risk of being caught, if they are in
search of me; but I have no choice."

In a few moments Michael, dragging his horse by the bridle, reached a little
larch wood, through which the road lay. Beyond this it was destitute of trees, and
wound among bogs and pools, separated by dwarfed bushes, whins, and heather.
The ground on either side was quite impracticable, and the detachment must
necessarily pass through the wood. They were pursuing the high road to Irkutsk.
Plunging in about forty feet, he was stopped by a stream running under the
brushwood. But the shadow was so deep that Michael ran no risk of being seen,
unless the wood should be carefully searched. He therefore led his horse to the
stream and fastened him to a tree, returning to the edge of the road to listen and
ascertain with what sort of people he had to do.

Michael had scarcely taken up his position behind a group of larches when a
confused light appeared, above which glared brighter lights waving about in the
shadow.

"Torches!" said he to himself. And he drew quickly back, gliding like a
savage into the thickest underwood.

As they approached the wood the horses' pace was slackened. The horsemen
were probably lighting up the road with the intention of examining every turn.

Michael feared this, and instinctively drew near to the bank of the stream,
ready to plunge in if necessary.

Arrived at the top of the wood, the detachment halted. The horsemen
dismounted. There were about fifty. A dozen of them carried torches, lighting up
the road.

By watching their preparations Michael found to his joy that the detachment
were not thinking of visiting the copse, but only bivouacking near, to rest their
horses and allow the men to take some refreshment. The horses were soon
unsaddled, and began to graze on the thick grass which carpeted the ground. The
men meantime stretched themselves by the side of the road, and partook of the
provisions they produced from their knapsacks.

Michael's self-possession had never deserted him, and creeping amongst the
high grass he endeavored not only to examine the new-comers, but to hear what
they said. It was a detachment from Omsk, composed of Usbeck horsemen, a
race of the Mongolian type. These men, well built, above the medium height,
rough, and wild-featured, wore on their heads the "talpak," or black sheep-skin
cap, and on their feet yellow high-heeled boots with turned-up toes, like the


shoes of the Middle Ages. Their tunics were close-fitting, and confined at the
waist by a leathern belt braided with red. They were armed defensively with a
shield, and offensively with a curved sword, and a flintlock musket slung at the
saddle-bow. From their shoulders hung gay-colored cloaks.

The horses, which were feeding at liberty at the edge of the wood, were, like
their masters, of the Usbeck race. These animals are rather smaller than the
Turcomanian horses, but are possessed of remarkable strength, and know no
other pace than the gallop.

This detachment was commanded by a "pendja-baschi"; that is to say, a
commander of fifty men, having under him a "deh-baschi," or simple
commander of ten men. These two officers wore helmets and half coats-of-mail;
little trumpets fastened to their saddle-bows were the distinctive signs of their
rank.

The pendja-baschi had been obliged to let his men rest, fatigued with a long
stage. He and the second officer, smoking "beng," the leaf which forms the base
of the "has-chisch," strolled up and down the wood, so that Michael Strogoff
without being seen, could catch and understand their conversation, which was
spoken in the Tartar language.

Michael's attention was singularly excited by their very first words. It was of
him they were speaking.

"This courier cannot be much in advance of us," said the pendja-baschi;
"and, on the other hand, it is absolutely impossible that he can have followed any
other route than that of the Baraba."

"Who knows if he has left Omsk?" replied the deh-baschi. "Perhaps he is still
hidden in the town."

"That is to be wished, certainly. Colonel Ogareff would have no fear then
that the dispatches he bears should ever reach their destination."

"They say that he is a native, a Siberian," resumed the deh-baschi. "If so, he
must be well acquainted with the country, and it is possible that he has left the
Irkutsk road, depending on rejoining it later."

"But then we should be in advance of him," answered the pendja-baschi; "for
we left Omsk within an hour after his departure, and have since followed the
shortest road with all the speed of our horses. He has either remained in Omsk,
or we shall arrive at Tomsk before him, so as to cut him off; in either case he will
not reach Irkutsk."

"A rugged woman, that old Siberian, who is evidently his mother," said the
deh-baschi.

At this remark Michael's heart beat violently.

"Yes," answered the pendja-baschi. "She stuck to it well that the pretended


merchant was not her son, but it was too late. Colonel Ogareff was not to be
taken in; and, as he said, he will know how to make the old witch speak when
the time comes."

These words were so many dagger-thrusts for Michael. He was known to be
a courier of the Czar! A detachment of horsemen on his track could not fail to
cut him off. And, worst of all, his mother was in the hands of the Tartars, and the
cruel Ogareff had undertaken to make her speak when he wished!

Michael well knew that the brave Siberian would sacrifice her life for him.
He had fancied that he could not hate Ivan Ogareff more, yet a fresh tide of hate
now rose in his heart. The wretch who had betrayed his country now threatened
to torture his mother.

The conversation between the two officers continued, and Michael
understood that an engagement was imminent in the neighborhood of Kolyvan,
between the Muscovite troops coming from the north and the Tartars. A small
Russian force of two thousand men, reported to have reached the lower course of
the Obi, were advancing by forced marches towards Tomsk. If such was the
case, this force, which would soon find itself engaged with the main body of
Feofar-Khan's army, would be inevitably overwhelmed, and the Irkutsk road
would be in the entire possession of the invaders.

As to himself, Michael learnt, by some words from the pendja-baschi, that a
price was set on his head, and that orders had been given to take him, dead or
alive.

It was necessary, therefore, to get the start of the Usbeck horsemen on the
Irkutsk road, and put the Obi between himself and them. But to do that, he must
escape before the camp was broken up.

His determination taken, Michael prepared to execute it.

Indeed, the halt would not be prolonged, and the pendja-baschi did not intend
to give his men more than an hour's rest, although their horses could not have
been changed for fresh ones since Omsk, and must be as much fatigued as that of
Michael Strogoff.

There was not a moment to lose. It was within an hour of morning. It was
needful to profit by the darkness to leave the little wood and dash along the road;
but although night favored it the success of such a flight appeared to be almost
impossible.

Not wishing to do anything at random, Michael took time for reflection,
carefully weighing the chances so as to take the best. From the situation of the
place the result was this--that he could not escape through the back of the wood,
the stream which bordered it being not only deep, but very wide and muddy.
Beneath this thick water was a slimy bog, on which the foot could not rest. There


was only one way open, the high-road. To endeavor to reach it by creeping round
the edge of the wood, without attracting attention, and then to gallop at headlong
speed, required all the remaining strength and energy of his noble steed. Too
probably it would fall dead on reaching the banks of the Obi, when, either by
boat or by swimming, he must cross this important river. This was what Michael
had before him.

His energy and courage increased in sight of danger.

His life, his mission, his country, perhaps the safety of his mother, were at
stake. He could not hesitate.

There was not a moment to be lost. Already there was a slight movement
among the men of the detachment. A few horsemen were strolling up and down
the road in front of the wood. The rest were still lying at the foot of the trees, but
their horses were gradually penetrating towards the center of the wood.

Michael had at first thought of seizing one of these horses, but he recollected
that, of course, they would be as fatigued as his own. It was better to trust to his
own brave steed, which had already rendered him such important service. The
good animal, hidden behind a thicket, had escaped the sight of the Usbecks.
They, besides, had not penetrated so far into the wood.

Michael crawled up to his horse through the grass, and found him lying
down. He patted and spoke gently to him, and managed to raise him without
noise. Fortunately, the torches were entirely consumed, and now went out, the
darkness being still profound under shelter of the larches. After replacing the bit,
Michael looked to his girths and stirrups, and began to lead his horse quietly
away. The intelligent animal followed his master without even making the least
neigh.

A few Usbeck horses raised their heads, and began to wander towards the
edge of the wood. Michael held his revolver in his hand, ready to blow out the
brains of the first Tartar who should approach him. But happily the alarm was
not given, and he was able to gain the angle made by the wood where it joined
the road.

To avoid being seen, Michael's intention was not to mount until after turning
a corner some two hundred feet from the wood. Unfortunately, just at the
moment that he was issuing from the wood, an Usbeck's horse, scenting him,
neighed and began to trot along the road. His master ran to catch him, and seeing
a shadowy form moving in the dim light, "Look out!" he shouted.

At the cry, all the men of the bivouac jumped up, and ran to seize their
horses. Michael leaped on his steed, and galloped away. The two officers of the
detachment urged on their men to follow.

Michael heard a report, and felt a ball pass through his tunic. Without turning


his head, without replying, he spurred on, and, clearing the brushwood with a
tremendous bound, he galloped at full speed toward the Obi.

The Usbecks' horses being unsaddled gave him a small start, but in less than
two minutes he heard the tramp of several horses gradually gaining on him.

Day was now beginning to break, and objects at some distance were
becoming visible. Michael turned his head, and perceived a horseman rapidly
approaching him. It was the deh-baschi. Being better mounted, this officer had
distanced his detachment.

Without drawing rein, Michael extended his revolver, and took a moment's
aim. The Usbeck officer, hit in the breast, rolled on the ground.

But the other horsemen followed him closely, and without waiting to assist
the deh-baschi, exciting each other by their shouts, digging their spurs into their
horses' sides, they gradually diminished the distance between themselves and
Michael.

For half an hour only was the latter able to keep out of range of the Tartars,
but he well knew that his horse was becoming weaker, and dreaded every instant
that he would stumble never to rise again.

It was now light, although the sun had not yet risen above the horizon. Two
versts distant could be seen a pale line bordered by a few trees.

This was the Obi, which flows from the southwest to the northeast, the
surface almost level with the ground, its bed being but the steppe itself.

Several times shots were fired at Michael, but without hitting him, and
several times too he discharged his revolver on those of the soldiers who pressed
him too closely. Each time an Usbeck rolled on the ground, midst cries of rage
from his companions. But this pursuit could only terminate to Michael's
disadvantage. His horse was almost exhausted. He managed to reach the bank of
the river. The Usbeck detachment was now not more than fifty paces behind
him.

The Obi was deserted--not a boat of any description which could take him
over the water!

"Courage, my brave horse!" cried Michael. "Come! A last effort!" And he
plunged into the river, which here was half a verst in width.

It would have been difficult to stand against the current--indeed, Michael's
horse could get no footing. He must therefore swim across the river, although it
was rapid as a torrent. Even to attempt it showed Michael's marvelous courage.
The soldiers reached the bank, but hesitated to plunge in.

The pendja-baschi seized his musket and took aim at Michael, whom he
could see in the middle of the stream. The shot was fired, and Michael's horse,
struck in the side, was borne away by the current.


His master, speedily disentangling himself from his stirrups, struck out
boldly for the shore. In the midst of a hailstorm of balls he managed to reach the
opposite side, and disappeared in the rushes.


CHAPTER XVII THE RIVALS


MICHAEL was in comparative safety, though his situation was still terrible.
Now that the faithful animal who had so bravely borne him had met his death in
the waters of the river, how was he to continue his journey?

He was on foot, without provisions, in a country devastated by the invasion,
overrun by the Emir's scouts, and still at a considerable distance from the place
he was striving to reach. "By Heaven, I will get there!" he exclaimed, in reply to
all the reasons for faltering. "God will protect our sacred Russia."

Michael was out of reach of the Usbeck horsemen. They had not dared to
pursue him through the river.

Once more on solid ground Michael stopped to consider what he should do
next. He wished to avoid Tomsk, now occupied by the Tartar troops.
Nevertheless, he must reach some town, or at least a post-house, where he could
procure a horse. A horse once found, he would throw himself out of the beaten
track, and not again take to the Irkutsk road until in the neighborhood of
Krasnoiarsk. From that place, if he were quick, he hoped to find the way still
open, and he intended to go through the Lake Baikal provinces in a southeasterly
direction.

Michael began by going eastward. By following the course of the Obi two
versts further, he reached a picturesque little town lying on a small hill. A few
churches, with Byzantine cupolas colored green and gold, stood up against the
gray sky. This is Kolyvan, where the officers and people employed at Kamsk and
other towns take refuge during the summer from the unhealthy climate of the
Baraba. According to the latest news obtained by the Czar's courier, Kolyvan
could not be yet in the hands of the invaders. The Tartar troops, divided into two
columns, had marched to the left on Omsk, to the right on Tomsk, neglecting the
intermediate country.

Michael Strogoff's plan was simply this--to reach Kolyvan before the arrival
of the Usbeck horsemen, who would ascend the other bank of the Obi to the
ferry. There he would procure clothes and a horse, and resume the road to
Irkutsk across the southern steppe.

It was now three o'clock in the morning. The neighborhood of Kolyvan was
very still, and appeared to have been totally abandoned. The country population
had evidently fled to the northwards, to the province of Yeniseisk, dreading the
invasion, which they could not resist.

Michael was walking at a rapid pace towards Kolyvan when distant firing


struck his ear. He stopped, and clearly distinguished the dull roar of artillery, and
above it a crisp rattle which could not be mistaken.

"It is cannon and musketry!" said he. "The little Russian body is engaged
with the Tartar army! Pray Heaven that I may arrive at Kolyvan before them!"

The firing became gradually louder, and soon to the left of Kolyvan a mist
collected--not smoke, but those great white clouds produced by discharges of
artillery.

The Usbeck horsemen stopped on the left of the Obi, to await the result of
the battle. From them Michael had nothing to fear as he hastened towards the
town.

In the meanwhile the firing increased, and became sensibly nearer. It was no
longer a confused roar, but distinct reports. At the same time the smoke partially
cleared, and it became evident that the combatants were rapidly moving
southwards. It appeared that Kolyvan was to be attacked on the north side. But
were the Russians defending it or the Tartars? It being impossible to decide this,
Michael became greatly perplexed.

He was not more than half a verst from Kolyvan when he observed flames
shooting up among the houses of the town, and the steeple of a church fell in the
midst of clouds of smoke and fire. Was the struggle, then, in Kolyvan? Michael
was compelled to think so. It was evident that Russians and Tartars were fighting
in the streets of the town. Was this a time to seek refuge there? Would he not run
a risk of being taken prisoner? Should he succeed in escaping from Kolyvan, as
he had escaped from Omsk? He hesitated and stopped a moment. Would it not be
better to try, even on foot, to reach some small town, and there procure a horse at
any price? This was the only thing to be done; and Michael, leaving the Obi,
went forward to the right of Kolyvan.

The firing had now increased in violence. Flames soon sprang up on the left
of the town. Fire was devouring one entire quarter of Kolyvan.

Michael was running across the steppe endeavoring to gain the covert of
some trees when a detachment of Tartar cavalry appeared on the right. He dared
not continue in that direction. The horsemen advanced rapidly, and it would have
been difficult to escape them.

Suddenly, in a thick clump of trees, he saw an isolated house, which it would
be possible to reach before he was perceived. Michael had no choice but to run
there, hide himself and ask or take something to recruit his strength, for he was
exhausted with hunger and fatigue.

He accordingly ran on towards this house, still about half a verst distant. As
he approached, he could see that it was a telegraph office. Two wires left it in
westerly and easterly directions, and a third went towards Kolyvan.


It was to be supposed that under the circumstances this station was
abandoned; but even if it was, Michael could take refuge there, and wait till
nightfall, if necessary, to again set out across the steppe covered with Tartar
scouts.

He ran up to the door and pushed it open.

A single person was in the room whence the telegraphic messages were
dispatched. This was a clerk, calm, phlegmatic, indifferent to all that was passing
outside. Faithful to his post, he waited behind his little wicket until the public
claimed his services.

Michael ran up to him, and in a voice broken by fatigue, "What do you
know?" he asked.

"Nothing," answered the clerk, smiling.

"Are the Russians and Tartars engaged?"

"They say so."

"But who are the victors?"

"T don't know."

Such calmness, such indifference, in the midst of these terrible events, was
scarcely credible.

"And is not the wire cut?" said Michael.

"It is cut between Kolyvan and Krasnoiarsk, but it is still working between
Kolyvan and the Russian frontier."

"For the government?"

"For the government, when it thinks proper. For the public, when they pay.
Ten copecks a word, whenever you like, sir!"

Michael was about to reply to this strange clerk that he had no message to
send, that he only implored a little bread and water, when the door of the house
was again thrown open.

Thinking that it was invaded by Tartars, Michael made ready to leap out of
the window, when two men only entered the room who had nothing of the Tartar
soldier about them. One of them held a dispatch, written in pencil, in his hand,
and, passing the other, he hurried up to the wicket of the imperturbable clerk.

In these two men Michael recognized with astonishment, which everyone
will understand, two personages of whom he was not thinking at all, and whom
he had never expected to see again. They were the two reporters, Harry Blount
and Alcide Jolivet, no longer traveling companions, but rivals, enemies, now that
they were working on the field of battle.

They had left Ichim only a few hours after the departure of Michael Strogoff,
and they had arrived at Kolyvan before him, by following the same road, in
consequence of his losing three days on the banks of the Irtych. And now, after


being both present at the engagement between the Russians and Tartars before
the town, they had left just as the struggle broke out in the streets, and ran to the
telegraph office, so as to send off their rival dispatches to Europe, and forestall
each other in their report of events.

Michael stood aside in the shadow, and without being seen himself he could
see and hear all that was going on. He would now hear interesting news, and
would find out whether or not he could enter Kolyvan.

Blount, having distanced his companion, took possession of the wicket,
whilst Alcide Jolivet, contrary to his usual habit, stamped with impatience.

"Ten copecks a word," said the clerk.

Blount deposited a pile of roubles on the shelf, whilst his rival looked on
with a sort of stupefaction.

"Good," said the clerk. And with the greatest coolness in the world he began
to telegraph the following dispatch: "Daily Telegraph, London.

"From Kolyvan, Government of Omsk, Siberia, 6th August.

"Engagement between Russian and Tartar troops."

The reading was in a distinct voice, so that Michael heard all that the English
correspondent was sending to his paper.

"Russians repulsed with great loss. Tartars entered Kolyvan to-day." These
words ended the dispatch.

"My turn now," cried Alcide Jolivet, anxious to send off his dispatch,
addressed to his cousin.

But that was not Blount's idea, who did not intend to give up the wicket, but
have it in his power to send off the news just as the events occurred. He would
therefore not make way for his companion.

"But you have finished!" exclaimed Jolivet.

"T have not finished," returned Harry Blount quietly.

And he proceeded to write some sentences, which he handed in to the clerk,
who read out in his calm voice: "John Gilpin was a citizen of credit and renown;
a train-band captain eke was he of famous London town."

Harry Blount was telegraphing some verses learned in his childhood, in order
to employ the time, and not give up his place to his rival. It would perhaps cost
his paper some thousands of roubles, but it would be the first informed. France
could wait.

Jolivet's fury may be imagined, though under any other circumstances he
would have thought it fair warfare. He even endeavored to force the clerk to take
his dispatch in preference to that of his rival.

"It is that gentleman's right," answered the clerk coolly, pointing to Blount,
and smiling in the most amiable manner. And he continued faithfully to transmit


to the Daily Telegraph the well-known verses of Cowper.

Whilst he was working Blount walked to the window and, his field glass to
his eyes, watched all that was going on in the neighborhood of Kolyvan, so as to
complete his information. In a few minutes he resumed his place at the wicket,
and added to his telegram: "Two churches are in flames. The fire appears to gain
on the right. John Gilpin's spouse said to her dear, Though wedded we have
been these twice ten tedious years, yet we no holiday have seen.""

Alcide Jolivet would have liked to strangle the honorable correspondent of
the Daily Telegraph.

He again interrupted the clerk, who, quite unmoved, merely replied: "It is his
right, sir, it is his right--at ten copecks a word."

And he telegraphed the following news, just brought him by Blount:
"Russian fugitives are escaping from the town. 'Away went Gilpin--who but he?
His fame soon spread around: He carries weight! he rides a race! "Tis for a
thousand pound!" And Blount turned round with a quizzical look at his rival.

Alcide Jolivet fumed.

In the meanwhile Harry Blount had returned to the window, but this time his
attention was diverted by the interest of the scene before him. Therefore, when
the clerk had finished telegraphing the last lines dictated by Blount, Alcide
Jolivet noiselessly took his place at the wicket, and, just as his rival had done,
after quietly depositing a respectable pile of roubles on the shelf, he delivered his
dispatch, which the clerk read aloud: "Madeleine Jolivet, 10, Faubourg
Montmartre, Paris.

"From Kolyvan, Government of Omsk, Siberia, 6th August.

"Fugitives are escaping from the town. Russians defeated. Fiercely pursued
by the Tartar cavalry."

And as Harry Blount returned he heard Jolivet completing his telegram by
singing in a mocking tone:

"II est un petit homme, Tout habille de gris, Dans Paris!"

Imitating his rival, Alcide Jolivet had used a merry refrain of Beranger.

"Hallo!" said Harry Blount.

"Just so," answered Jolivet.

In the meantime the situation at Kolyvan was alarming in the extreme. The
battle was raging nearer, and the firing was incessant.

At that moment the telegraph office shook to its foundations. A shell had
made a hole in the wall, and a cloud of dust filled the office.

Alcide was just finishing writing his lines; but to stop, dart on the shell, seize
it in both hands, throw it out of the window, and return to the wicket, was only
the affair of a moment.


Five seconds later the shell burst outside. Continuing with the greatest
possible coolness, Alcide wrote: "A six-inch shell has just blown up the wall of
the telegraph office. Expecting a few more of the same size."

Michael Strogoff had no doubt that the Russians were driven out of Kolyvan.
His last resource was to set out across the southern steppe.

Just then renewed firing broke out close to the telegraph house, and a perfect
shower of bullets smashed all the glass in the windows. Harry Blount fell to the
ground wounded in the shoulder.

Jolivet even at such a moment, was about to add this postscript to his
dispatch: "Harry Blount, correspondent of the Daily Telegraph, has fallen at my
side struck by--" when the imperturbable clerk said calmly: "Sir, the wire has
broken." And, leaving his wicket, he quietly took his hat, brushed it round with
his sleeve, and, still smiling, disappeared through a little door which Michael
had not before perceived.

The house was surrounded by Tartar soldiers, and neither Michael nor the
reporters could effect their retreat.

Alcide Jolivet, his useless dispatch in his hand, had run to Blount, stretched
on the ground, and had bravely lifted him on his shoulders, with the intention of
flying with him. He was too late!

Both were prisoners; and, at the same time, Michael, taken unawares as he
was about to leap from the window, fell into the hands of the Tartars!

END OF BOOK I


BOOK II


CHAPTER I A TARTAR CAMP


AT a day's march from Kolyvan, several versts beyond the town of
Diachinks, stretches a wide plain, planted here and there with great trees,
principally pines and cedars. This part of the steppe is usually occupied during
the warm season by Siberian shepherds, and their numerous flocks. But now it
might have been searched in vain for one of its nomad inhabitants. Not that the
plain was deserted. It presented a most animated appearance.

There stood the Tartar tents; there Feofar-Khan, the terrible Emir of Bokhara,
was encamped; and there on the following day, the 7th of August, were brought
the prisoners taken at Kolyvan after the annihilation of the Russian force, which
had vainly attempted to oppose the progress of the invaders. Of the two thousand
men who had engaged with the two columns of the enemy, the bases of which
rested on Tomsk and Omsk, only a few hundred remained. Thus events were
going badly, and the imperial government appeared to have lost its power
beyond the frontiers of the Ural--for a time at least, for the Russians could not
fail eventually to defeat the savage hordes of the invaders. But in the meantime
the invasion had reached the center of Siberia, and it was spreading through the
revolted country both to the eastern, and the western provinces. If the troops of
the Amoor and the province of Takutsk did not arrive in time to occupy it,
Irkutsk, the capital of Asiatic Russia, being insufficiently garrisoned, would fall
into the hands of the Tartars, and the Grand Duke, brother of the Emperor, would
be sacrificed to the vengeance of Ivan Ogareff.

What had become of Michael Strogoff? Had he broken down under the
weight of so many trials? Did he consider himself conquered by the series of
disasters which, since the adventure of Ichim, had increased in magnitude? Did
he think his cause lost? that his mission had failed? that his orders could no
longer be obeyed?

Michael was one of those men who never give in while life exists. He was
yet alive; he still had the imperial letter safe; his disguise had been undiscovered.
He was included amongst the numerous prisoners whom the Tartars were
dragging with them like cattle; but by approaching Tomsk he was at the same
time drawing nearer to Irkutsk. Besides, he was still in front of Ivan Ogareff.

"T will get there!" he repeated to himself.

Since the affair of Kolyvan all the powers of his mind were concentrated on
one object--to become free! How should he escape from the Emir's soldiers?

Feofar's camp presented a magnificent spectacle.


Numberless tents, of skin, felt, or silk, glistened in the rays of the sun. The
lofty plumes which surmounted their conical tops waved amidst banners, flags,
and pennons of every color. The richest of these tents belonged to the Seides and
Khodjas, who are the principal personages of the khanat. A special pavilion,
omamented with a horse's tail issuing from a sheaf of red and white sticks
artistically interlaced, indicated the high rank of these Tartar chiefs. Then in the
distance rose several thousand of the Turcoman tents, called "karaoy," which had
been carried on the backs of camels.

The camp contained at least a hundred and fifty thousand soldiers, as many
foot as horse soldiers, collected under the name of Alamanes. Amongst them,
and as the principal types of Turkestan, would have been directly remarked the
Tadjiks, from their regular features, white skin, tall forms, and black eyes and
hair; they formed the bulk of the Tartar army, and of them the khanats of
Khokhand and Koundouge had furnished a contingent nearly equal to that of
Bokhara. With the Tadjiks were mingled specimens of different races who either
reside in Turkestan or whose native countries border on it. There were Usbecks,
red-bearded, small in stature, similar to those who had pursued Michael. Here
were Kirghiz, with flat faces like the Kalmucks, dressed in coats of mail: some
carried the lance, bows, and arrows of Asiatic manufacture; some the saber, a
matchlock gun, and the "tschakane," a little short-handled ax, the wounds from
which invariably prove fatal. There were Mongols--of middle height, with black
hair plaited into pigtails, which hung down their back; round faces, swarthy
complexions, lively deep-set eyes, scanty beards--dressed in blue nankeen
trimmed with black plush, sword-belts of leather with silver buckles, coats gayly
braided, and silk caps edged with fur and three ribbons fluttering behind. Brown-
skinned Afghans, too, might have been seen. Arabs, having the primitive type of
the beautiful Semitic races; and Turcomans, with eyes which looked as if they
had lost the pupil,--all enrolled under the Emir's flag, the flag of incendiaries and
devastators.

Among these free soldiers were a certain number of slave soldiers,
principally Persians, commanded by officers of the same nation, and they were
certainly not the least esteemed of Feofar-Khan's army.

If to this list are added the Jews, who acted as servants, their robes confined
with a cord, and wearing on their heads instead of the turban, which is forbidden
them, little caps of dark cloth; if with these groups are mingled some hundreds
of "kalenders," a sort of religious mendicants, clothed in rags, covered by a
leopard skin, some idea may be formed of the enormous agglomerations of
different tribes included under the general denomination of the Tartar army.

Nothing could be more romantic than this picture, in delineating which the


most skillful artist would have exhausted all the colors of his palette.

Feofar's tent overlooked the others. Draped in large folds of a brilliant silk
looped with golden cords and tassels, surmounted by tall plumes which waved in
the wind like fans, it occupied the center of a wide clearing, sheltered by a grove
of magnificent birch and pine trees. Before this tent, on a japanned table inlaid
with precious stones, was placed the sacred book of the Koran, its pages being of
thin gold-leaf delicately engraved. Above floated the Tartar flag, quartered with
the Emir's arms.

In a semicircle round the clearing stood the tents of the great functionaries of
Bokhara. There resided the chief of the stables, who has the right to follow the
Emir on horseback even into the court of his palace; the grand falconer; the
"housch-begui," bearer of the royal seal; the "toptschi-baschi," grand master of
the artillery; the "khodja," chief of the council, who receives the prince's kiss,
and may present himself before him with his girdle untied; the "scheikh-oul-
islam," chief of the Ulemas, representing the priests; the "cazi-askev," who, in
the Emir's absence settles all disputes raised among the soldiers; and lastly, the
chief of the astrologers, whose great business is to consult the stars every time
the Khan thinks of changing his quarters.

When the prisoners were brought into the camp, the Emir was in his tent. He
did not show himself. This was fortunate, no doubt. A sign, a word from him
might have been the signal for some bloody execution. But he intrenched
himself in that isolation which constitutes in part the majesty of Eastern kings.
He who does not show himself is admired, and, above all, feared.

As to the prisoners, they were to be penned up in some enclosure, where, ill-
treated, poorly fed, and exposed to all the inclemencies of the weather, they
would await Feofar's pleasure.

The most docile and patient of them all was undoubtedly Michael Strogoff.
He allowed himself to be led, for they were leading him where he wished to go,
and under conditions of safety which free he could not have found on the road
from Kolyvan to Tomsk. To escape before reaching that town was to risk again
falling into the hands of the scouts, who were scouring the steppe. The most
eastern line occupied by the Tartar columns was not situated beyond the eighty-
fifth meridian, which passes through Tomsk. This meridian once passed, Michael
considered that he should be beyond the hostile zones, that he could traverse
Genisci without danger, and gain Krasnoiarsk before Feofar-Khan had invaded
the province.

"Once at Tomsk," he repeated to himself, to repress some feelings of
impatience which he could not entirely master, "in a few minutes I should be
beyond the outposts; and twelve hours gained on Feofar, twelve hours on


Ogareff, that surely would be enough to give me a start of them to Irkutsk."

The thing that Michael dreaded more than everything else was the presence
of Ivan Ogareff in the Tartar camp. Besides the danger of being recognized, he
felt, by a sort of instinct, that this was the traitor whom it was especially
necessary to precede. He understood, too, that the union of Ogareff's troops with
those of Feofar would complete the invading army, and that the junction once
effected, the army would march en masse on the capital of Eastern Siberia. All
his apprehensions came from this quarter, and he dreaded every instant to hear
some flourish of trumpets, announcing the arrival of the lieutenant of the Emir.

To this was added the thought of his mother, of Nadia,--the one a prisoner at
Omsk; the other dragged on board the Irtych boats, and no doubt a captive, as
Marfa Strogoff was. He could do nothing for them. Should he ever see them
again? At this question, to which he dared not reply, his heart sank very low.

At the same time with Michael Strogoff and so many other prisoners Harry
Blount and Alcide Jolivet had also been taken to the Tartar camp. Their former
traveling companion, captured like them at the telegraph office, knew that they
were penned up with him in the enclosure, guarded by numerous sentinels, but
he did not wish to accost them. It mattered little to him, at this time especially,
what they might think of him since the affair at Ichim. Besides, he desired to be
alone, that he might act alone, if necessary. He therefore held himself aloof from
his former acquaintances.

From the moment that Harry Blount had fallen by his side, Jolivet had not
ceased his attentions to him. During the journey from Kolyvan to the camp--that
is to say, for several hours--Blount, by leaning on his companion's arm, had been
enabled to follow the rest of the prisoners. He tried to make known that he was a
British subject; but it had no effect on the barbarians, who only replied by prods
with a lance or sword. The correspondent of the Daily Telegraph was, therefore,
obliged to submit to the common lot, resolving to protest later, and obtain
satisfaction for such treatment. But the journey was not the less disagreeable to
him, for his wound caused him much pain, and without Alcide Jolivet's
assistance he might never have reached the camp.

Jolivet, whose practical philosophy never abandoned him, had physically and
morally strengthened his companion by every means in his power. His first care,
when they found themselves definitely established in the enclosure, was to
examine Blount's wound. Having managed carefully to draw off his coat, he
found that the shoulder had been only grazed by the shot.

"This is nothing," he said. "A mere scratch! After two or three dressings you
will be all to rights."

"But these dressings?" asked Blount.


"IT will make them for you myself."

"Then you are something of a doctor?"

"All Frenchmen are something of doctors."

And on this affirmation Alcide, tearing his handkerchief, made lint of one
piece, bandages of the other, took some water from a well dug in the middle of
the enclosure, bathed the wound, and skillfully placed the wet rag on Harry
Blount's shoulder.

"I treat you with water," he said. "This liquid is the most efficacious sedative
known for the treatment of wounds, and is the most employed now. Doctors
have taken six thousand years to discover that! Yes, six thousand years in round
numbers!"

"I thank you, M. Jolivet," answered Harry, stretching himself on a bed of dry
leaves, which his companion had arranged for him in the shade of a birch tree.

"Bah! it's nothing! You would do as much for me."

"I am not quite so sure," said Blount candidly.

"Nonsense, stupid! All English are generous."

"Doubtless; but the French?"

"Well, the French--they are brutes, if you like! But what redeems them is that
they are French. Say nothing more about that, or rather, say nothing more at all.
Rest is absolutely necessary for you."

But Harry Blount had no wish to be silent. If the wound, in prudence,
required rest, the correspondent of the Daily Telegraph was not a man to indulge
himself.

"M. Jolivet," he asked, "do you think that our last dispatches have been able
to pass the Russian frontier?"

"Why not?" answered Alcide. "By this time you may be sure that my beloved
cousin knows all about the affair at Kolyvan."

"How many copies does your cousin work off of her dispatches?" asked
Blount, for the first time putting his question direct to his companion.

"Well," answered Alcide, laughing, "my cousin is a very discreet person,
who does not like to be talked about, and who would be in despair if she
troubled the sleep of which you are in need."

"I don't wish to sleep," replied the Englishman. "What will your cousin think
of the affairs of Russia?"

"That they seem for the time in a bad way. But, bah! the Muscovite
government is powerful; it cannot be really uneasy at an invasion of barbarians."

"Too much ambition has lost the greatest empires," answered Blount, who
was not exempt from a certain English jealousy with regard to Russian
pretensions in Central Asia.


"Oh, do not let us talk politics," cried Jolivet. "It is forbidden by the faculty.
Nothing can be worse for wounds in the shoulder--unless it was to put you to
sleep.”

"Let us, then, talk of what we ought to do," replied Blount. "M. Jolivet, I
have no intention at all of remaining a prisoner to these Tartars for an indefinite
time."

"Nor I, either, by Jove!"

"We will escape on the first opportunity?"

"Yes, if there is no other way of regaining our liberty."

"Do you know of any other?" asked Blount, looking at his companion.

"Certainly. We are not belligerents; we are neutral, and we will claim our
freedom."

"From that brute of a Feofar-Khan?"

"No; he would not understand," answered Jolivet; "but from his lieutenant,
Ivan Ogareff."

"He is a villain."

"No doubt; but the villain is a Russian. He knows that it does not do to trifle
with the rights of men, and he has no interest to retain us; on the contrary. But to
ask a favor of that gentleman does not quite suit my taste."

"But that gentleman is not in the camp, or at least I have not seen him here,"
observed Blount.

"He will come. He will not fail to do that. He must join the Emir. Siberia is
cut in two now, and very certainly Feofar's army is only waiting for him to
advance on Irkutsk."

"And once free, what shall we do?"

"Once free, we will continue our campaign, and follow the Tartars, until the
time comes when we can make our way into the Russian camp. We must not
give up the game. No, indeed; we have only just begun. You, friend, have
already had the honor of being wounded in the service of the Daily Telegraph,
whilst I--I have as yet suffered nothing in my cousin's service. Well, well!
Good," murmured Alcide Jolivet; "there he is asleep. A few hours' sleep and a
few cold water compresses are all that are required to set an Englishman on his
legs again. These fellows are made of cast iron."

And whilst Harry Blount rested, Alcide watched near him, after having
drawn out his note book, which he loaded with notes, determined besides to
share them with his companion, for the greater satisfaction of the readers of the
Daily Telegraph. Events had united them one with the other. They were no
longer jealous of each other. So, then, the thing that Michael Strogoff dreaded
above everything was the most lively desire of the two correspondents. Ivan


Ogareff's arrival would evidently be of use to them. Blount and Jolivet's interest
was, therefore, contrary to that of Michael. The latter well understood the
situation, and it was one reason, added to many others, which prevented him
from approaching his former traveling companions. He therefore managed so as
not to be seen by them.

Four days passed thus without the state of things being in anywise altered.
The prisoners heard no talk of the breaking up of the Tartar camp. They were
strictly guarded. It would have been impossible for them to pass the cordon of
foot and horse soldiers, which watched them night and day. As to the food which
was given them it was barely sufficient. Twice in the twenty-four hours they
were thrown a piece of the intestines of goats grilled on the coals, or a few bits
of that cheese called "kroute," made of sour ewe's milk, and which, soaked in
mare's milk, forms the Kirghiz dish, commonly called "koumyss." And this was
all. It may be added that the weather had become detestable. There were
considerable atmospheric commotions, bringing squalls mingled with rain. The
unfortunate prisoners, destitute of shelter, had to bear all the inclemencies of the
weather, nor was there the slightest alleviation to their misery. Several wounded
women and children died, and the prisoners were themselves compelled to dig
graves for the bodies of those whom their jailers would not even take the trouble
to bury.

During this trying period Alcide Jolivet and Michael Strogoff worked hard,
each in the portions of the enclosure in which they found themselves. Healthy
and vigorous, they suffered less than so many others, and could better endure the
hardships to which they were exposed. By their advice, and the assistance they
rendered, they were of the greatest possible use to their suffering and despairing
fellow-captives.

Was this state of things to last? Would Feofar-Khan, satisfied with his first
success, wait some time before marching on Irkutsk? Such, it was to be feared,
would be the case. But it was not so. The event so much wished for by Jolivet
and Blount, so much dreaded by Michael, occurred on the morning of the 12th of
August.

On that day the trumpets sounded, the drums beat, the cannon roared. A huge
cloud of dust swept along the road from Kolyvan. Ivan Ogareff, followed by
several thousand men, made his entry into the Tartar camp.


CHAPTER If CORRESPONDENTS IN TROUBLE


IVAN OGAREFF was bringing up the main body of the army of the Emir.
The cavalry and infantry now under him had formed part of the column which
had taken Omsk. Ogareff, not having been able to reduce the high town, in
which, it must be remembered, the governor and garrison had sought refuge, had
decided to pass on, not wishing to delay operations which ought to lead to the
conquest of Eastern Siberia. He therefore left a garrison in Omsk, and,
reinforcing himself en route with the conquerors of Kolyvan, joined Feofar's
army.

Ivan Ogareff's soldiers halted at the outposts of the camp. They received no
orders to bivouac. Their chief's plan, doubtless, was not to halt there, but to press
on and reach Tomsk in the shortest possible time, it being an important town,
naturally intended to become the center of future operations.

Besides his soldiers, Ogareff was bringing a convoy of Russian and Siberian
prisoners, captured either at Omsk or Kolyvan. These unhappy creatures were
not led to the enclosure--already too crowded--but were forced to remain at the
outposts without shelter, almost without nourishment. What fate was Feofar-
Khan reserving for these unfortunates? Would he imprison them in Tomsk, or
would some bloody execution, familiar to the Tartar chiefs, remove them when
they were found too inconvenient? This was the secret of the capricious Emir.

This army had not come from Omsk and Kolyvan without bringing in its
train the usual crowd of beggars, freebooters, pedlars, and gypsies, which
compose the rear-guard of an army on the march.

All these people lived on the country traversed, and left little of anything
behind them. There was, therefore, a necessity for pushing forward, if only to
secure provisions for the troops. The whole region between Ichim and the Obi,
now completely devastated, no longer offered any resources. The Tartars left a
desert behind them.

Conspicuous among the gypsies who had hastened from the western
provinces was the Tsigane troop, which had accompanied Michael Strogoff as
far as Perm. Sangarre was there. This fierce spy, the tool of Ivan Ogareff, had not
deserted her master. Ogareff had traveled rapidly to Ichim, whilst Sangarre and
her band had proceeded to Omsk by the southern part of the province.

It may be easily understood how useful this woman was to Ogareff. With her
gypsy-band she could penetrate anywhere. Ivan Ogareff was kept acquainted
with all that was going on in the very heart of the invaded provinces. There were


a hundred eyes, a hundred ears, open in his service. Besides, he paid liberally for
this espionage, from which he derived so much advantage.

Once Sangarre, being implicated in a very serious affair, had been saved by
the Russian officer. She never forgot what she owed him, and had devoted
herself to his service body and soul.

When Ivan Ogareff entered on the path of treason, he saw at once how he
might turn this woman to account. Whatever order he might give her, Sangarre
would execute it. An inexplicable instinct, more powerful still than that of
gratitude, had urged her to make herself the slave of the traitor to whom she had
been attached since the very beginning of his exile in Siberia.

Confidante and accomplice, Sangarre, without country, without family, had
been delighted to put her vagabond life to the service of the invaders thrown by
Ogareff on Siberia. To the wonderful cunning natural to her race she added a
wild energy, which knew neither forgiveness nor pity. She was a savage worthy
to share the wigwam of an Apache or the hut of an Andaman.

Since her arrival at Omsk, where she had rejoined him with her Tsiganes,
Sangarre had not again left Ogareff. The circumstance that Michael and Marfa
Strogoff had met was known to her. She knew and shared Ogareff's fears
concerning the journey of a courier of the Czar. Having Marfa Strogoff in her
power, she would have been the woman to torture her with all the refinement of
a Redskin in order to wrest her secret from her. But the hour had not yet come in
which Ogareff wished the old Siberian to speak. Sangarre had to wait, and she
waited, without losing sight of her whom she was watching, observing her
slightest gestures, her slightest words, endeavoring to catch the word "son"
escaping from her lips, but as yet always baffled by Marfa's taciturnity.

At the first flourish of the trumpets several officers of high rank, followed by
a brilliant escort of Usbeck horsemen, moved to the front of the camp to receive
Ivan Ogareff. Arrived in his presence, they paid him the greatest respect, and
invited him to accompany them to Feofar-Khan's tent.

Imperturbable as usual, Ogareff replied coldly to the deference paid to him.
He was plainly dressed; but, from a sort of impudent bravado, he still wore the
uniform of a Russian officer.

As he was about to enter the camp, Sangarre, passing among the officers
approached and remained motionless before him. "Nothing?" asked Ogareff.

"Nothing."

"Have patience."

"Is the time approaching when you will force the old woman to speak?"

"It is approaching, Sangarre."

"When will the old woman speak?"


"When we reach Tomsk."

"And we Shall be there--"

"In three days."

A strange gleam shot from Sangarre's great black eyes, and she retired with a
calm step. Ogareff pressed his spurs into his horse's flanks, and, followed by his
staff of Tartar officers, rode towards the Emir's tent.

Feofar-Khan was expecting his lieutenant. The council, composed of the
bearer of the royal seal, the khodja, and some high officers, had taken their
places in the tent. Ivan Ogareff dismounted and entered.

Feofar-Khan was a man of forty, tall, rather pale, of a fierce countenance,
and evil eyes. A curly black beard flowed over his chest. With his war costume,
coat of mail of gold and silver, cross-belt and scabbard glistening with precious
stones, boots with golden spurs, helmet ornamented with an aigrette of brilliant
diamonds, Feofar presented an aspect rather strange than imposing for a Tartar
Sardana-palus, an undisputed sovereign, who directs at his pleasure the life and
fortune of his subjects.

When Ivan Ogareff appeared, the great dignitaries remained seated on their
gold-embroidered cushions; but Feofar rose from a rich divan which occupied
the back part of the tent, the ground being hidden under the thick velvet-pile of a
Bokharian carpet.

The Emir approached Ogareff and gave him a kiss, the meaning of which he
could not mistake. This kiss made the lieutenant chief of the council, and placed
him temporarily above the khodja.

Then Feofar spoke. "I have no need to question you," said he; "speak, Ivan.
You will find here ears very ready to listen to you."

"Takhsir," answered Ogareff, "this is what I have to make known to you." He
spoke in the Tartar language, giving to his phrases the emphatic tum which
distinguishes the languages of the Orientals. 'Takhsir, this is not the time for
unnecessary words. What I have done at the head of your troops, you know. The
lines of the Ichim and the Irtych are now in our power; and the Turcoman
horsemen can bathe their horses in the now Tartar waters. The Kirghiz hordes
rose at the voice of Feofar-Khan. You can now push your troops towards the
east, and where the sun rises, or towards the west, where he sets."

"And if I march with the sun?" asked the Emir, without his countenance
betraying any of his thoughts.

"To march with the sun," answered Ogareff, "is to throw yourself towards
Europe; it is to conquer rapidly the Siberian provinces of Tobolsk as far as the
Ural Mountains."

"And if I go to meet this luminary of the heavens?"


"Tt is to subdue to the Tartar dominion, with Irkutsk, the richest countries of
Central Asia."

"But the armies of the Sultan of St. Petersburg?" said Feofar-Khan,
designating the Emperor of Russia by this strange title.

"You have nothing to fear from them," replied Ivan Ogareff. "The invasion
has been sudden; and before the Russian army can succor them, Irkutsk or
Tobolsk will have fallen into your power. The Czar's troops have been
overwhelmed at Kolyvan, as they will be everywhere where yours meet them."

"And what advice does your devotion to the Tartar cause suggest?" asked the
Emir, after a few moments' silence.

"My advice," answered Ivan Ogareff quickly, "is to march to meet the sun. It
is to give the grass of the eastern steppes to the Turcoman horses to consume. It
is to take Irkutsk, the capital of the eastern provinces, and with it a hostage, the
possession of whom is worth a whole country. In the place of the Czar, the
Grand Duke his brother must fall into your hands."

This was the great result aimed at by Ivan Ogareff. To listen to him, one
would have taken him for one of the cruel descendants of Stephan Razine, the
celebrated pirate who ravaged Southern Russia in the eighteenth century. To
seize the Grand Duke, murder him pitilessly, would fully satisfy his hatred.
Besides, with the capture of Irkutsk, all Eastern Siberia would pass to the
Tartars.

"Tt shall be thus, Ivan," replied Feofar.

"What are your orders, Takhsir?"

"To-day our headquarters shall be removed to Tomsk."

Ogareff bowed, and, followed by the housch-begui, he retired to execute the
Emir's orders.

As he was about to mount his horse, to return to the outposts, a tumult broke
out at some distance, in the part of the camp reserved for the prisoners. Shouts
were heard, and two or three shots fired. Perhaps it was an attempt at revolt or
escape, which must be summarily suppressed.

Ivan Ogareff and the housch-begui walked forward and almost immediately
two men, whom the soldiers had not been able to keep back appeared before
them.

The housch-begui, without more information, made a sign which was an
order for death, and the heads of the two prisoners would have rolled on the
ground had not Ogareff uttered a few words which arrested the sword already
raised aloft. The Russian had perceived that these prisoners were strangers, and
he ordered them to be brought to him.

They were Harry Blount and Alcide jolivet.


On Ogareff's arrival in the camp, they had demanded to be conducted to his
presence. The soldiers had refused. In consequence, a struggle, an attempt at
flight, shots fired which happily missed the two correspondents, but their
execution would not have been long delayed, if it had not been for the
intervention of the Emir's lieutenant.

The latter observed the prisoners for some moments, they being absolutely
unknown to him. They had been present at that scene in the post-house at Ichim,
in which Michael Strogoff had been struck by Ogareff; but the brutal traveler
had paid no attention to the persons then collected in the common room.

Blount and Jolivet, on the contrary, recognized him at once, and the latter
said in a low voice, "Hullo! It seems that Colonel Ogareff and the rude
personage of Ichim are one!" Then he added in his companion's ear, "Explain our
affair, Blount. You will do me a service. This Russian colonel in the midst of a
Tartar camp disgusts me; and although, thanks to him, my head is still on my
shoulders, my eyes would exhibit my feelings were I to attempt to look him in
the face."

So saying, Alcide Jolivet assumed a look of complete and haughty
indifference.

Whether or not Ivan Ogareff perceived that the prisoner's attitude was
insulting towards him, he did not let it appear. "Who are you, gentlemen?" he
asked in Russian, in a cold tone, but free from its usual rudeness.

"Two correspondents of English and French newspapers," replied Blount
laconically.

"You have, doubtless, papers which will establish your identity?"

"Here are letters which accredit us in Russia, from the English and French
chancellor's office."

Ivan Ogareff took the letters which Blount held out, and read them
attentively. "You ask," said he, "authorization to follow our military operations in
Siberia?"

"We ask to be free, that is all," answered the English correspondent dryly.

"You are so, gentlemen,” answered Ogareff; "I am curious to read your
articles in the Daily Telegraph."

"Sir," replied Blount, with the most imperturbable coolness, "it is sixpence a
number, including postage." And thereupon he returned to his companion, who
appeared to approve completely of his replies.

Ivan Ogareff, without frowning, mounted his horse, and going to the head of
his escort, soon disappeared in a cloud of dust.

"Well, Jolivet, what do you think of Colonel Ivan Ogareff, general-in-chief
of the Tartar troops?" asked Blount.


"I think, my dear friend," replied Alcide, smiling, "that the housch-begui
made a very graceful gesture when he gave the order for our heads to be cut off."

Whatever was the motive which led Ogareff to act thus in regard to the two
correspondents, they were free and could rove at their pleasure over the scene of
war. Their intention was not to leave it. The sort of antipathy which formerly
they had entertained for each other had given place to a sincere friendship.
Circumstances having brought them together, they no longer thought of
separating. The petty questions of rivalry were forever extinguished. Harry
Blount could never forget what he owed his companion, who, on the other hand,
never tried to remind him of it. This friendship too assisted the reporting
operations, and was thus to the advantage of their readers.

"And now," asked Blount, "what shall we do with our liberty?"

"Take advantage of it, of course," replied Alcide, "and go quietly to Tomsk to
see what is going on there."

"Until the time--very near, I hope--when we may rejoin some Russian
regiment?"

"As you say, my dear Blount, it won't do to Tartarise ourselves too much.
The best side is that of the most civilized army, and it is evident that the people
of Central Asia will have everything to lose and absolutely nothing to gain from
this invasion, while the Russians will soon repulse them. It is only a matter of
time."

The arrival of Ivan Ogareff, which had given Jolivet and Blount their liberty,
was to Michael Strogoff, on the contrary, a serious danger. Should chance bring
the Czar's courier into Ogareff's presence, the latter could not fail to recognize in
him the traveler whom he had so brutally treated at the Ichim post-house, and
although Michael had not replied to the insult as he would have done under any
other circumstances, attention would be drawn to him, and at once the
accomplishment of his plans would be rendered more difficult.

This was the unpleasant side of the business. A favorable result of his arrival,
however, was the order which was given to raise the camp that very day, and
remove the headquarters to Tomsk. This was the accomplishment of Michael's
most fervent desire. His intention, as has been said, was to reach Tomsk
concealed amongst the other prisoners; that is to say, without any risk of falling
into the hands of the scouts who swarmed about the approaches to this important
town. However, in consequence of the arrival of Ivan Ogareff, he questioned
whether it would not be better to give up his first plan and attempt to escape
during the journey.

Michael would, no doubt, have kept to the latter plan had he not learnt that
Feofar-Khan and Ogareff had already set out for the town with some thousands


of horsemen. "I will wait, then," said he to himself; "at least, unless some
exceptional opportunity for escape occurs. The adverse chances are numerous on
this side of Tomsk, while beyond I shall in a few hours have passed the most
advanced Tartar posts to the east. Still three days of patience, and may God aid
me!"

It was indeed a journey of three days which the prisoners, under the guard of
a numerous detachment of Tartars, were to make across the steppe. A hundred
and fifty versts lay between the camp and the town--an easy march for the Emir's
soldiers, who wanted for nothing, but a wretched journey for these people,
enfeebled by privations. More than one corpse would show the road they had
traversed.

It was two o'clock in the afternoon, on the 12th of August, under a hot sun
and cloudless sky, that the toptschi-baschi gave the order to start.

Alcide and Blount, having bought horses, had already taken the road to
Tomsk, where events were to reunite the principal personages of this story.

Amongst the prisoners brought by Ivan Ogareff to the Tartar camp was an
old woman, whose taciturmity seemed to keep her apart from all those who
shared her fate. Not a murmur issued from her lips. She was like a statue of
grief. This woman was more strictly guarded than anyone else, and, without her
appearing to notice, was constantly watched by the Tsigane Sangarre.
Notwithstanding her age she was compelled to follow the convoy of prisoners on
foot, without any alleviation of her suffering.

However, a kind Providence had placed near her a courageous, kind-hearted
being to comfort and assist her. Amongst her companions in misfortune a young
girl, remarkable for beauty and taciturnity, seemed to have given herself the task
of watching over her. No words had been exchanged between the two captives,
but the girl was always at the old woman's side when help was useful. At first
the mute assistance of the stranger was accepted with some mistrust. Gradually,
however, the young girl's clear glance, her reserve, and the mysterious sympathy
which draws together those who are in misfortune, thawed Marfa Strogoff's
coldness.

Nadia--for it was she--was thus able, without knowing it, to render to the
mother those attentions which she had herself received from the son. Her
instinctive kindness had doubly inspired her. In devoting herself to her service,
Nadia secured to her youth and beauty the protection afforded by the age of the
old prisoner.

On the crowd of unhappy people, embittered by sufferings, this silent pair--
one seeming to be the grandmother, the other the grand-daughter--imposed a sort
of respect.


After being carried off by the Tartar scouts on the Irtych, Nadia had been
taken to Omsk. Kept prisoner in the town, she shared the fate of all those
captured by Ivan Ogareff, and consequently that of Marfa Strogoff.

If Nadia had been less energetic, she would have succumbed to this double
blow. The interruption to her journey, the death of Michael, made her both
desperate and excited. Divided, perhaps forever, from her father, after so many
happy efforts had brought her near him, and, to crown her grief, separated from
the intrepid companion whom God seemed to have placed in her way to lead her.
The image of Michael Strogoff, struck before her eyes with a lance and
disappearing beneath the waters of the Irtych, never left her thoughts.

Could such a man have died thus? For whom was God reserving His
miracles if this good man, whom a noble object was urging onwards, had been
allowed to perish so miserably? Then anger would prevail over grief. The scene
of the affront so strangely borne by her companion at the Ichim relay returned to
her memory. Her blood boiled at the recollection.

"Who will avenge him who can no longer avenge himself?" she said.

And in her heart, she cried, "May it be I!" If before his death Michael had
confided his secret to her, woman, aye girl though she was, she might have been
able to carry to a successful conclusion the interrupted task of that brother whom
God had so soon taken from her.

Absorbed in these thoughts, it can be understood how Nadia could remain
insensible to the miseries even of her captivity. Thus chance had united her to
Marfa Strogoff without her having the least suspicion of who she was. How
could she imagine that this old woman, a prisoner like herself, was the mother of
him, whom she only knew as the merchant Nicholas Korpanoff? And on the
other hand, how could Marfa guess that a bond of gratitude connected this young
stranger with her son?

The thing that first struck Nadia in Marfa Strogoff was the similarity in the
way in which each bore her hard fate. This stoicism of the old woman under the
daily hardships, this contempt of bodily suffering, could only be caused by a
moral grief equal to her own. So Nadia thought; and she was not mistaken. It
was an instinctive sympathy for that part of her misery which Marfa did not
show which first drew Nadia towards her. This way of bearing her sorrow went
to the proud heart of the young girl. She did not offer her services; she gave
them. Marfa had neither to refuse nor accept them. In the difficult parts of the
journey, the girl was there to support her. When the provisions were given out,
the old woman would not have moved, but Nadia shared her small portion with
her; and thus this painful journey was performed. Thanks to her companion,
Marfa was able to follow the soldiers who guarded the prisoners without being


fastened to a saddle-bow, as were many other unfortunate wretches, and thus
dragged along this road of sorrow.

"May God reward you, my daughter, for what you have done for my old
age!" said Marfa Strogoff once, and for some time these were the only words
exchanged between the two unfortunate beings.

During these few days, which to them appeared like centuries, it would seem
that the old woman and the girl would have been led to speak of their situation.
But Marfa Strogoff, from a caution which may be easily understood, never spoke
about herself except with the greatest brevity. She never made the smallest
allusion to her son, nor to the unfortunate meeting.

Nadia also, if not completely silent, spoke little. However, one day her heart
overflowed, and she told all the events which had occurred from her departure
from Wladimir to the death of Nicholas Korpanoff.

All that her young companion told intensely interested the old Siberian.
"Nicholas Korpanoff!" said she. "Tell me again about this Nicholas. I know only
one man, one alone, in whom such conduct would not have astonished me.
Nicholas Korpanoff! Was that really his name? Are you sure of it, my daughter?"

"Why should he have deceived me in this," replied Nadia, "when he deceived
me in no other way?"

Moved, however, by a kind of presentiment, Marfa Strogoff put questions
upon questions to Nadia.

"You told me he was fearless, my daughter. You have proved that he has
been so?" asked she.

"Yes, fearless indeed!" replied Nadia.

"It was just what my son would have done," said Marfa to herself.

Then she resumed, "Did you not say that nothing stopped him, nor
astonished him; that he was so gentle in his strength that you had a sister as well
as a brother in him, and he watched over you like a mother?"

"Yes, yes," said Nadia. "Brother, sister, mother--he has been all to me!"

"And defended you like a lion?"

"A lion indeed!" replied Nadia. "A lion, a hero!"

"My son, my son!" thought the old Siberian. "But you said, however, that he
bore a terrible insult at that post-house in Ichim?"

"He did bear it," answered Nadia, looking down.

"He bore it!" murmured Marfa, shuddering.

"Mother, mother," cried Nadia, "do not blame him! He had a secret. A secret
of which God alone is as yet the judge!"

"And," said Marfa, raising her head and looking at Nadia as though she
would read the depths of her heart, "in that hour of humiliation did you not


despise this Nicholas Korpanoff?"

"I admired without understanding him,'
more worthy of respect."

The old woman was silent for a minute.

"Was he tall?" she asked.

"Very tall."

"And very handsome? Come, speak, my daughter."

"He was very handsome," replied Nadia, blushing.

"It was my son! I tell you it was my son!" exclaimed the old woman,
embracing Nadia.

"Your son!" said Nadia amazed, "your son!"

"Come," said Marfa; "let us get to the bottom of this, my child. Your
companion, your friend, your protector had a mother. Did he never speak to you
of his mother?"

"Of his mother?" said Nadia. "He spoke to me of his mother as I spoke to
him of my father--often, always. He adored her."

"Nadia, Nadia, you have just told me about my own son," said the old
woman.

And she added impetuously, "Was he not going to see this mother, whom you
say he loved, in Omsk?"

"No," answered Nadia, "no, he was not."

"Not!" cried Marfa. "You dare to tell me not!"

"I say so: but it remains to me to tell you that from motives which
outweighed everything else, motives which I do not know, I understand that
Nicholas Korpanoff had to traverse the country completely in secret. To him it
was a question of life and death, and still more, a question of duty and honor."

"Duty, indeed, imperious duty," said the old Siberian, "of those who sacrifice
everything, even the joy of giving a kiss, perhaps the last, to his old mother. All
that you do not know, Nadia--all that I did not know myself--I now know. You
have made me understand everything. But the light which you have thrown on
the mysteries of my heart, I cannot return on yours. Since my son has not told
you his secret, I must keep it. Forgive me, Nadia; I can never repay what you
have done for me."

"Mother, I ask you nothing," replied Nadia.

All was thus explained to the old Siberian, all, even the conduct of her son
with regard to herself in the inn at Omsk. There was no doubt that the young
girl's companion was Michael Strogoff, and that a secret mission in the invaded
country obliged him to conceal his quality of the Czar's courier.

"Ah, my brave boy!" thought Marfa. "No, I will not betray you, and tortures


'


replied the girl. "I never felt him


shall not wrest from me the avowal that it was you whom I saw at Omsk."

Marfa could with a word have paid Nadia for all her devotion to her. She
could have told her that her companion, Nicholas Korpanoff, or rather Michael
Strogoff, had not perished in the waters of the Irtych, since it was some days
after that incident that she had met him, that she had spoken to him.

But she restrained herself, she was silent, and contented herself with saying,
"Hope, my child! Misfortune will not overwhelm you. You will see your father
again; I feel it; and perhaps he who gave you the name of sister is not dead. God
cannot have allowed your brave companion to perish. Hope, my child, hope! Do
as I do. The mourning which I wear is not yet for my son."


CHAPTER HI BLOW FOR BLOW


SUCH were now the relative situations of Marfa Strogoff and Nadia. All was
understood by the old Siberian, and though the young girl was ignorant that her
much-regretted companion still lived, she at least knew his relationship to her
whom she had made her mother; and she thanked God for having given her the
joy of taking the place of the son whom the prisoner had lost.

But what neither of them could know was that Michael, having been
captured at Kolyvan, was in the same convoy and was on his way to Tomsk with
them.

The prisoners brought by Ivan Ogareff had been added to those already kept
by the Emir in the Tartar camp. These unfortunate people, consisting of
Russians, Siberians, soldiers and civilians, numbered some thousands, and
formed a column which extended over several versts. Some among them being
considered dangerous were handcuffed and fastened to a long chain. There were,
too, women and children, many of the latter suspended to the pommels of the
saddles, while the former were dragged mercilessly along the road on foot, or
driven forward as if they were animals. The horsemen compelled them to
maintain a certain order, and there were no laggards with the exception of those
who fell never to rise again.

In consequence of this arrangement, Michael Strogoff, marching in the first
ranks of those who had left the Tartar camp--that is to say, among the Kolyvan
prisoners--was unable to mingle with the prisoners who had arrived after him
from Omsk. He had therefore no suspicion that his mother and Nadia were
present in the convoy, nor did they suppose that he was among those in front.
This journey from the camp to Tomsk, performed under the lashes and spear-
points of the soldiers, proved fatal to many, and terrible to all. The prisoners
traveled across the steppe, over a road made still more dusty by the passage of
the Emir and his vanguard. Orders had been given to march rapidly. The short
halts were rare. The hundred miles under a burning sky seemed interminable,
though they were performed as rapidly as possible.

The country, which extends from the right of the Obi to the base of the spur
detached from the Sayanok Mountains, is very sterile. Only a few stunted and
burnt-up shrubs here and there break the monotony of the immense plain. There
was no cultivation, for there was no water; and it was water that the prisoners,
parched by their painful march, most needed. To find a stream they must have
diverged fifty versts eastward, to the very foot of the mountains.


There flows the Tom, a little affluent of the Obi, which passes near Tomsk
before losing itself in one of the great northern arteries. There water would have
been abundant, the steppe less arid, the heat less severe. But the strictest orders
had been given to the commanders of the convoy to reach Tomsk by the shortest
way, for the Emir was much afraid of being taken in the flank and cut off by
some Russian column descending from the northern provinces.

It is useless to dwell upon the sufferings of the unhappy prisoners. Many
hundreds fell on the steppe, where their bodies would lie until winter, when the
wolves would devour the remnants of their bones.

As Nadia helped the old Siberian, so in the same way did Michael render to
his more feeble companions in misfortune such services as his situation allowed.
He encouraged some, supported others, going to and fro, until a prick from a
soldier's lance obliged him to resume the place which had been assigned him in
the ranks.

Why did he not endeavor to escape?

The reason was that he had now quite determined not to venture until the
steppe was safe for him. He was resolved in his idea of going as far as Tomsk "at
the Emir's expense," and indeed he was right. As he observed the numerous
detachments which scoured the plain on the convoy's flanks, now to the south,
now to the north, it was evident that before he could have gone two versts he
must have been recaptured. The Tartar horsemen swarmed--it actually appeared
as if they sprang from the earth--like insects which a thunderstorm brings to the
surface of the ground. Flight under these conditions would have been extremely
difficult, if not impossible. The soldiers of the escort displayed excessive
vigilance, for they would have paid for the slightest carelessness with their
heads.

At nightfall of the 15th of August, the convoy reached the little village of
Zabediero, thirty versts from Tomsk.

The prisoners' first movement would have been to rush into the river, but
they were not allowed to leave the ranks until the halt had been organized.
Although the current of the Tom was just now like a torrent, it might have
favored the flight of some bold or desperate man, and the strictest measures of
vigilance were taken. Boats, requisitioned at Zabediero, were brought up to the
Tom and formed a line of obstacles impossible to pass. As to the encampment on
the outskirts of the village, it was guarded by a cordon of sentinels.

Michael Strogoff, who now naturally thought of escape, saw, after carefully
surveying the situation, that under these conditions it was perfectly impossible;
so, not wishing to compromise himself, he waited.

The prisoners were to encamp for the whole night on the banks of the Tom,


for the Emir had put off the entrance of his troops into Tomsk. It had been
decided that a military fete should mark the inauguration of the Tartar
headquarters in this important city. Feofar-Khan already occupied the fortress,
but the bulk of his army bivouacked under its walls, waiting until the time came
for them to make a solemn entry.

Ivan Ogareff left the Emir at Tomsk, where both had arrived the evening
before, and returned to the camp at Zabediero. From here he was to start the next
day with the rear-guard of the Tartar army. A house had been arranged for him in
which to pass the night. At sunrise horse and foot soldiers were to proceed to
Tomsk, where the Emir wished to receive them with the pomp usual to Asiatic
sovereigns. As soon as the halt was organized, the prisoners, worn out with their
three days' journey, and suffering from burning thirst, could drink and take a
little rest. The sun had already set, when Nadia, supporting Marfa Strogoff,
reached the banks of the Tom. They had not till then been able to get through
those who crowded the banks, but at last they came to drink in their turn.

The old woman bent over the clear stream, and Nadia, plunging in her hand,
carried it to Marfa's lips. Then she refreshed herself. They found new life in
these welcome waters. Suddenly Nadia started up; an involuntary cry escaped
her.

Michael Strogoff was there, a few steps from her. It was he. The dying rays
of the sun fell upon him.

At Nadia's cry Michael started. But he had sufficient command over himself
not to utter a word by which he might have been compromised. And yet, when
he saw Nadia, he also recognized his mother.

Feeling he could not long keep master of himself at this unexpected meeting,
he covered his eyes with his hands and walked quickly away.

Nadia's impulse was to run after him, but the old Siberian murmured in her
ear, "Stay, my daughter!"

"It is he!" replied Nadia, choking with emotion. "He lives, mother! It is he!"

"Tt is my son," answered Marfa, "it is Michael Strogoff, and you see that I do
not make a step towards him! Imitate me, my daughter."

Michael had just experienced the most violent emotion which a man can feel.
His mother and Nadia were there!

The two prisoners who were always together in his heart, God had brought
them together in this common misfortune. Did Nadia know who he was? Yes, for
he had seen Marfa's gesture, holding her back as she was about to rush towards
him. Marfa, then, had understood all, and kept his secret.

During that night, Michael was twenty times on the point of looking for and
joining his mother; but he knew that he must resist the longing he felt to take her


in his arms, and once more press the hand of his young companion. The least
imprudence might be fatal. He had besides sworn not to see his mother. Once at
Tomsk, since he could not escape this very night, he would set off without
having even embraced the two beings in whom all the happiness of his life was
centered, and whom he should leave exposed to so many perils.

Michael hoped that this fresh meeting at the Zabediero camp would have no
disastrous consequences either to his mother or to himself. But he did not know
that part of this scene, although it passed so rapidly, had been observed by
Sangarre, Ogareff's spy.

The Tsigane was there, a few paces off, on the bank, as usual, watching the
old Siberian woman. She had not caught sight of Michael, for he disappeared
before she had time to look around; but the mother's gesture as she kept back
Nadia had not escaped her, and the look in Marfa's eyes told her all.

It was now beyond doubt that Marfa Strogoff's son, the Czar's courier, was at
this moment in Zabediero, among Ivan Ogareff's prisoners. Sangarre did not
know him, but she knew that he was there. She did not then attempt to discover
him, for it would have been impossible in the dark and the immense crowd.

As for again watching Nadia and Marfa Strogoff, that was equally useless. It
was evident that the two women would keep on their guard, and it would be
impossible to overhear anything of a nature to compromise the courier of the
Czar. The Tsigane's first thought was to tell Ivan Ogareff. She therefore
immediately left the encampment. A quarter of an hour after, she reached
Zabediero, and was shown into the house occupied by the Emir's lieutenant.
Ogareff received the Tsigane directly.

"What have you to tell me, Sangarre?" he asked.

"Marfa Strogoff's son is in the encampment."

"A prisoner?"

"A prisoner."

"Ah!" exclaimed Ogareff, "I shall know--"

"You will know nothing, Ivan," replied Tsigane; "for you do not even know
him by sight."

"But you know him; you have seen him, Sangarre?"

"I have not seen him; but his mother betrayed herself by a gesture, which
told me everything."

"Are you not mistaken?"

"I am not mistaken."

"You know the importance which I attach to the apprehension of this
courier," said Ivan Ogareff. "If the letter which he has brought from Moscow
reaches Irkutsk, if it is given to the Grand Duke, the Grand Duke will be on his


guard, and I shall not be able to get at him. I must have that letter at any price.
Now you come to tell me that the bearer of this letter is in my power. I repeat,
Sangarre, are you not mistaken?"

Ogareff spoke with great animation. His emotion showed the extreme
importance he attached to the possession of this letter. Sangarre was not at all put
out by the urgency with which Ogareff repeated his question. "I am not
mistaken, Ivan," she said.

"But, Sangarre, there are thousands of prisoners; and you say that you do not
know Michael Strogoff."

"No," answered the Tsigane, with a look of savage joy, "I do not know him;
but his mother knows him. Ivan, we must make his mother speak."

"To-morrow she shall speak!" cried Ogareff. So saying, he extended his hand
to the Tsigane, who kissed it; for there is nothing servile in this act of respect, it
being usual among the Northern races.

Sangarre returned to the camp. She found out Nadia and Marfa Strogoff, and
passed the night in watching them. Although worn out with fatigue, the old
woman and the girl did not sleep. Their great anxiety kept them awake. Michael
was living, but a prisoner. Did Ogareff know him, or would he not soon find him
out? Nadia was occupied by the one thought that he whom she had thought dead
still lived. But Marfa saw further into the future: and, although she did not care
what became of herself, she had every reason to fear for her son.

Sangarre, under cover of the night, had crept near the two women, and
remained there several hours listening. She heard nothing. From an instinctive
feeling of prudence not a word was exchanged between Nadia and Marfa
Strogoff. The next day, the 16th of August, about ten in the morning, trumpet-
calls resounded throughout the encampment. The Tartar soldiers were almost
immediately under arms.

Ivan Ogareff arrived, surrounded by a large staff of Tartar officers. His face
was more clouded than usual, and his knitted brow gave signs of latent wrath
which was waiting for an occasion to break forth.

Michael Strogoff, hidden in a group of prisoners, saw this man pass. He had
a presentiment that some catastrophe was imminent: for Ivan Ogareff knew now
that Marfa was the mother of Michael Strogoff.

Ogareff dismounted, and his escort cleared a large circle round him. Just then
Sangarre approached him, and said, "I have no news."

Ivan Ogareff's only reply was to give an order to one of his officers. Then the
ranks of prisoners were brutally hurried up by the soldiers. The unfortunate
people, driven on with whips, or pushed on with lances, arranged themselves
round the camp. A strong guard of soldiers drawn up behind, rendered escape


impossible.

Silence then ensued, and, on a sign from Ivan Ogareff, Sangarre advanced
towards the group, in the midst of which stood Marfa.

The old Siberian saw her, and knew what was going to happen. A scornful
smile passed over her face. Then leaning towards Nadia, she said in a low tone,
"You know me no longer, my daughter. Whatever may happen, and however
hard this trial may be, not a word, not a sign. It concerns him, and not me."

At that moment Sangarre, having regarded her for an instant, put her hand on
her shoulder.

"What do you want with me?" said Marfa.

"Come!" replied Sangarre, and pushing the old Siberian before her, she took
her to Ivan Ogareff, in the middle of the cleared ground. Michael cast down his
eyes that their angry flashings might not appear.

Marfa, standing before Ivan Ogareff, drew herself up, crossed her arms on
her breast, and waited.

"You are Marfa Strogoff?" asked Ogareff.

"Yes," replied the old Siberian calmly.

"Do you retract what you said to me when, three days ago, I interrogated you
at Omsk?"

"No!"

"Then you do not know that your son, Michael Strogoff, courier of the Czar,
has passed through Omsk?"

"T do not know it."

"And the man in whom you thought you recognized your son, was not he
your son?"

"He was not my son."

"And since then you have not seen him amongst the prisoners?"

"No."

"If he were pointed out, would you recognize him?"

"No."

On this reply, which showed such determined resolution, a murmur was
heard amongst the crowd.

Ogareff could not restrain a threatening gesture.

"Listen," said he to Marfa, "your son is here, and you shall immediately point
him out to me."

"No."

"All these men, taken at Omsk and Kolyvan, will defile before you; and if
you do not show me Michael Strogoff, you shall receive as many blows of the
knout as men shall have passed before you."


Ivan Ogareff saw that, whatever might be his threats, whatever might be the
tortures to which he submitted her, the indomitable Siberian would not speak. To
discover the courier of the Czar, he counted, then, not on her, but on Michael
himself. He did not believe it possible that, when mother and son were in each
other's presence, some involuntary movement would not betray him. Of course,
had he wished to seize the imperial letter, he would simply have given orders to
search all the prisoners; but Michael might have destroyed the letter, having
learnt its contents; and if he were not recognized, if he were to reach Irkutsk, all
Ivan Ogareff's plans would be baffled. It was thus not only the letter which the
traitor must have, but the bearer himself.

Nadia had heard all, and she now knew who was Michael Strogoff, and why
he had wished to cross, without being recognized, the invaded provinces of
Siberia.

On an order from Ivan Ogareff the prisoners defiled, one by one, past Marfa,
who remained immovable as a statue, and whose face expressed only perfect
indifference.

Her son was among the last. When in his turn he passed before his mother,
Nadia shut her eyes that she might not see him. Michael was to all appearance
unmoved, but the palm of his hand bled under his nails, which were pressed into
them.

Ivan Ogareff was baffled by mother and son.

Sangarre, close to him, said one word, "The knout!"

"Yes," cried Ogareff, who could no longer restrain himself; "the knout for
this wretched old woman--the knout to the death!"

A Tartar soldier bearing this terrible instrument of torture approached Marfa.
The knout is composed of a certain number of leathern thongs, at the end of
which are attached pieces of twisted iron wire. It is reckoned that a sentence to
one hundred and twenty blows of this whip is equivalent to a sentence of death.

Marfa knew it, but she knew also that no torture would make her speak. She
was Sacrificing her life.

Marfa, seized by two soldiers, was forced on her knees on the ground. Her
dress torn off left her back bare. A saber was placed before her breast, at a few
inches' distance only. Directly she bent beneath her suffering, her breast would
be pierced by the sharp steel.

The Tartar drew himself up. He waited. "Begin!" said Ogareff. The whip
whistled in the air.

But before it fell a powerful hand stopped the Tartar's arm. Michael was
there. He had leapt forward at this horrible scene. If at the relay at Ichim he had
restrained himself when Ogareff's whip had struck him, here before his mother,


who was about to be struck, he could not do so. Ivan Ogareff had succeeded.

"Michael Strogoff!" cried he. Then advancing, "Ah, the man of Ichim?"

"Himself!" said Michael. And raising the knout he struck Ogareff a sharp
blow across the face. "Blow for blow!" said he.

"Well repaid!" cried a voice concealed by the tumult.

Twenty soldiers threw themselves on Michael, and in another instant he
would have been slain.

But Ogareff, who on being struck had uttered a cry of rage and pain, stopped
them. "This man is reserved for the Emir's judgment," said he. "Search him!"

The letter with the imperial arms was found in Michael's bosom; he had not
had time to destroy it; it was handed to Ogareff.

The voice which had pronounced the words, "Well repaid!" was that of no
other than Alcide Jolivet. "Par-dieu!" said he to Blount, "they are rough, these
people. Acknowledge that we owe our traveling companion a good turn.
Korpanoff or Strogoff is worthy of it. Oh, that was fine retaliation for the little
affair at Ichim."

"Yes, retaliation truly," replied Blount; "but Strogoff is a dead man. I suspect
that, for his own interest at all events, it would have been better had he not
possessed quite so lively a recollection of the event."

"And let his mother perish under the knout?"

"Do you think that either she or his sister will be a bit better off from this
outbreak of his?"

"I do not know or think anything except that I should have done much the
same in his position," replied Alcide. "What a scar the Colonel has received!
Bah! one must boil over sometimes. We should have had water in our veins
instead of blood had it been incumbent on us to be always and everywhere
unmoved to wrath."

"A neat little incident for our journals," observed Blount, "if only Ivan
Ogareff would let us know the contents of that letter."

Ivan Ogareff, when he had stanched the blood which was trickling down his
face, had broken the seal. He read and re-read the letter deliberately, as if he was
determined to discover everything it contained.

Then having ordered that Michael, carefully bound and guarded, should be
carried on to Tomsk with the other prisoners, he took command of the troops at
Zabediero, and, amid the deafening noise of drums and trumpets, he marched
towards the town where the Emir awaited him.


CHAPTER IV THE TRIUMPHAL ENTRY


TOMSK, founded in 1604, nearly in the heart of the Siberian provinces, is
one of the most important towns in Asiatic Russia. Tobolsk, situated above the
sixtieth parallel; Irkutsk, built beyond the hundredth meridian--have seen Tomsk
increase at their expense.

And yet Tomsk, as has been said, is not the capital of this important
province. It is at Omsk that the Governor-General of the province and the official
world reside. But Tomsk is the most considerable town of that territory. The
country being rich, the town is so likewise, for it is in the center of fruitful
mines. In the luxury of its houses, its arrangements, and its equipages, it might
rival the greatest European capitals. It is a city of millionaires, enriched by the
spade and pickax, and though it has not the honor of being the residence of the
Czar's representative, it can boast of including in the first rank of its notables the
chief of the merchants of the town, the principal grantees of the imperial
government's mines.

But the millionaires were fled now, and except for the crouching poor, the
town stood empty to the hordes of Feofar-Khan. At four o'clock the Emir made
his entry into the square, greeted by a flourish of trumpets, the rolling sound of
the big drums, salvoes of artillery and musketry.

Feofar mounted his favorite horse, which carried on its head an aigrette of
diamonds. The Emir still wore his uniform. He was accompanied by a numerous
staff, and beside him walked the Khans of Khokhand and Koundouge and the
grand dignitaries of the Khanats.

At the same moment appeared on the terrace the chief of Feofar's wives, the
queen, if this title may be given to the sultana of the states of Bokhara. But,
queen or slave, this woman of Persian origin was wonderfully beautiful.
Contrary to the Mahometan custom, and no doubt by some caprice of the Emir,
she had her face uncovered. Her hair, divided into four plaits, fell over her
dazzling white shoulders, scarcely concealed by a veil of silk worked in gold,
which fell from the back of a cap studded with gems of the highest value. Under
her blue-silk petticoat, fell the "zirdjameh" of silken gauze, and above the sash
lay the "pirahn." But from the head to the little feet, such was the profusion of
jewels--gold beads strung on silver threads, chaplets of turquoises, "firouzehs"
from the celebrated mines of Elbourz, necklaces of cornelians, agates, emeralds,
opals, and sapphires--that her dress seemed to be literally made of precious
stones. The thousands of diamonds which sparkled on her neck, arms, hands, at


her waist, and at her feet might have been valued at almost countless millions of
roubles.

The Emir and the Khans dismounted, as did the dignitaries who escorted
them. All entered a magnificent tent erected on the center of the first terrace.
Before the tent, as usual, the Koran was laid.

Feofar's lieutenant did not make them wait, and before five o'clock the
trumpets announced his arrival. Ivan Ogareff--the Scarred Cheek, as he was
already nick-named--wearing the uniform of a Tartar officer, dismounted before
the Emir's tent. He was accompanied by a party of soldiers from the camp at
Zabediero, who ranged up at the sides of the square, in the middle of which a
place for the sports was reserved. A large scar could be distinctly seen cut
obliquely across the traitor's face.

Ogareff presented his principal officers to the Emir, who, without departing
from the coldness which composed the main part of his dignity, received them in
a way which satisfied them that they stood well in the good graces of their chief.

At least so thought Harry Blount and Alcide Jolivet, the two inseparables,
now associated together in the chase after news. After leaving Zabediero, they
had proceeded rapidly to Tomsk. The plan they had agreed upon was to leave the
Tartars as soon as possible, and to join a Russian regiment, and, if they could, to
go with them to Irkutsk. All that they had seen of the invasion, its burnings, its
pillages, its murders, had perfectly sickened them, and they longed to be among
the ranks of the Siberian army. Jolivet had told his companion that he could not
leave Tomsk without making a sketch of the triumphal entry of the Tartar troops,
if it was only to satisfy his cousin's curiosity; but the same evening they both
intended to take the road to Irkutsk, and being well mounted hoped to distance
the Emir's scouts.

Alcide and Blount mingled therefore in the crowd, so as to lose no detail of a
festival which ought to supply them with a hundred good lines for an article.
They admired the magnificence of Feofar-Khan, his wives, his officers, his
guards, and all the Eastern pomp, of which the ceremonies of Europe can give
not the least idea. But they turned away with disgust when Ivan Ogareff
presented himself before the Emir, and waited with some impatience for the
amusements to begin.

"You see, my dear Blount,” said Alcide, "we have come too soon, like honest
citizens who like to get their money's worth. All this is before the curtain rises, it
would have been better to arrive only for the ballet."

"What ballet?" asked Blount.

"The compulsory ballet, to be sure. But see, the curtain is going to rise."
Alcide Jolivet spoke as if he had been at the Opera, and taking his glass from its


case, he prepared, with the air of a connoisseur, "to examine the first act of
Feofar's company."

A painful ceremony was to precede the sports. In fact, the triumph of the
vanquisher could not be complete without the public humiliation of the
vanquished. This was why several hundreds of prisoners were brought under the
soldiers' whips. They were destined to march past Feofar-Khan and his allies
before being crammed with their companions into the prisons in the town.

In the first ranks of these prisoners figured Michael Strogoff. As Ogareff had
ordered, he was specially guarded by a file of soldiers. His mother and Nadia
were there also.

The old Siberian, although energetic enough when her own safety was in
question, was frightfully pale. She expected some terrible scene. It was not
without reason that her son had been brought before the Emir. She therefore
trembled for him. Ivan Ogareff was not a man to forgive having been struck in
public by the knout, and his vengeance would be merciless. Some frightful
punishment familiar to the barbarians of Central Asia would, no doubt, be
inflicted on Michael Ogareff had protected him against the soldiers because he
well knew what would happen by reserving him for the justice of the Emir.

The mother and son had not been able to speak together since the terrible
scene in the camp at Zabediero. They had been pitilessly kept apart--a bitter
aggravation of their misery, for it would have been some consolation to have
been together during these days of captivity. Marfa longed to ask her son's
pardon for the harm she had unintentionally done him, for she reproached herself
with not having commanded her maternal feelings. If she had restrained herself
in that post-house at Omsk, when she found herself face to face with him,
Michael would have passed unrecognized, and all these misfortunes would have
been avoided.

Michael, on his side, thought that if his mother was there, if Ogareff had
brought her with him, it was to make her suffer with the sight of his own
punishment, or perhaps some frightful death was reserved for her also.

As to Nadia, she only asked herself how she could save them both, how
come to the aid of son and mother. As yet she could only wonder, but she felt
instinctively that she must above everything avoid drawing attention upon
herself, that she must conceal herself, make herself insignificant. Perhaps she
might at least gnaw through the meshes which imprisoned the lion. At any rate if
any opportunity was given her she would seize upon it, and sacrifice herself, if
need be, for the son of Marfa Strogoff.

In the meantime the greater part of the prisoners were passing before the
Emir, and as they passed each was obliged to prostrate himself, with his forehead


in the dust, in token of servitude. Slavery begins by humiliation. When the
unfortunate people were too slow in bending, the rough guards threw them
violently to the ground.

Alcide Jolivet and his companion could not witness such a sight without
feeling indignant.

"It is cowardly--let us go," said Alcide.

"No," answered Blount; "we must see it all."

"See it all!--ah!" cried Alcide, suddenly, grasping his companion's arm.

"What is the matter with you?" asked the latter.

"Look, Blount; it is she!"

"What she?"

"The sister of our traveling companion--alone, and a prisoner! We must save
her."

"Calm yourself," replied Blount coolly. "Any interference on our part in
behalf of the young girl would be worse than useless."

Alcide Jolivet, who had been about to rush forward, stopped, and Nadia--
who had not perceived them, her features being half hidden by her hair--passed
in her turn before the Emir without attracting his attention.

However, after Nadia came Marfa Strogoff; and as she did not throw herself
quickly in the dust, the guards brutally pushed her. She fell.

Her son struggled so violently that the soldiers who were guarding him could
scarcely hold him back. But the old woman rose, and they were about to drag her
on, when Ogareff interposed, saying, "Let that woman stay!"

As to Nadia, she happily regained the crowd of prisoners. Ivan Ogareff had
taken no notice of her.

Michael was then led before the Emir, and there he remained standing,
without casting down his eyes.

"Your forehead to the ground!" cried Ogareff.

"No!" answered Michael.

Two soldiers endeavored to make him bend, but they were themselves laid
on the ground by a buffet from the young man's fist.

Ogareff approached Michael. "You shall die!" he said.

"I can die," answered Michael fiercely; "but your traitor's face, Ivan, will not
the less carry forever the infamous brand of the knout."

At this reply Ivan Ogareff became perfectly livid.

"Who is this prisoner?" asked the Emir, in a tone of voice terrible from its
very calmness.

"A Russian spy," answered Ogareff. In asserting that Michael was a spy he
knew that the sentence pronounced against him would be terrible.


The Emir made a sign at which all the crowd bent low their heads. Then he
pointed with his hand to the Koran, which was brought him. He opened the
sacred book and placed his finger on one of its pages.

It was chance, or rather, according to the ideas of these Orientals, God
Himself who was about to decide the fate of Michael Strogoff. The people of
Central Asia give the name of "fal" to this practice. After having interpreted the
sense of the verse touched by the judge's finger, they apply the sentence
whatever it may be.

The Emir had let his finger rest on the page of the Koran. The chief of the
Ulemas then approached, and read in a loud voice a verse which ended with
these words, "And he will no more see the things of this earth."

"Russian spy!" exclaimed Feofar-Kahn in a voice trembling with fury, "you
have come to see what is going on in the Tartar camp. Then look while you


W


may.


CHAPTER V "LOOK WHILE YOU MAY!"

MICHAEL was held before the Emir's throne, at the foot of the terrace, his
hands bound behind his back. His mother overcome at last by mental and
physical torture, had sunk to the ground, daring neither to look nor listen.

"Look while you may," exclaimed Feofar-Kahn, stretching his arm towards
Michael in a threatening manner. Doubtless Ivan Ogareff, being well acquainted
with Tartar customs, had taken in the full meaning of these words, for his lips
curled for an instant in a cruel smile; he then took his place by Feofar-Khan.

A trumpet call was heard. This was the signal for the amusements to begin.
"Here comes the ballet," said Alcide to Blount; "but, contrary to our customs,
these barbarians give it before the drama."

Michael had been commanded to look at everything. He looked. A troop of
dancers poured into the open space before the Emir's tent. Different Tartar
instruments, the "doutare," a long-handled guitar, the "kobize," a kind of
violoncello, the "tschibyzga," a long reed flute; wind instruments, tom-toms,
tambourines, united with the deep voices of the singers, formed a strange
harmony. Added to this were the strains of an aerial orchestra, composed of a
dozen kites, which, fastened by strings to their centers, resounded in the breeze
like AEolian harps.

Then the dancers began. The performers were all of Persian origin; they were
no longer slaves, but exercised their profession at liberty. Formerly they figured
officially in the ceremonies at the court of Teheran, but since the accession of the
reigning family, banished or treated with contempt, they had been compelled to


seek their fortune elsewhere. They wore the national costume, and were adorned
with a profusion of jewels. Little triangles of gold, studded with jewels, glittered
in their ears. Circles of silver, marked with black, surrounded their necks and
legs.

These performers gracefully executed various dances, sometimes alone,
sometimes in groups. Their faces were uncovered, but from time to time they
threw a light veil over their heads, and a gauze cloud passed over their bright
eyes as smoke over a starry sky. Some of these Persians wore leathern belts
embroidered with pearls, from which hung little triangular bags. From these
bags, embroidered with golden filigree, they drew long narrow bands of scarlet
silk, on which were braided verses of the Koran. These bands, which they held
between them, formed a belt under which the other dancers darted; and, as they
passed each verse, following the precept it contained, they either prostrated
themselves on the earth or lightly bounded upwards, as though to take a place
among the houris of Mohammed's heaven.

But what was remarkable, and what struck Alcide, was that the Persians
appeared rather indolent than fiery. Their passion had deserted them, and, by the
kind of dances as well as by their execution, they recalled rather the calm and
self-possessed nauch girls of India than the impassioned dancers of Egypt.

When this was over, a stern voice was heard saying:

"Look while you may!"

The man who repeated the Emir's words--a tall spare Tartar--was he who
carried out the sentences of Feofar-Khan against offenders. He had taken his
place behind Michael, holding in his hand a broad curved saber, one of those
Damascene blades which are forged by the celebrated armorers of Karschi or
Hissar.

Behind him guards were carrying a tripod supporting a chafing-dish filled
with live coals. No smoke arose from this, but a light vapor surrounded it, due to
the incineration of a certain aromatic and resinous substance which he had
thrown on the surface.

The Persians were succeeded by another party of dancers, whom Michael
recognized. The journalists also appeared to recognize them, for Blount said to
his companion, "These are the Tsiganes of Nijni-Novgorod."

"No doubt of it," cried Alcide. "Their eyes, I imagine, bring more money to
these spies than their legs."

In putting them down as agents in the Emir's service, Alcide Jolivet was, by
all accounts, not mistaken.

In the first rank of the Tsiganes, Sangarre appeared, superb in her strange and
picturesque costume, which set off still further her remarkable beauty.


Sangarre did not dance, but she stood as a statue in the midst of the
performers, whose style of dancing was a combination of that of all those
countries through which their race had passed--Turkey, Bohemia, Egypt, Italy,
and Spain. They were enlivened by the sound of cymbals, which clashed on their
arms, and by the hollow sounds of the "daires"--a sort of tambourine played with
the fingers.

Sangarre, holding one of those daires, which she played between her hands,
encouraged this troupe of veritable corybantes. A young Tsigane, of about fifteen
years of age, then advanced. He held in his hand a "doutare," strings of which he
made to vibrate by a simple movement of the nails. He sung. During the singing
of each couplet, of very peculiar rhythm, a dancer took her position by him and
remained there immovable, listening to him, but each time that the burden came
from the lips of the young singer, she resumed her dance, dinning in his ears
with her daire, and deafening him with the clashing of her cymbals. Then, after
the last chorus, the remainder surrounded the Tsigane in the windings of their
dance.

At that moment a shower of gold fell from the hands of the Emir and his
train, and from the hands of his officers of all ranks; to the noise which the
pieces made as they struck the cymbals of the dancers, being added the last
murmurs of the doutares and tambourines.

"Lavish as robbers," said Alcide in the ear of his companion. And in fact it
was the result of plunder which was falling; for, with the Tartar tomans and
sequins, rained also Russian ducats and roubles.

Then silence followed for an instant, and the voice of the executioner, who
laid his hand on Michael's shoulder, once more pronounced the words, which
this repetition rendered more and more sinister:

"Look while you may"

But this time Alcide observed that the executioner no longer held the saber
bare in his hand.

Meanwhile the sun had sunk behind the horizon. A semi-obscurity began to
envelop the plain. The mass of cedars and pines became blacker and blacker, and
the waters of the Tom, totally obscured in the distance, mingled with the
approaching shadows.

But at that instant several hundreds of slaves, bearing lighted torches, entered
the square. Led by Sangarre, Tsiganes and Persians reappeared before the Emir's
throne, and showed off, by the contrast, their dances of styles so different. The
instruments of the Tartar orchestra sounded forth in harmony still more savage,
accompanied by the guttural cries of the singers. The kites, which had fallen to
the ground, once more winged their way into the sky, each bearing a parti-


colored lantern, and under a fresher breeze their harps vibrated with intenser
sound in the midst of the aerial illumination.

Then a squadron of Tartars, in their brilliant uniforms, mingled in the dances,
whose wild fury was increasing rapidly, and then began a performance which
produced a very strange effect. Soldiers came on the ground, armed with bare
sabers and long pistols, and, as they executed dances, they made the air re-echo
with the sudden detonations of their firearms, which immediately set going the
rumbling of the tambourines, and grumblings of the daires, and the gnashing of
doutares.

Their arms, covered with a colored powder of some metallic ingredient, after
the Chinese fashion, threw long jets--red, green, and blue--so that the groups of
dancers seemed to be in the midst of fireworks. In some respects, this
performance recalled the military dance of the ancients, in the midst of naked
swords; but this Tartar dance was rendered yet more fantastic by the colored fire,
which wound, serpent-like, above the dancers, whose dresses seemed to be
embroidered with fiery hems. It was like a kaleidoscope of sparks, whose infinite
combinations varied at each movement of the dancers.

Though it may be thought that a Parisian reporter would be perfectly
hardened to any scenic effect, which our modern ideas have carried so far, yet
Alcide Jolivet could not restrain a slight movement of the head, which at home,
between the Boulevard Montmartre and La Madeleine would have said--"Very
fair, very fair."


Then, suddenly, at a signal, all the lights of the fantasia were extinguished,
the dances ceased, and the performers disappeared. The ceremony was over, and
the torches alone lighted up the plateau, which a few instants before had been so
brilliantly illuminated.

On a sign from the Emir, Michael was led into the middle of the square.

"Blount," said Alcide to his companion, "are you going to see the end of all
this?”

"No, that I am not," replied Blount.

"The readers of the Daily Telegraph are, I hope, not very eager for the details
of an execution a la mode Tartare?"

"No more than your cousin!"

"Poor fellow!" added Alcide, as he watched Michael. "That valiant soldier
should have fallen on the field of battle!"

"Can we do nothing to save him?" said Blount.

"Nothing!"

The reporters recalled Michael's generous conduct towards them; they knew
now through what trials he must have passed, ever obedient to his duty; and in
the midst of these Tartars, to whom pity is unknown, they could do nothing for
him. Having little desire to be present at the torture reserved for the unfortunate
man, they returned to the town. An hour later, they were on the road to Irkutsk,
for it was among the Russians that they intended to follow what Alcide called,
by anticipation, "the campaign of revenge."

Meantime, Michael was standing ready, his eyes returning the Emir's
haughty glance, while his countenance assumed an expression of intense scorn
whenever he cast his looks on Ivan Ogareff. He was prepared to die, yet not a
single sign of weakness escaped him.

The spectators, waiting around the square, as well as Feofar-Khan's body-
guard, to whom this execution was only one of the attractions, were eagerly
expecting it. Then, their curiosity satisfied, they would rush off to enjoy the
pleasures of intoxication.

The Emir made a sign. Michael was thrust forward by his guards to the foot
of the terrace, and Feofar said to him, "You came to see our goings out and
comings in, Russian spy. You have seen for the last time. In an instant your eyes
will be forever shut to the day."

Michael's fate was to be not death, but blindness; loss of sight, more terrible
perhaps than loss of life. The unhappy man was condemned to be blinded.

However, on hearing the Emir's sentence Michael's heart did not grow faint.
He remained unmoved, his eyes wide open, as though he wished to concentrate
his whole life into one last look. To entreat pity from these savage men would be


useless, besides, it would be unworthy of him. He did not even think of it. His
thoughts were condensed on his mission, which had apparently so completely
failed; on his mother, on Nadia, whom he should never more see! But he let no
sign appear of the emotion he felt. Then, a feeling of vengeance to be
accomplished came over him. "Ivan," said he, in a stern voice, "Ivan the Traitor,
the last menace of my eyes shall be for you!"

Ivan Ogareff shrugged his shoulders.

But Michael was not to be looking at Ivan when his eyes were put out. Marfa
Strogoff stood before him.

"My mother!" cried he. "Yes! yes! my last glance shall be for you, and not
for this wretch! Stay there, before me! Now I see once more your well-beloved
face! Now shall my eyes close as they rest upon it...!"

The old woman, without uttering a word, advanced.

"Take that woman away!" said Ivan.

Two soldiers were about to seize her, but she stepped back and remained
standing a few paces from Michael.

The executioner appeared. This time, he held his saber bare in his hand, and
this saber he had just drawn from the chafing-dish, where he had brought it to a
white heat. Michael was going to be blinded in the Tartar fashion, with a hot
blade passed before his eyes!

Michael did not attempt to resist. Nothing existed before his eyes but his
mother, whom his eyes seemed to devour. All his life was in that last look.

Marfa Strogoff, her eyes open wide, her arms extended towards where he
stood, was gazing at him. The incandescent blade passed before Michael's eyes.

A despairing cry was heard. His aged mother fell senseless to the ground.
Michael Strogoff was blind.

His orders executed, the Emir retired with his train. There remained in the
square only Ivan Ogareff and the torch bearers. Did the wretch intend to insult
his victim yet further, and yet to give him a parting blow?

Ivan Ogareff slowly approached Michael, who, feeling him coming, drew
himself up. Ivan drew from his pocket the Imperial letter, he opened it, and with
supreme irony he held it up before the sightless eyes of the Czar's courier,
saying, "Read, now, Michael Strogoff, read, and go and repeat at Irkutsk what
you have read. The true Courier of the Czar is Ivan Ogareff."

This said, the traitor thrust the letter into his breast. Then, without looking
round he left the square, followed by the torch-bearers.

Michael was left alone, at a few paces from his mother, lying lifeless,
perhaps dead. He heard in the distance cries and songs, the varied noises of a
wild debauch. Tomsk, illuminated, glittered and gleamed.


Michael listened. The square was silent and deserted. He went, groping his
way, towards the place where his mother had fallen. He found her with his hand,
he bent over her, he put his face close to hers, he listened for the beating of her
heart. Then he murmured a few words.

Did Marfa still live, and did she hear her son's words? Whether she did so or
not, she made not the slightest movement. Michael kissed her forehead and her
white locks. He then raised himself, and, groping with his foot, trying to stretch
out his hand to guide himself, he walked by degrees to the edge of the square.

Suddenly Nadia appeared. She walked straight to her companion. A knife in
her hand cut the cords which bound Michael's arms. The blind man knew not
who had freed him, for Nadia had not spoken a word.

But this done: "Brother!" said she.

"Nadia!" murmured Michael, "Nadia!"

"Come, brother," replied Nadia, "use my eyes whilst yours sleep. I will lead
you to Irkutsk."


CHAPTER VI A FRIEND ON THE HIGHWAY

HALF an hour afterwards, Michael and Nadia had left Tomsk.

Many others of the prisoners were that night able to escape from the Tartars,
for officers and soldiers, all more or less intoxicated, had unconsciously relaxed
the vigilant guard which they had hitherto maintained. Nadia, after having been
carried off with the other prisoners, had been able to escape and return to the
square, at the moment when Michael was led before the Emir. There, mingling
with the crowd, she had witnessed the terrible scene. Not a cry escaped her when
the scorching blade passed before her companion's eyes. She kept, by her
strength of will, mute and motionless. A providential inspiration bade her
restrain herself and retain her liberty that she might lead Marfa's son to that goal
which he had sworn to reach. Her heart for an instant ceased to beat when the
aged Siberian woman fell senseless to the ground, but one thought restored her
to her former energy. "I will be the blind man's dog," said she.

On Ogareff's departure, Nadia had concealed herself in the shade. She had
waited till the crowd left the square. Michael, abandoned as a wretched being
from whom nothing was to be feared, was alone. She saw him draw himself
towards his mother, bend over her, kiss her forehead, then rise and grope his way
in flight.

A few instants later, she and he, hand in hand, had descended the steep slope,
when, after having followed the high banks of the Tom to the furthest extremity
of the town, they happily found a breach in the inclosure.


The road to Irkutsk was the only one which penetrated towards the east. It
could not be mistaken. It was possible that on the morrow, after some hours of
carousal, the scouts of the Emir, once more scattering over the steppes, might cut
off all communication. It was of the greatest importance therefore to get in
advance of them. How could Nadia bear the fatigues of that night, from the 16th
to the 17th of August? How could she have found strength for so long a stage?
How could her feet, bleeding under that forced march, have carried her thither?
It is almost incomprehensible. But it is none the less true that on the next
morning, twelve hours after their departure from Tomsk, Michael and she
reached the town of Semilowskoe, after a journey of thirty-five miles.

Michael had not uttered a single word. It was not Nadia who held his hand, it
was he who held that of his companion during the whole of that night; but,
thanks to that trembling little hand which guided him, he had walked at his
ordinary pace.

Semilowskoe was almost entirely abandoned. The inhabitants had fled. Not
more than two or three houses were still occupied. All that the town contained,
useful or precious, had been carried off in wagons. However, Nadia was obliged
to make a halt of a few hours. They both required food and rest.

The young girl led her companion to the extremity of the town. There they
found an empty house, the door wide open. An old rickety wooden bench stood
in the middle of the room, near the high stove which is to be found in all
Siberian houses. They silently seated themselves.

Nadia gazed in her companion's face as she had never before gazed. There
was more than gratitude, more than pity, in that look. Could Michael have seen
her, he would have read in that sweet desolate gaze a world of devotion and
tenderness.

The eyelids of the blind man, made red by the heated blade, fell half over his
eyes. The pupils seemed to be singularly enlarged. The rich blue of the iris was
darker than formerly. The eyelashes and eyebrows were partly burnt, but in
appearance, at least, the old penetrating look appeared to have undergone no
change. If he could no longer see, if his blindness was complete, it was because
the sensibility of the retina and optic nerve was radically destroyed by the fierce
heat of the steel.

Then Michael stretched out his hands.

"Are you there, Nadia?" he asked.

"Yes," replied the young girl; "I am close to you, and I will not go away from
you, Michael."

At his name, pronounced by Nadia for the first time, a thrill passed through
Michael's frame. He perceived that his companion knew all, who he was.


"Nadia," replied he, "we must separate!"

"We separate? How so, Michael?"

"T must not be an obstacle to your journey! Your father is waiting for you at
Irkutsk! You must rejoin your father!"

"My father would curse me, Michael, were I to abandon you now, after all
you have done for me!"

"Nadia, Nadia," replied Michael, "you should think only of your father!"

"Michael," replied Nadia, "you have more need of me than my father. Do
you mean to give up going to Irkutsk?"

"Never!" cried Michael, in a tone which plainly showed that none of his
energy was gone.

"But you have not the letter!"

"That letter of which Ivan Ogareff robbed me! Well! I shall manage without
it, Nadia! They have treated me as a spy! I will act as a spy! I will go and repeat
at Irkutsk all I have seen, all I have heard; I swear it by Heaven above! The
traitor shall meet me one day face to face! But I must arrive at Irkutsk before
him."

"And yet you speak of our separating, Michael?"

"Nadia, they have taken everything from me!"

"I have some roubles still, and my eyes! I can see for you, Michael; and I
will lead you thither, where you could not go alone!"

"And how shall we go?"

"On foot."

"And how shall we live?"

"By begging."

"Let us start, Nadia."

"Come, Michael."

The two young people no longer kept the names "brother" and "sister." In
their common misfortune, they felt still closer united. They left the house after
an hour's repose. Nadia had procured in the town some morsels of
"tchornekhleb," a sort of barley bread, and a little mead, called "meod" in
Russia. This had cost her nothing, for she had already begun her plan of begging.
The bread and mead had in some degree appeased Michael's hunger and thirst.
Nadia gave him the lion's share of this scanty meal. He ate the pieces of bread
his companion gave him, drank from the gourd she held to his lips.

"Are you eating, Nadia?" he asked several times.

"Yes, Michael," invariably replied the young girl, who contented herself with
what her companion left.

Michael and Nadia quitted Semilowskoe, and once more set out on the


laborious road to Irkutsk. The girl bore up in a marvelous way against fatigue.
Had Michael seen her, perhaps he would not have had the courage to go on. But
Nadia never complained, and Michael, hearing no sigh, walked at a speed he was
unable to repress. And why? Did he still expect to keep before the Tartars? He
was on foot, without money; he was blind, and if Nadia, his only guide, were to
be separated from him, he could only lie down by the side of the road and there
perish miserably. But if, on the other hand, by energetic perseverance he could
reach Krasnoiarsk, all was perhaps not lost, since the governor, to whom he
would make himself known, would not hesitate to give him the means of
reaching Irkutsk.

Michael walked on, speaking little, absorbed in his own thoughts. He held
Nadia's hand. The two were in incessant communication. It seemed to them that
they had no need of words to exchange their thoughts. From time to time
Michael said, "Speak to me, Nadia."

"Why should I, Michael? We are thinking together!" the young girl would
reply, and contrived that her voice should not betray her extreme fatigue.

But sometimes, as if her heart had ceased to beat for an instant, her limbs
tottered, her steps flagged, her arms fell to her sides, she dropped behind.
Michael then stopped, he fixed his eyes on the poor girl, as though he would try
to pierce the gloom which surrounded him; his breast heaved; then, supporting
his companion more than before, he started on afresh.

However, amidst these continual miseries, a fortunate circumstance on that
day occurred which it appeared likely would considerably ease their fatigue.
They had been walking from Semilowskoe for two hours when Michael stopped.

"Is there no one on the road?"

"Not a single soul,” replied Nadia.

"Do you not hear some noise behind us? If they are Tartars we must hide.
Keep a good look-out!"

"Wait, Michael!" replied Nadia, going back a few steps to where the road
turned to the right.

Michael Strogoff waited alone for a minute, listening attentively.

Nadia returned almost immediately and said, "It is a cart. A young man is
leading it."

"Is he alone?"

"Alone."

Michael hesitated an instant. Should he hide? or should he, on the contrary,
try to find a place in the vehicle, if not for himself, at least for her? For himself,
he would be quite content to lay one hand on the cart, to push it if necessary, for
his legs showed no sign of failing him; but he felt sure that Nadia, compelled to


walk ever since they crossed the Obi, that is, for eight days, must be almost
exhausted. He waited.

The cart was soon at the corner of the road. It was a very dilapidated vehicle,
known in the country as a kibitka, just capable of holding three persons. Usually
the kibitka is drawn by three horses, but this had but one, a beast with long hair
and a very long tail. It was of the Mongol breed, known for strength and
courage.

A young man was leading it, with a dog beside him. Nadia saw at once that
the young man was Russian; his face was phlegmatic, but pleasant, and at once
inspired confidence. He did not appear to be in the slightest hurry; he was not
walking fast that he might spare his horse, and, to look at him, it would not have
been believed that he was following a road which might at any instant be
swarming with Tartars.

Nadia, holding Michael by the hand, made way for the vehicle. The kibitka
stopped, and the driver smilingly looked at the young girl.

"And where are you going to in this fashion?" he asked, opening wide his
great honest eyes.

At the sound of his voice, Michael said to himself that he had heard it before.
And it was satisfactory to him to recognize the man for his brow at once cleared.

"Well, where are you going?" repeated the young man, addressing himself
more directly to Michael.

"We are going to Irkutsk," he replied.

"Oh! little father, you do not know that there are still versts and versts
between you and Irkutsk?"

"T know it."

"And you are going on foot?"

"On foot."

"You, well! but the young lady?"

"She is my sister," said Michael, who judged it prudent to give again this
name to Nadia.

"Yes, your sister, little father! But, believe me, she will never be able to get
to Irkutsk!"

"Friend," returned Michael, approaching him, "the Tartars have robbed us of
everything, and I have not a copeck to offer you; but if you will take my sister
with you, I will follow your cart on foot; I will run when necessary, I will not
delay you an hour!"

"Brother," exclaimed Nadia, "I will not! I will not! Sir, my brother is blind!"

"Blind!" repeated the young man, much moved.

"The Tartars have burnt out his eyes!" replied Nadia, extending her hands, as


if imploring pity.

"Burnt out his eyes! Oh! poor little father! I am going to Krasnoiarsk. Well,
why should not you and your sister mount in the kibitka? By sitting a little close,
it will hold us all three. Besides, my dog will not refuse to go on foot; only I
don't go fast, I spare my horse."

"Friend, what is your name?" asked Michael.

"My name is Nicholas Pigassof."

"Tt is aname that I will never forget," said Michael.

"Well, jump up, little blind father. Your sister will be beside you, in the
bottom of the cart; I sit in front to drive. There is plenty of good birch bark and
straw in the bottom; it's like a nest. Serko, make room!"

The dog jumped down without more telling. He was an animal of the
Siberian race, gray hair, of medium size, with an honest big head, just made to
pat, and he, moreover, appeared to be much attached to his master.

In a moment more, Michael and Nadia were seated in the kibitka. Michael
held out his hands as if to feel for those of Pigassof. "You wish to shake my
hands!" said Nicholas. "There they are, little father! shake them as long as it will
give you any pleasure."

The kibitka moved on; the horse, which Nicholas never touched with the
whip, ambled along. Though Michael did not gain any in speed, at least some
fatigue was spared to Nadia.

Such was the exhaustion of the young girl, that, rocked by the monotonous
movement of the kibitka, she soon fell into a sleep, its soundness proving her
complete prostration. Michael and Nicholas laid her on the straw as comfortably
as possible. The compassionate young man was greatly moved, and if a tear did
not escape from Michael's eyes, it was because the red-hot iron had dried up the
last!

"She is very pretty," said Nicholas.

"Yes," replied Michael.

"They try to be strong, little father, they are brave, but they are weak after all,
these dear little things! Have you come from far."

"Very far."

"Poor young people! It must have hurt you very much when they burnt your
eyes!"

"Very much," answered Michael, turning towards Nicholas as if he could see
him.

"Did you not weep?"

"Yes."

"I should have wept too. To think that one could never again see those one


loves. But they can see you, however; that's perhaps some consolation!"

"Yes, perhaps. Tell me, my friend," continued Michael, "have you never seen
me anywhere before?"

"You, little father? No, never."

"The sound of your voice is not unknown to me."

"Why!" returned Nicholas, smiling, "he knows the sound of my voice!
Perhaps you ask me that to find out where I come from. I come from Kolyvan."

"From Kolyvan?" repeated Michael. "Then it was there I met you; you were
in the telegraph office?"

"That may be," replied Nicholas. "I was stationed there. I was the clerk in
charge of the messages."

"And you stayed at your post up to the last moment?"

"Why, it's at that moment one ought to be there!"

"It was the day when an Englishman and a Frenchman were disputing,
roubles in hand, for the place at your wicket, and the Englishman telegraphed
some poetry."

"That is possible, but I do not remember it."

"What! you do not remember it?"

"IT never read the dispatches I send. My duty being to forget them, the
shortest way is not to know them."

This reply showed Nicholas Pigassof's character. In the meanwhile the
kibitka pursued its way, at a pace which Michael longed to render more rapid.
But Nicholas and his horse were accustomed to a pace which neither of them
would like to alter. The horse went for two hours and rested one--so on, day and
night. During the halts the horse grazed, the travelers ate in company with the
faithful Serko. The kibitka was provisioned for at least twenty persons, and
Nicholas generously placed his supplies at the disposal of his two guests, whom
he believed to be brother and sister.

After a day's rest, Nadia recovered some strength. Nicholas took the best
possible care of her. The journey was being made under tolerable circumstances,
slowly certainly, but surely. It sometimes happened that during the night,
Nicholas, although driving, fell asleep, and snored with a clearness which
showed the calmness of his conscience. Perhaps then, by looking close,
Michael's hand might have been seen feeling for the reins, and giving the horse a
more rapid pace, to the great astonishment of Serko, who, however, said nothing.
The trot was exchanged for the amble as soon as Nicholas awoke, but the kibitka
had not the less gained some versts.

Thus they passed the river Ichirnsk, the villages of Ichisnokoe, Berikylokoe,
Kuskoe, the river Marunsk, the village of the same name, Bogostowskoe, and,


lastly, the Ichoula, a little stream which divides Western from Eastern Siberia.
The road now lay sometimes across wide moors, which extended as far as the
eye could reach, sometimes through thick forests of firs, of which they thought
they should never get to the end. Everywhere was a desert; the villages were
almost entirely abandoned. The peasants had fled beyond the Yenisei, hoping
that this wide river would perhaps stop the Tartars.

On the 22d of August, the kibitka entered the town of Atchinsk, two hundred
and fifty miles from Tomsk. Eighty miles still lay between them and
Krasnoiarsk.

No incident had marked the journey. For the six days during which they had
been together, Nicholas, Michael, and Nadia had remained the same, the one in
his unchange-able calm, the other two, uneasy, and thinking of the time when
their companion would leave them.

Michael saw the country through which they traveled with the eyes of
Nicholas and the young girl. In turns, they each described to him the scenes they
passed. He knew whether he was in a forest or on a plain, whether a hut was on
the steppe, or whether any Siberian was in sight. Nicholas was never silent, he
loved to talk, and, from his peculiar way of viewing things, his friends were
amused by his conversation. One day, Michael asked him what sort of weather it
was.

"Fine enough, little father," he answered, "but soon we shall feel the first
winter frosts. Perhaps the Tartars will go into winter quarters during the bad
season."

Michael Strogoff shook his head with a doubtful air.

"You do not think so, little father?" resumed Nicholas. "You think that they
will march on to Irkutsk?"

"I fear so," replied Michael.

"Yes... you are right; they have with them a bad man, who will not let them
loiter on the way. You have heard speak of Ivan Ogareff?"

"Yes."

"You know that it is not right to betray one's country!"

"No... it is not right..." answered Michael, who wished to remain unmoved.

"Little father," continued Nicholas, "it seems to me that you are not half
indignant enough when Ivan Ogareff is spoken of. Your Russian heart ought to
leap when his name is uttered."

"Believe me, my friend, I hate him more than you can ever hate him," said
Michael.

"It is not possible," replied Nicholas; "no, it is not possible! When I think of
Ivan Ogareff, of the harm which he is doing to our sacred Russia, I get into such


a rage that if I could get hold of him--"
"If you could get hold of him, friend?"
"T think I should kill him."
"And I, I am sure of it," returned Michael quietly.


CHAPTER VII THE PASSAGE OF THE YENISEI

AT nightfall, on the 25th of August, the kibitka came in sight of Krasnoiarsk.
The journey from Tomsk had taken eight days. If it had not been accomplished
as rapidly as it might, it was because Nicholas had slept little. Consequently, it
was impossible to increase his horse's pace, though in other hands, the journey
would not have taken sixty hours.

Happily, there was no longer any fear of Tartars. Not a scout had appeared on
the road over which the kibitka had just traveled. This was strange enough, and
evidently some serious cause had prevented the Emir's troops from marching
without delay upon Irkutsk. Something had occurred. A new Russian corps,
hastily raised in the government of Yeniseisk, had marched to Tomsk to
endeavor to retake the town. But, being too weak to withstand the Emir's troops,
now concentrated there, they had been forced to effect a retreat. Feofar-Khan,
including his own soldiers, and those of the Khanats of Khokhand and Koun-
douze, had now under his command two hundred and fifty thousand men, to
which the Russian government could not as yet oppose a sufficient force. The
invasion could not, therefore, be immediately stopped, and the whole Tartar
army might at once march upon Irkutsk. The battle of Tomsk was on the 22nd of
August, though this Michael did not know, but it explained why the vanguard of
the Emir's army had not appeared at Krasnoiarsk by the 25th.

However, though Michael Strogoff could not know the events which had
occurred since his departure, he at least knew that he was several days in
advance of the Tartars, and that he need not despair of reaching before them the
town of Irkutsk, still six hundred miles distant.

Besides, at Krasnoiarsk, of which the population is about twelve thousand
souls, he depended upon obtaining some means of transport. Since Nicholas
Pigassof was to stop in that town, it would be necessary to replace him by a
guide, and to change the kibitka for another more rapid vehicle. Michael, after
having addressed himself to the governor of the town, and established his
identity and quality as Courier of the Czar--which would be easy--doubted not
that he would be enabled to get to Irkutsk in the shortest possible time. He would
thank the good Nicholas Pigassof, and set out immediately with Nadia, for he
did not wish to leave her until he had placed her in her father's arms. Though


Nicholas had resolved to stop at Krasnoiarsk, it was only as he said, "on
condition of finding employment there." In fact, this model clerk, after having
stayed to the last minute at his post in Kolyvan, was endeavoring to place
himself again at the disposal of the government. "Why should I receive a salary
which I have not earned?" he would say.

In the event of his services not being required at Krasnoiarsk, which it was
expected would be still in telegraphic communication with Irkutsk, he proposed
to go to Oudinsk, or even to the capital of Siberia itself. In the latter case, he
would continue to travel with the brother and sister; and where would they find a
surer guide, or a more devoted friend?

The kibitka was now only half a verst from Krasnoiarsk. The numerous
wooden crosses which are erected at the approaches to the town, could be seen
to the right and left of the road. It was seven in the evening; the outline of the
churches and of the houses built on the high bank of the Yenisei were clearly
defined against the evening sky, and the waters of the river reflected them in the
twilight.

"Where are we, sister?" asked Michael.

"Half a verst from the first houses," replied Nadia.

"Can the town be asleep?” observed Michael. "Not a sound strikes my ear."

"And I cannot see the slightest light, nor even smoke mounting into the air,"
added Nadia.

"What a queer town!" said Nicholas. "They make no noise in it, and go to
bed uncommonly early!"

A presentiment of impending misfortune passed across Michael's heart. He
had not said to Nadia that he had placed all his hopes on Krasnoiarsk, where he
expected to find the means of safely finishing his journey. He much feared that
his anticipations would again be disappointed.

But Nadia had guessed his thoughts, although she could not understand why
her companion should be so anxious to reach Irkutsk, now that the Imperial letter
was gone. She one day said something of the sort to him. "I have sworn to go to
Irkutsk," he replied.

But to accomplish his mission, it was necessary that at Krasnoiarsk he should
find some more rapid mode of locomotion. "Well, friend," said he to Nicholas,
"why are we not going on?"

"Because I am afraid of waking up the inhabitants of the town with the noise
of my carriage!" And with a light fleck of the whip, Nicholas put his horse in
motion.

Ten minutes after they entered the High Street. Krasnoiarsk was deserted;
there was no longer an Athenian in this "Northern Athens," as Madame de


Bourboulon has called it. Not one of their dashing equipages swept through the
wide, clean streets. Not a pedestrian enlivened the footpaths raised at the bases
of the magnificent wooden houses, of monumental aspect! Not a Siberian belle,
dressed in the last French fashion, promenaded the beautiful park, cleared in a
forest of birch trees, which stretches away to the banks of the Yenisei! The great
bell of the cathedral was dumb; the chimes of the churches were silent. Here was
complete desolation. There was no longer a living being in this town, lately so
lively!

The last telegram sent from the Czar's cabinet, before the rupture of the wire,
had ordered the governor, the garrison, the inhabitants, whoever they might be,
to leave Krasnoiarsk, to carry with them any articles of value, or which might be
of use to the Tartars, and to take refuge at Irkutsk. The same injunction was
given to all the villages of the province. It was the intention of the Muscovite
government to lay the country desert before the invaders. No one thought for an
instant of disputing these orders. They were executed, and this was the reason
why not a single human being remained in Krasnoiarsk.

Michael Strogoff, Nadia, and Nicholas passed silently through the streets of
the town. They felt half-stupefied. They themselves made the only sound to be
heard in this dead city. Michael allowed nothing of what he felt to appear, but he
inwardly raged against the bad luck which pursued him, his hopes being again
disappointed.

"Alack, alack!" cried Nicholas, "I shall never get any employment in this
desert!"

"Friend," said Nadia, "you must go on with us."

"I must indeed!" replied Nicholas. "The wire is no doubt still working
between Oudinsk and Irkutsk, and there--Shall we start, little father?"

"Let us wait till to-morrow," answered Michael.

"You are right," said Nicholas. "We have the Yenisei to cross, and need light
to see our way there!"

"To see!" murmured Nadia, thinking of her blind companion.

Nicholas heard her, and turning to Michael, "Forgive me, little father," said
he. "Alas! night and day, it is true, are all the same to you!"

"Do not reproach yourself, friend," replied Michael, pressing his hand over
his eyes. "With you for a guide I can still act. Take a few hours' repose. Nadia
must rest too. To-morrow we will recommence our journey!"

Michael and his friends had not to search long for a place of rest. The first
house, the door of which they pushed open, was empty, as well as all the others.
Nothing could be found within but a few heaps of leaves. For want of better
fodder the horse had to content himself with this scanty nourishment. The


provisions of the kibitka were not yet exhausted, so each had a share. Then, after
having knelt before a small picture of the Panaghia, hung on the wall, and still
lighted up by a flickering lamp, Nicholas and the young girl slept, whilst
Michael, over whom sleep had no influence, watched.

Before daybreak the next morning, the 26th of August, the horse was
drawing the kibitka through the forests of birch trees towards the banks of the
Yenisei. Michael was in much anxiety. How was he to cross the river, if, as was
probable, all boats had been destroyed to retard the Tartars' march? He knew the
Yenisei, its width was considerable, its currents strong. Ordinarily by means of
boats specially built for the conveyance of travelers, carriages, and horses, the
passage of the Yenisei takes about three hours, and then it is with extreme
difficulty that the boats reach the opposite bank. Now, in the absence of any
ferry, how was the kibitka to get from one bank to the other?

Day was breaking when the kibitka reached the left bank, where one of the
wide alleys of the park ended. They were about a hundred feet above the Yenisei,
and could therefore survey the whole of its wide course.

"Do you see a boat?" asked Michael, casting his eyes eagerly about from one
side to the other, mechanically, no doubt, as if he could really see.

"It is scarcely light yet, brother," replied Nadia. "The fog is still thick, and we
cannot see the water."

"But I hear it roaring,” said Michael.

Indeed, from the fog issued a dull roaring sound. The waters being high
rushed down with tumultuous violence. All three waited until the misty curtain
should rise. The sun would not be long in dispersing the vapors.

"Well?" asked Michael.

"The fog is beginning to roll away, brother," replied Nadia, "and it will soon
be clear."

"Then you do not see the surface of the water yet?"

"Not yet."

"Have patience, little father," said Nicholas. "All this will soon disappear.
Look! here comes the breeze! It is driving away the fog. The trees on the
opposite hills are already appearing. It is sweeping, flying away. The kindly rays
of the sun have condensed all that mass of mist. Ah! how beautiful it is, my poor
fellow, and how unfortunate that you cannot see such a lovely sight!"

"Do you see a boat?" asked Michael.

"I see nothing of the sort," answered Nicholas.

"Look well, friend, on this and the opposite bank, as far as your eye can
reach. A raft, even a canoe?"

Nicholas and Nadia, grasping the bushes on the edge of the cliff, bent over


the water. The view they thus obtained was extensive. At this place the Yenisei is
not less than a mile in width, and forms two arms, of unequal size, through
which the waters flow swiftly. Between these arms lie several islands, covered
with alders, willows, and poplars, looking like verdant ships, anchored in the
river. Beyond rise the high hills of the Eastern shore, crowned with forests,
whose tops were then empurpled with light. The Yenisei stretched on either side
as far as the eye could reach. The beautiful panorama lay before them for a
distance of fifty versts.

But not a boat was to be seen. All had been taken away or destroyed,
according to order. Unless the Tartars should bring with them materials for
building a bridge of boats, their march towards Irkutsk would certainly be
stopped for some time by this barrier, the Yenisei.

"I remember," said Michael, "that higher up, on the outskirts of Krasnoiarsk,
there is a little quay. There the boats touch. Friend, let us go up the river, and see
if some boat has not been forgotten on the bank."

Nadia seized Michael's hand and started off at a rapid pace in the direction
indicated. If only a boat or a barge large enough to hold the kibitka could be
found, or even one that would carry just themselves, Michael would not hesitate
to attempt the passage! Twenty minutes after, all three had reached the little
quay, with houses on each side quite down to the water's edge. It was like a
village standing beyond the town of Krasnoiarsk.

But not a boat was on the shore, not a barge at the little wharf, nothing even
of which a raft could be made large enough to carry three people. Michael
questioned Nicholas, who made the discouraging reply that the crossing
appeared to him absolutely impracticable.

"We shall cross!" answered Michael.

The search was continued. They examined the houses on the shore,
abandoned like all the rest of Krasnoiarsk. They had merely to push open the
doors and enter. The cottages were evidently those of poor people, and quite
empty. Nicholas visited one, Nadia entered another, and even Michael went here
and there and felt about, hoping to light upon some article that might be useful.

Nicholas and the girl had each fruitlessly rammaged these cottages and were
about to give up the search, when they heard themselves called. Both ran to the
bank and saw Michael standing on the threshold of a door.

"Come!" he exclaimed. Nicholas and Nadia went towards him and followed
him into the cottage.

"What are these?" asked Michael, touching several objects piled up in a
corner.

"They are leathern bottles," answered Nicholas.


"Are they full?"

"Yes, full of koumyss. We have found them very opportunely to renew our
provisions!"

"Koumyss" is a drink made of mare's or camel's milk, and is very sustaining,
and even intoxicating; so that Nicholas and his companions could not but
congratulate themselves on the discovery.

"Save one," said Michael, "but empty the others."

"Directly, little father."

"These will help us to cross the Yenisei."

"And the raft?"

"Will be the kibitka itself, which is light enough to float. Besides, we will
sustain it, as well as the horse, with these bottles."

"Well thought of, little father," exclaimed Nicholas, "and by God's help we
will get safely over... though perhaps not in a straight line, for the current is very
rapid!"

"What does that matter?" replied Michael. "Let us get across first, and we
shall soon find out the road to Irkutsk on the other side of the river."

"To work, then," said Nicholas, beginning to empty the bottles.

One full of koumyss was reserved, and the rest, with the air carefully
fastened in, were used to form a floating apparatus. Two bottles were fastened to
the horse's sides to support it in the water. Two others were attached to the shafts
to keep them on a level with the body of the machine, thus transformed into a
raft. This work was soon finished.

"You will not be afraid, Nadia?" asked Michael.

"No, brother," answered the girl.

"And you, friend?"

"I?" cried Nicholas. "I am now going to have one of my dreams realized--
that of sailing in a cart."

At the spot where they were now standing, the bank sloped, and was suitable
for the launching of the kibitka. The horse drew it into the water, and they were
soon both floating. As to Serko, he was swimming bravely.

The three passengers, seated in the vehicle, had with due precaution taken off
their shoes and stockings; but, thanks to the bottles, the water did not even come
over their ankles. Michael held the reins, and, according to Nicholas's directions,
guided the animal obliquely, but cautiously, so as not to exhaust him by
struggling against the current. So long as the kibitka went with the current all
was easy, and in a few minutes it had passed the quays of Krasnoiarsk. It drifted
northwards, and it was soon evident that it would only reach the opposite bank
far below the town. But that mattered little. The crossing would have been made


without great difficulty, even on this imperfect apparatus, had the current been
regular; but, unfortunately, there were whirlpools in numbers, and soon the
kibitka, notwithstanding all Michael's efforts, was irresistibly drawn into one of
these.

There the danger was great. The kibitka no longer drifted, but spun rapidly
round, inclining towards the center of the eddy, like a rider in a circus. The horse
could scarcely keep his head above water, and ran a great risk of being
suffocated. Serko had been obliged to take refuge in the carriage.

Michael knew what was happening. He felt himself drawn round in a
gradually narrowing line, from which they could not get free. How he longed to
see, to be better able to avoid this peril, but that was no longer possible. Nadia
was silent, her hands clinging to the sides of the cart, which was inclining more
and more towards the center of depression.

And Nicholas, did he not understand the gravity of the situation? Was it with
him phlegm or contempt of danger, courage or indifference? Was his life
valueless in his eyes, and, according to the Eastern expression, "an hotel for five
days," which, whether one is willing or not, must be left the sixth? At any rate,
the smile on his rosy face never faded for an instant.

The kibitka was thus in the whirlpool, and the horse was nearly exhausted,
when, all at once, Michael, throwing off such of his garments as might impede
him, jumped into the water; then, seizing with a strong hand the bridle of the
terrified horse, he gave him such an impulse that he managed to struggle out of
the circle, and getting again into the current, the kibitka drifted along anew.

"Hurrah!" exclaimed Nicholas.

Two hours after leaving the wharf, the kibitka had crossed the widest arm of
the river, and had landed on an island more than six versts below the starting
point.

There the horse drew the cart onto the bank, and an hour's rest was given to
the courageous animal; then the island having been crossed under the shade of
its magnificent birches, the kibitka found itself on the shore of the smaller arm of
the Yenisei.

This passage was much easier; no whirlpools broke the course of the river in
this second bed; but the current was so rapid that the kibitka only reached the
opposite side five versts below. They had drifted eleven versts in all.

These great Siberian rivers across which no bridges have as yet been thrown,
are serious obstacles to the facility of communication. All had been more or less
unfortunate to Michael Strogoff. On the Irtych, the boat which carried him and
Nadia had been attacked by Tartars. On the Obi, after his horse had been struck
by a bullet, he had only by a miracle escaped from the horsemen who were


pursuing him. In fact, this passage of the Yenisei had been performed the least
disastrously.

"That would not have been so amusing,” exclaimed Nicholas, rubbing his
hands, as they disembarked on the right bank of the river, "if it had not been so
difficult."

"That which has only been difficult to us, friend," answered Michael
Strogoff, "will, perhaps, be impossible to the Tartars."


CHAPTER VIII AHARE CROSSES THE ROAD

MICHAEL STROGOFF might at last hope that the road to Irkutsk was clear.
He had distanced the Tartars, now detained at Tomsk, and when the Emir's
soldiers should arrive at Krasnoiarsk they would find only a deserted town.
There being no communication between the two banks of the Yenisei, a delay of
some days would be caused until a bridge of boats could be established, and to
accomplish this would be a difficult undertaking. For the first time since the
encounter with Ivan Ogareff at Omsk, the courier of the Czar felt less uneasy,
and began to hope that no fresh obstacle would delay his progress.

The road was good, for that part of it which extends between Krasnoiarsk
and Irkutsk is considered the best in the whole journey; fewer jolts for travelers,
large trees to shade them from the heat of the sun, sometimes forests of pines or
cedars covering an extent of a hundred versts. It was no longer the wide steppe
with limitless horizon; but the rich country was empty. Everywhere they came
upon deserted villages. The Siberian peasantry had vanished. It was a desert, but
a desert by order of the Czar.

The weather was fine, but the air, which cooled during the night, took some
time to get warm again. Indeed it was now near September, and in this high
region the days were sensibly shortening. Autumn here lasts but a very little
while, although this part of Siberian territory is not situated above the fifty-fifth
parallel, that of Edinburgh and Copenhagen. However, winter succeeds summer
almost unexpectedly. These winters of Asiatic Russia may be said to be
precocious, considering that during them the thermometer falls until the mercury
is frozen nearly 42 degrees below zero, and that 20 degrees below zero is
considered an unsupportable temperature.

The weather favored our travelers. It was neither stormy nor rainy. The
health of Nadia and Michael was good, and since leaving Tomsk they had
gradually recovered from their past fatigues.

As to Nicholas Pigassof, he had never been better in his life. To him this
journey was a trip, an agreeable excursion in which he employed his enforced


holiday.

"Decidedly," said he, "this is pleasanter than sitting twelve hours a day,
perched on a stool, working the manip-ulator!"

Michael had managed to get Nicholas to make his horse quicken his pace. To
obtain this result, he had confided to Nicholas that Nadia and he were on their
way to join their father, exiled at Irkutsk, and that they were very anxious to get
there. Certainly, it would not do to overwork the horse, for very probably they
would not be able to exchange him for another; but by giving him frequent rests-
-every ten miles, for instance--forty miles in twenty-four hours could easily be
accomplished. Besides, the animal was strong, and of a race calculated to endure
great fatigue. He was in no want of rich pasturage along the road, the grass being
thick and abundant. Therefore, it was possible to demand an increase of work
from him.

Nicholas gave in to all these reasons. He was much moved at the situation of
these two young people, going to share their father's exile. Nothing had ever
appeared so touching to him. With what a smile he said to Nadia: "Divine
goodness! what joy will Mr. Korpanoff feel, when his eyes behold you, when his
arms open to receive you! If I go to Irkutsk--and that appears very probable now-
-will you permit me to be present at that interview! You will, will you not?"
Then, striking his forehead: "But, I forgot, what grief too when he sees that his
poor son is blind! Ah! everything is mingled in this world!"

However, the result of all this was the kibitka went faster, and, according to
Michael's calculations, now made almost eight miles an hour.

After crossing the little river Biriousa, the kibitka reached Biriousensk on the
morning of the 4th of September. There, very fortunately, for Nicholas saw that
his provisions were becoming exhausted, he found in an oven a dozen
"pogatchas," a kind of cake prepared with sheep's fat and a large supply of plain
boiled rice. This increase was very opportune, for something would soon have
been needed to replace the koumyss with which the kibitka had been stored at
Krasnoiarsk.

After a halt, the journey was continued in the afternoon. The distance to
Irkutsk was not now much over three hundred miles. There was not a sign of the
Tartar vanguard. Michael Strogoff had some grounds for hoping that his journey
would not be again delayed, and that in eight days, or at most ten, he would be in
the presence of the Grand Duke.

On leaving Biriousinsk, a hare ran across the road, in front of the kibitka.
"Ah!" exclaimed Nicholas.

"What is the matter, friend?" asked Michael quickly, like a blind man whom
the least sound arouses.


"Did you not see?" said Nicholas, whose bright face had become suddenly
clouded. Then he added, "Ah! no! you could not see, and it's lucky for you, little
father!"

"But I saw nothing," said Nadia.

"So much the better! So much the better! But I--I saw!"

"What was it then?" asked Michael.

"A hare crossing our road!" answered Nicholas.

In Russia, when a hare crosses the path, the popular belief is that it is the sign
of approaching evil. Nicholas, superstitious like the greater number of Russians,
stopped the kibitka.

Michael understood his companion's hesitation, without sharing his credulity,
and endeavored to reassure him, "There is nothing to fear, friend," said he.

"Nothing for you, nor for her, I know, little father," answered Nicholas, "but
for me!"

"It is my fate," he continued. And he put his horse in motion again. However,
in spite of these forebodings the day passed without any accident.

At twelve o'clock the next day, the 6th of September, the kibitka halted in the
village of Alsalevok, which was as deserted as the surrounding country. There,
on a doorstep, Nadia found two of those strong-bladed knives used by Siberian
hunters. She gave one to Michael, who concealed it among his clothes, and kept
the other herself.

Nicholas had not recovered his usual spirits. The ill-omen had affected him
more than could have been believed, and he who formerly was never half an
hour without speaking, now fell into long reveries from which Nadia found it
difficult to arouse him. The kibitka rolled swiftly along the road. Yes, swiftly!
Nicholas no longer thought of being so careful of his horse, and was as anxious
to arrive at his journey's end as Michael himself. Notwithstanding his fatalism,
and though resigned, he would not believe himself in safety until within the
walls of Irkutsk. Many Russians would have thought as he did, and more than
one would have turned his horse and gone back again, after a hare had crossed
his path.

Some observations made by him, the justice of which was proved by Nadia
transmitting them to Michael, made them fear that their trials were not yet over.
Though the land from Krasnoiarsk had been respected in its natural productions,
its forests now bore trace of fire and steel; and it was evident that some large
body of men had passed that way.

Twenty miles before Nijni-Oudinsk, the indications of recent devastation
could not be mistaken, and it was impossible to attribute them to others than the
Tartars. It was not only that the fields were trampled by horse's feet, and that


trees were cut down. The few houses scattered along the road were not only
empty, some had been partly demolished, others half burnt down. The marks of
bullets could be seen on their walls.

Michael's anxiety may be imagined. He could no longer doubt that a party of
Tartars had recently passed that way, and yet it was impossible that they could be
the Emir's soldiers, for they could not have passed without being seen. But then,
who were these new invaders, and by what out-of-the-way path across the steppe
had they been able to join the highroad to Irkutsk? With what new enemies was
the Czar's courier now to meet?

He did not communicate his apprehensions either to Nicholas or Nadia, not
wishing to make them uneasy. Besides, he had resolved to continue his way, as
long as no insurmountable obstacle stopped him. Later, he would see what it was
best to do. During the ensuing day, the recent passage of a large body of foot and
horse became more and more apparent. Smoke was seen above the horizon. The
kibitka advanced cautiously. Several houses in deserted villages still burned, and
could not have been set on fire more than four and twenty hours before.

At last, during the day, on the 8th of September, the kibitka stopped
suddenly. The horse refused to advance. Serko barked furiously.

"What is the matter?" asked Michael.

"A corpse!" replied Nicholas, who had leapt out of the kibitka. The body was
that of a moujik, horribly mutilated, and already cold. Nicholas crossed himself.
Then, aided by Michael, he carried the body to the side of the road. He would
have liked to give it decent burial, that the wild beasts of the steppe might not
feast on the miserable remains, but Michael could not allow him the time.

"Come, friend, come!" he exclaimed, "we must not delay, even for an hour!"
And the kibitka was driven on.

Besides, if Nicholas had wished to render the last duties to all the dead
bodies they were now to meet with on the Siberian highroad, he would have had
enough to do! As they approached Nijni-Oudinsk, they were found by twenties,
stretched on the ground.

It was, however, necessary to follow this road until it was manifestly
impossible to do so longer without falling into the hands of the invaders. The
road they were following could not be abandoned, and yet the signs of
devastation and ruin increased at every village they passed through. The blood of
the victims was not yet dry. As to gaining information about what had occurred,
that was impossible. There was not a living being left to tell the tale.

About four o'clock in the afternoon of this day, Nicholas caught sight of the
tall steeples of the churches of Nijni-Oudinsk. Thick vapors, which could not
have been clouds, were floating around them.


Nicholas and Nadia looked, and communicated the result of their
observations to Michael. They must make up their minds what to do. If the town
was abandoned, they could pass through without risk, but if, by some
inexplicable maneuver, the Tartars occupied it, they must at every cost avoid the
place.

"Advance cautiously,” said Michael Strogoff, "but advance!"

A verst was soon traversed.

"Those are not clouds, that is smoke!" exclaimed Nadia. "Brother, they are
buming the town!"

It was, indeed, only too plain. Flashes of light appeared in the midst of the
vapor. It became thicker and thicker as it mounted upwards. But were they
Tartars who had done this? They might be Russians, obeying the orders of the
Grand Duke. Had the government of the Czar determined that from Krasnoiarsk,
from the Yenisei, not a town, not a village should offer a refuge to the Emir's
soldiers? What was Michael to do?

He was undecided. However, having weighed the pros and cons, he thought
that whatever might be the difficulties of a journey across the steppe without a
beaten path, he ought not to risk capture a second time by the Tartars. He was
just proposing to Nicholas to leave the road, when a shot was heard on their
right. A ball whistled, and the horse of the kibitka fell dead, shot through the
head.

A dozen horsemen dashed forward, and the kibitka was surrounded. Before
they knew where they were, Michael, Nadia, and Nicholas were prisoners, and
were being dragged rapidly towards Nijni-Oudinsk.

Michael, in this second attack, had lost none of his presence of mind. Being
unable to see his enemies, he had not thought of defending himself. Even had he
possessed the use of his eyes, he would not have attempted it. The consequences
would have been his death and that of his companions. But, though he could not
see, he could listen and understand what was said.

From their language he found that these soldiers were Tartars, and from their
words, that they preceded the invading army.

In short, what Michael learnt from the talk at the present moment, as well as
from the scraps of conversation he overheard later, was this. These men were not
under the direct orders of the Emir, who was now detained beyond the Yenisei.
They made part of a third column chiefly composed of Tartars from the khanats
of Khokland and Koondooz, with which Feofar's army was to affect a junction in
the neighborhood of Irkutsk.

By Ogareff's advice, in order to assure the success of the invasion in the
Eastern provinces, this column had skirted the base of the Altai Mountains.


Pillaging and ravaging, it had reached the upper course of the Yenisei. There,
guessing what had been done at Krasnoiarsk by order of the Czar, and to
facilitate the passage of the river to the Emir's troops, this column had launched
a flotilla of boats, which would enable Feofar to cross and resume the road to
Irkutsk. Having done this, it had descended the valley of the Yenisei and struck
the road on a level with Alsalevsk. From this little town began the frightful
course of ruin which forms the chief part of Tartar warfare. Nijni-Oudinsk had
shared the common fate, and the Tartars, to the number of fifty thousand, had
now quitted it to take up a position before Irkutsk. Before long, they would be
reinforced by the Emir's troops.

Such was the state of affairs at this date, most serious for this isolated part of
Eastern Siberia, and for the comparatively few defenders of its capital.

It can be imagined with what thoughts Michael's mind was now occupied!
Who could have been astonished had he, in his present situation, lost all hope
and all courage? Nothing of the sort, however; his lips muttered no other words
than these: "I will get there!"

Half an hour after the attack of the Tartar horsemen, Michael Strogoff,
Nadia, and Nicholas entered Nijni-Oudinsk. The faithful dog followed them,
though at a distance. They could not stay in the town, as it was in flames, and
about to be left by the last of the marauders. The prisoners were therefore thrown
on horses and hurried away; Nicholas resigned as usual, Nadia, her faith in
Michael unshaken, and Michael himself, apparently indifferent, but ready to
seize any opportunity of escaping.

The Tartars were not long in perceiving that one of their prisoners was blind,
and their natural barbarity led them to make game of their unfortunate victim.
They were traveling fast. Michael's horse, having no one to guide him, often
started aside, and so made confusion among the ranks. This drew on his rider
such abuse and brutality as wrung Nadia's heart, and filled Nicholas with
indignation. But what could they do? They could not speak the Tartar language,
and their assistance was mercilessly refused. Soon it occurred to these men, in a
refinement of cruelty, to exchange the horse Michael was riding for one which
was blind. The motive of the change was explained by a remark which Michael
overheard, "Perhaps that Russian can see, after all!"

Michael was placed on this horse, and the reins ironically put into his hand.
Then, by dint of lashing, throwing stones, and shouting, the animal was urged
into a gallop. The horse, not being guided by his rider, blind as himself,
sometimes ran into a tree, sometimes went quite off the road--in consequence,
collisions and falls, which might have been extremely dangerous.

Michael did not complain. Not a murmur escaped him. When his horse fell,


he waited until it got up. It was, indeed, soon assisted up, and the cruel fun
continued. At sight of this wicked treatment, Nicholas could not contain himself;
he endeavored to go to his friend's aid. He was prevented, and treated brutally.

This game would have been prolonged, to the Tartars' great amusement, had
not a serious accident put an end to it. On the 10th of September the blind horse
ran away, and made straight for a pit, some thirty or forty feet deep, at the side of
the road.

Nicholas tried to go after him. He was held back. The horse, having no
guide, fell with his rider to the bottom. Nicholas and Nadia uttered a piercing
cry! They believed that their unfortunate companion had been killed.

However, when they went to his assistance, it was found that Michael,
having been able to throw himself out of the saddle, was unhurt, but the
miserable horse had two legs broken, and was quite useless. He was left there to
die without being put out of his suffering, and Michael, fastened to a Tartar's
saddle, was obliged to follow the detachment on foot.

Even now, not a protest, not a complaint! He marched with a rapid step,
scarcely drawn by the cord which tied him. He was still "the Man of Iron," of
whom General Kissoff had spoken to the Czar!

The next day, the 11th of September, the detachment passed through the
village of Chibarlinskoe. Here an incident occurred which had _ serious
consequences. It was nightfall. The Tartar horsemen, having halted, were more
or less intoxicated. They were about to start. Nadia, who till then, by a miracle,
had been respectfully treated by the soldiers, was insulted by one of them.

Michael could not see the insult, nor the insulter, but Nicholas saw for him.
Then, quietly, without thinking, without perhaps knowing what he was doing,
Nicholas walked straight up to the man, and, before the latter could make the
least movement to stop him, had seized a pistol from his holster and discharged
it full at his breast.

The officer in command of the detachment hastened up on hearing the report.
The soldiers would have cut the unfortunate Nicholas to pieces, but at a sign
from their officer, he was bound instead, placed across a horse, and the
detachment galloped off.

The rope which fastened Michael, gnawed through by him, broke by the
sudden start of the horse, and the half-tipsy rider galloped on without perceiving
that his prisoner had escaped.

Michael and Nadia found themselves alone on the road.


CHAPTER IX IN THE STEPPE


MICHAEL STROGOFF and Nadia were once more as free as they had been
in the journey from Perm to the banks of the Irtych. But how the conditions
under which they traveled were altered! Then, a comfortable tarantass, fresh
horses, well-kept post-horses assured the rapidity of their journey. Now they
were on foot; it was utterly impossible to procure any other means of
locomotion, they were without resources, not knowing how to obtain even food,
and they had still nearly three hundred miles to go! Moreover, Michael could
now only see with Nadia's eyes.

As to the friend whom chance had given them, they had just lost him, and
fearful might be his fate. Michael had thrown himself down under the
brushwood at the side of the road. Nadia stood beside him, waiting for the word
from him to continue the march.

It was ten o'clock. The sun had more than three hours before disappeared
below the horizon. There was not a house in sight. The last of the Tartars was
lost in the distance. Michael and Nadia were quite alone.

"What will they do with our friend?" exclaimed the girl. "Poor Nicholas! Our
meeting will have been fatal to him!" Michael made no response.

"Michael," continued Nadia, "do you not know that he defended you when
you were the Tartars' sport; that he risked his life for me?"

Michael was still silent. Motionless, his face buried in his hands; of what was
he thinking? Perhaps, although he did not answer, he heard Nadia speak.

Yes! he heard her, for when the young girl added, "Where shall I lead you,
Michael?"

"To Irkutsk!" he replied.

"By the highroad?"

"Yes, Nadia."

Michael was still the same man who had sworn, whatever happened, to
accomplish his object. To follow the highroad, was certainly to go the shortest
way. If the vanguard of Feofar-Khan's troops appeared, it would then be time to
strike across the country.

Nadia took Michael's hand, and they started.

The next morning, the 13th of September, twenty versts further, they made a
short halt in the village of Joulounov-skoe. It was burnt and deserted. All night
Nadia had tried to see if the body of Nicholas had not been left on the road, but it
was in vain that she looked among the ruins, and searched among the dead. Was


he reserved for some cruel torture at Irkutsk?

Nadia, exhausted with hunger, was fortunate enough to find in one of the
houses a quantity of dried meat and "soukharis," pieces of bread, which, dried by
evaporation, preserve their nutritive qualities for an indefinite time.

Michael and the girl loaded themselves with as much as they could carry.
They had thus a supply of food for several days, and as to water, there would be
no want of that in a district rendered fertile by the numerous little affluents of the
Angara.

They continued their journey. Michael walked with a firm step, and only
slackened his pace for his companion's sake. Nadia, not wishing to retard him,
obliged herself to walk. Happily, he could not see to what a miserable state
fatigue had reduced her.

However, Michael guessed it. "You are quite done up, poor child," he said
sometimes.

"No," she would reply.

"When you can no longer walk, I will carry you."

"Yes, Michael."

During this day they came to the little river Oka, but it was fordable, and
they had no difficulty in crossing. The sky was cloudy and the temperature
moderate. There was some fear that the rain might come on, which would much
have increased their misery. A few showers fell, but they did not last.

They went on as before, hand in hand, speaking little, Nadia looking about
on every side; twice a day they halted. Six hours of the night were given to sleep.
In a few huts Nadia again found a little mutton; but, contrary to Michael's hopes,
there was not a single beast of burden in the country; horses, camels--all had
been either killed or carried off. They must still continue to plod on across this
weary steppe on foot.

The third Tartar column, on its way to Irkutsk, had left plain traces: here a
dead horse, there an abandoned cart. The bodies of unfortunate Siberians lay
along the road, principally at the entrances to villages. Nadia, overcoming her
repugnance, looked at all these corpses!

The chief danger lay, not before, but behind. The advance guard of the Emir's
army, commanded by Ivan Ogareff, might at any moment appear. The boats sent
down the lower Yenisei must by this time have reached Krasnoiarsk and been
made use of. The road was therefore open to the invaders. No Russian force
could be opposed to them between Krasnoiarsk and Lake Baikal, Michael
therefore expected before long the appearance of the Tartar scouts.

At each halt, Nadia climbed some hill and looked anxiously to the Westward,
but as yet no cloud of dust had signaled the approach of a troop of horse.


Then the march was resumed; and when Michael felt that he was dragging
poor Nadia forward too rapidly, he went at a slower pace. They spoke little, and
only of Nicholas. The young girl recalled all that this companion of a few days
had done for them.

In answering, Michael tried to give Nadia some hope of which he did not
feel a spark himself, for he well knew that the unfortunate fellow would not
escape death.

One day Michael said to the girl, "You never speak to me of my mother,
Nadia."

His mother! Nadia had never wished to do so. Why renew his grief? Was not
the old Siberian dead? Had not her son given the last kiss to her corpse stretched
on the plain of Tomsk?

"Speak to me of her, Nadia," said Michael. "Speak--you will please me."

And then Nadia did what she had not done before. She told all that had
passed between Marfa and herself since their meeting at Omsk, where they had
seen each other for the first time. She said how an inexplicable instinct had led
her towards the old prisoner without knowing who she was, and what
encouragement she had received in return. At that time Michael Strogoff had
been to her but Nicholas Korpanoff.

"Whom I ought always to have been," replied Michael, his brow darkening.

Then later he added, "I have broken my oath, Nadia. I had sworn not to see
my mother!"

"But you did not try to see her, Michael," replied Nadia. "Chance alone
brought you into her presence."

"I had sworn, whatever might happen, not to betray myself."

"Michael, Michael! at sight of the lash raised upon Marfa, could you refrain?
No! No oath could prevent a son from succoring his mother!"

"I have broken my oath, Nadia," returned Michael. "May God and the Father
pardon me!"

"Michael," resumed the girl, "I have a question to ask you. Do not answer it
if you think you ought not. Nothing from you would vex me!"

"Speak, Nadia."

"Why, now that the Czar's letter has been taken from you, are you so anxious
to reach Irkutsk?"

Michael tightly pressed his companion's hand, but he did not answer.

"Did you know the contents of that letter before you left Moscow?"

"No, I did not know."

"Must I think, Michael, that the wish alone to place me in my father's hands
draws you toward Irkutsk?"


"No, Nadia," replied Michael, gravely. "I should deceive you if I allowed you
to believe that it was so. I go where duty orders me to go. As to taking you to
Irkutsk, is it not you, Nadia, who are now taking me there? Do I not see with
your eyes; and is it not your hand that guides me? Have you not repaid a
hundred-fold the help which I was able to give you at first? I do not know if fate
will cease to go against us; but the day on which you thank me for having placed
you in your father's hands, I in my turn will thank you for having led me to
Irkutsk."

"Poor Michael!" answered Nadia, with emotion. "Do not speak so. That does
not answer me. Michael, why, now, are you in such haste to reach Irkutsk?"

"Because I must be there before Ivan Ogareff," exclaimed Michael.

"Even now?"

"Even now, and I will be there, too!"

In uttering these words, Michael did not speak solely through hatred to the
traitor. Nadia understood that her companion had not told, or could not tell, her
all.

On the 15th of September, three days later, the two reached the village of
Kouitounskoe. The young girl suffered dreadfully. Her aching feet could
scarcely support her; but she fought, she struggled, against her weariness, and
her only thought was this: "Since he cannot see me, I will go on till I drop."

There were no obstacles on this part of the journey, no danger either since the
departure of the Tartars, only much fatigue. For three days it continued thus. It
was plain that the third invading column was advancing rapidly in the East; that
could be seen by the ruins which they left after them--the cold cinders and the
already decomposing corpses.

There was nothing to be seen in the West; the Emir's advance-guard had not
yet appeared. Michael began to consider the various reasons which might have
caused this delay. Was a sufficient force of Russians directly menacing Tomsk or
Krasnoiarsk? Did the third column, isolated from the others, run a risk of being
cut off? If this was the case, it would be easy for the Grand Duke to defend
Irkutsk, and any time gained against an invasion was a step towards repulsing it.
Michael sometimes let his thoughts run on these hopes, but he soon saw their
improbability, and felt that the preservation of the Grand Duke depended alone
on him.

Nadia dragged herself along. Whatever might be her moral energy, her
physical strength would soon fail her. Michael knew it only too well. If he had
not been blind, Nadia would have said to him, "Go, Michael, leave me in some
hut! Reach Irkutsk! Accomplish your mission! See my father! Tell him where I
am! Tell him that I wait for him, and you both will know where to find me!


Start! I am not afraid! I will hide myself from the Tartars! I will take care of
myself for him, for you! Go, Michael! I can go no farther!"

Many times Nadia was obliged to stop. Michael then took her in his strong
arms and, having no longer to think of her fatigue, walked more rapidly and with
his indefatigable step.

On the 18th of September, at ten in the evening, Kimilteiskoe was at last
entered. From the top of a hill, Nadia saw in the horizon a long light line. It was
the Dinka River. A few lightning flashes were reflected in the water; summer
lightning, without thunder. Nadia led her companion through the ruined village.
The cinders were quite cold. The last of the Tartars had passed through at least
five or six days before.

Beyond the village, Nadia sank down on a stone bench. "Shall we make a
halt?" asked Michael.

"Tt is night, Michael," answered Nadia. "Do you not want to rest a few
hours?"

"I would rather have crossed the Dinka," replied Michael, "I should like to
put that between us and the Emir's advance-guard. But you can scarcely drag
yourself along, my poor Nadia!"

"Come, Michael," returned Nadia, seizing her companion's hand and drawing
him forward.

Two or three versts further the Dinka flowed across the Irkutsk road. The
young girl wished to attempt this last effort asked by her companion. She found
her way by the light from the flashes. They were then crossing a boundless
desert, in the midst of which was lost the little river. Not a tree nor a hillock
broke the flatness. Not a breath disturbed the atmosphere, whose calmness
would allow the slightest sound to travel an immense distance.

Suddenly, Michael and Nadia stopped, as if their feet had been fast to the
ground. The barking of a dog came across the steppe. "Do you hear?" said
Nadia.

Then a mournful cry succeeded it--a despairing cry, like the last appeal of a
human being about to die.

"Nicholas! Nicholas!" cried the girl, with a foreboding of evil. Michael, who
was listening, shook his head.

"Come, Michael, come," said Nadia. And she who just now was dragging
herself with difficulty along, suddenly recovered strength, under violent
excitement.

"We have left the road," said Michael, feeling that he was treading no longer
on powdery soil but on short grass.

"Yes, we must!" returned Nadia. "It was there, on the right, from which the


cry came!"

In a few minutes they were not more than half a verst from the river. A
second bark was heard, but, although more feeble, it was certainly nearer. Nadia
stopped.

"Yes!" said Michael. "It is Serko barking!... He has followed his master!"

"Nicholas!" called the girl. Her cry was unanswered.

Michael listened. Nadia gazed over the plain illumined now and again with
electric light, but she saw nothing. And yet a voice was again raised, this time
murmuring in a plaintive tone, "Michael!"

Then a dog, all bloody, bounded up to Nadia.

It was Serko! Nicholas could not be far off! He alone could have murmured
the name of Michael! Where was he? Nadia had no strength to call again.
Michael, crawling on the ground, felt about with his hands.

Suddenly Serko uttered a fresh bark and darted towards a gigantic bird which
had swooped down. It was a vulture. When Serko ran towards it, it rose, but
returning struck at the dog. The latter leapt up at it. A blow from the formidable
beak alighted on his head, and this time Serko fell back lifeless on the ground.

At the same moment a cry of horror escaped Nadia. "There... there!" she
exclaimed.

A head issued from the ground! She had stumbled against it in the darkness.

Nadia fell on her knees beside it. Nicholas buried up to his neck, according
to the atrocious Tartar custom, had been left in the steppe to die of thirst, and
perhaps by the teeth of wolves or the beaks of birds of prey!

Frightful torture for the victim imprisoned in the ground--the earth pressed
down so that he cannot move, his arms bound to his body like those of a corpse
in its coffin! The miserable wretch, living in the mold of clay from which he is
powerless to break out, can only long for the death which is so slow in coming!

There the Tartars had buried their prisoner three days before! For three days,
Nicholas waited for the help which now came too late! The vultures had caught
sight of the head on a level with the ground, and for some hours the dog had
been defending his master against these ferocious birds!

Michael dug at the ground with his knife to release his friend! The eyes of
Nicholas, which till then had been closed, opened.

He recognized Michael and Nadia. "Farewell, my friends!" he murmured. "I
am glad to have seen you again! Pray for me!"

Michael continued to dig, though the ground, having been tightly rammed
down, was as hard as stone, and he managed at last to get out the body of the
unhappy man. He listened if his heart was still beating.... It was still!

He wished to bury him, that he might not be left exposed; and the hole into


which Nicholas had been placed when living, was enlarged, so that he might be
laid in it--dead! The faithful Serko was laid by his master.

At that moment, a noise was heard on the road, about half a verst distant.
Michael Strogoff listened. It was evidently a detachment of horse advancing
towards the Dinka. "Nadia, Nadia!" he said in a low voice.

Nadia, who was kneeling in prayer, arose. "Look, look!" said he.

"The Tartars!" she whispered.

It was indeed the Emir's advance-guard, passing rapidly along the road to
Irkutsk.

"They shall not prevent me from burying him!" said Michael. And he
continued his work.

Soon, the body of Nicholas, the hands crossed on the breast, was laid in the
grave. Michael and Nadia, kneeling, prayed a last time for the poor fellow,
inoffensive and good, who had paid for his devotion towards them with his life.

"And now," said Michael, as he threw in the earth, "the wolves of the steppe
will not devour him."

Then he shook his fist at the troop of horsemen who were passing. "Forward,
Nadia!" he said.

Michael could not follow the road, now occupied by the Tartars. He must
cross the steppe and turn to Irkutsk. He had not now to trouble himself about
crossing the Dinka. Nadia could not move, but she could see for him. He took
her in his arms and went on towards the southwest of the province.

A hundred and forty miles still remained to be traversed. How was the
distance to be performed? Should they not succumb to such fatigue? On what
were they to live on the way? By what superhuman energy were they to pass the
slopes of the Sayansk Mountains? Neither he nor Nadia could answer this!

And yet, twelve days after, on the 2d of October, at six o'clock in the
evening, a wide sheet of water lay at Michael Strogoff's feet. It was Lake Baikal.


CHAPTER X BAIKAL AND ANGARA


LAKE BAIKAL is situated seventeen hundred feet above the level of the
sea. Its length is about six hundred miles, its breadth seventy. Its depth is not
known. Madame de Bourboulon states that, according to the boatmen, it likes to
be spoken of as "Madam Sea." If it is called "Sir Lake," it immediately lashes
itself into fury. However, it is reported and believed by the Siberians that a
Russian is never drowned in it.

This immense basin of fresh water, fed by more than three hundred rivers, is
surrounded by magnificent volcanic mountains. It has no other outlet than the
Angara, which after passing Irkutsk throws itself into the Yenisei, a little above
the town of Yeniseisk. As to the mountains which encase it, they form a branch
of the Toungouzes, and are derived from the vast system of the Altai.

In this territory, subject to peculiar climatical conditions, the autumn appears
to be absorbed in the precocious winter. It was now the beginning of October.
The sun set at five o'clock in the evening, and during the long nights the
temperature fell to zero. The first snows, which would last till summer, already
whitened the summits of the neighboring hills. During the Siberian winter this
inland sea is frozen over to a thickness of several feet, and is crossed by the
sleighs of caravans.

Either because there are people who are so wanting in politeness as to call it
"Sir Lake," or for some more meteorological reason, Lake Baikal is subject to
violent tempests. Its waves, short like those of all inland seas, are much feared
by the rafts, prahms, and steamboats, which furrow it during the summer.

It was the southwest point of the lake which Michael had now reached,
carrying Nadia, whose whole life, so to speak, was concentrated in her eyes. But
what could these two expect, in this wild region, if it was not to die of
exhaustion and famine? And yet, what remained of the long journey of four
thousand miles for the Czar's courier to reach his end? Nothing but forty miles
on the shore of the lake up to the mouth of the Angara, and sixty miles from the
mouth of the Angara to Irkutsk; in all, a hundred miles, or three days' journey for
a strong man, even on foot.

Could Michael Strogoff still be that man?

Heaven, no doubt, did not wish to put him to this trial. The fatality which had
hitherto pursued his steps seemed for a time to spare him. This end of the Baikal,
this part of the steppe, which he believed to be a desert, which it usually is, was
not so now. About fifty people were collected at the angle formed by the end of


the lake.

Nadia immediately caught sight of this group, when Michael, carrying her in
his arms, issued from the mountain pass. The girl feared for a moment that it was
a Tartar detachment, sent to beat the shores of the Baikal, in which case flight
would have been impossible to them both. But Nadia was soon reassured.

"Russians!" she exclaimed. And with this last effort, her eyes closed and her
head fell on Michael's breast.

But they had been seen, and some of these Russians, running to them, led the
blind man and the girl to a little point at which was moored a raft.

The raft was just going to start. These Russians were fugitives of different
conditions, whom the same interest had united at Lake Baikal. Driven back by
the Tartar scouts, they hoped to obtain a refuge at Irkutsk, but not being able to
get there by land, the invaders having occupied both banks of the Angara, they
hoped to reach it by descending the river which flows through the town.

Their plan made Michael's heart leap; a last chance was before him, but he
had strength to conceal this, wishing to keep his incognito more strictly than
ever.

The fugitives’ plan was very simple. A current in the lake runs along by the
upper bank to the mouth of the Angara; this current they hoped to utilize, and
with its assistance to reach the outlet of Lake Baikal. From this point to Irkutsk,
the rapid waters of the river would bear them along at a rate of eight miles an
hour. In a day and a half they might hope to be in sight of the town.

No kind of boat was to be found; they had been obliged to make one; a raft,
or rather a float of wood, similar to those which usually are drifted down
Siberian rivers, was constructed. A forest of firs, growing on the bank, had
supplied the necessary materials; the trunks, fastened together with osiers, made
a platform on which a hundred people could have easily found room.

On board this raft Michael and Nadia were taken. The girl had returned to
herself; some food was given to her as well as to her companion. Then, lying on
a bed of leaves, she soon fell into a deep sleep.

To those who questioned him, Michael Strogoff said nothing of what had
taken place at Tomsk. He gave himself out as an inhabitant of Krasnoiarsk, who
had not been able to get to Irkutsk before the Emir's troops arrived on the left
bank of the Dinka, and he added that, very probably, the bulk of the Tartar forces
had taken up a position before the Siberian capital.

There was not a moment to be lost; besides, the cold was becoming more and
more severe. During the night the temperature fell below zero; ice was already
forming on the surface of the Baikal. Although the raft managed to pass easily
over the lake, it might not be so easy between the banks of the Angara, should


pieces of ice be found to block up its course.

At eight in the evening the moorings were cast off, and the raft drifted in the
current along the shore. It was steered by means of long poles, under the
management of several muscular moujiks. An old Baikal boatman took
command of the raft. He was a man of sixty-five, browned by the sun, and lake
breezes. A thick white beard flowed over his chest; a fur cap covered his head;
his aspect was grave and austere. His large great-coat, fastened in at the waist,
reached down to his heels. This taciturn old fellow was seated in the stern, and
issued his commands by gestures. Besides, the chief work consisted in keeping
the raft in the current, which ran along the shore, without drifting out into the
open.

It has been already said that Russians of all conditions had found a place on
the raft. Indeed, to the poor moujiks, the women, old men, and children, were
joined two or three pilgrims, surprised on their journey by the invasion; a few
monks, and a priest. The pilgrims carried a staff, a gourd hung at the belt, and
they chanted psalms in a plaintive voice: one came from the Ukraine, another
from the Yellow sea, and a third from the Finland provinces. This last, who was
an aged man, carried at his waist a little padlocked collecting-box, as if it had
been hung at a church door. Of all that he collected during his long and fatiguing
pilgrimage, nothing was for himself; he did not even possess the key of the box,
which would only be opened on his return.

The monks came from the North of the Empire. Three months before they
had left the town of Archangel. They had visited the sacred islands near the coast
of Carelia, the convent of Solovetsk, the convent of Troitsa, those of Saint
Antony and Saint Theodosia, at Kiev, that of Kazan, as well as the church of the
Old Believers, and they were now on their way to Irkutsk, wearing the robe, the
cowl, and the clothes of serge.

As to the papa, or priest, he was a plain village pastor, one of the six hundred
thousand popular pastors which the Russian Empire contains. He was clothed as
miserably as the moujiks, not being above them in social position; in fact,
laboring like a peasant on his plot of ground; baptis-ing, marrying, burying. He
had been able to protect his wife and children from the brutality of the Tartars by
sending them away into the Northern provinces. He himself had stayed in his
parish up to the last moment; then he was obliged to fly, and, the Irkutsk road
being stopped, had come to Lake Baikal.

These priests, grouped in the forward part of the raft, prayed at regular
intervals, raising their voices in the silent night, and at the end of each sentence
of their prayer, the "Slava Bogu," Glory to God! issued from their lips.

No incident took place during the night. Nadia remained in a sort of stupor,


and Michael watched beside her; sleep only overtook him at long intervals, and
even then his brain did not rest. At break of day, the raft, delayed by a strong
breeze, which counteracted the course of the current, was still forty versts from
the mouth of the Angara. It seemed probable that the fugitives could not reach it
before three or four o'clock in the evening. This did not trouble them; on the
contrary, for they would then descend the river during the night, and the darkness
would also favor their entrance into Irkutsk.

The only anxiety exhibited at times by the old boatman was concerning the
formation of ice on the surface of the water. The night had been excessively
cold; pieces of ice could be seen drifting towards the West. Nothing was to be
dreaded from these, since they could not drift into the Angara, having already
passed the mouth; but pieces from the Eastern end of the lake might be drawn by
the current between the banks of the river; this would cause difficulty, possibly
delay, and perhaps even an insurmountable obstacle which would stop the raft.

Michael therefore took immense interest in ascertaining what was the state of
the lake, and whether any large number of ice blocks appeared. Nadia being now
awake, he questioned her often, and she gave him an account of all that was
going on.

Whilst the blocks were thus drifting, curious phenomena were taking place
on the surface of the Baikal. Magnificent jets, from springs of boiling water, shot
up from some of those artesian wells which Nature has bored in the very bed of
the lake. These jets rose to a great height and spread out in vapor, which was
illuminated by the solar rays, and almost immediately condensed by the cold.
This curious sight would have assuredly amazed a tourist traveling in peaceful
times on this Siberian sea.

At four in the evening, the mouth of the Angara was signaled by the old
boatman, between the high granite rocks of the shore. On the right bank could be
seen the little port of Livenitchnaia, its church, and its few houses built on the
bank. But the serious thing was that the ice blocks from the East were already
drifting between the banks of the Angara, and consequently were descending
towards Irkutsk. However, their number was not yet great enough to obstruct the
course of the raft, nor the cold great enough to increase their number.

The raft arrived at the little port and there stopped. The old boatman wished
to put into harbor for an hour, in order to make some repairs. The trunks
threatened to separate, and it was important to fasten them more securely
together to resist the rapid current of the Angara.

The old boatman did not expect to receive any fresh fugitives at
Livenitchnaia, and yet, the moment the raft touched, two passengers, issuing
from a deserted house, ran as fast as they could towards the beach.


Nadia seated on the raft, was abstractedly gazing at the shore. A cry was
about to escape her. She seized Michael's hand, who at that moment raised his
head.

"What is the matter, Nadia?" he asked.

"Our two traveling companions, Michael."

"The Frenchman and the Englishman whom we met in the defiles of the
Ural?"

"Yes."

Michael started, for the strict incognito which he wished to keep ran a risk of
being betrayed. Indeed, it was no longer as Nicholas Korpanoff that Jolivet and
Blount would now see him, but as the true Michael Strogoff, Courier of the Czar.
The two correspondents had already met him twice since their separation at the
Ichim post-house--the first time at the Zabediero camp, when he laid open Ivan
Ogareff's face with the knout; the second time at Tomsk, when he was
condemned by the Emir. They therefore knew who he was and what depended
on him.

Michael Strogoff rapidly made up his mind. "Nadia," said he, "when they
step on board, ask them to come to me!"

It was, in fact, Blount and Jolivet, whom the course of events had brought to
the port of Livenitchnaia, as it had brought Michael Strogoff. As we know, after
having been present at the entry of the Tartars into Tomsk, they had departed
before the savage execution which terminated the fete. They had therefore never
suspected that their former traveling companion had not been put to death, but
blinded by order of the Emir.

Having procured horses they had left Tomsk the same evening, with the fixed
determination of henceforward dating their letters from the Russian camp of
Eastern Siberia. They proceeded by forced marches towards Irkutsk. They hoped
to distance Feofar-Khan, and would certainly have done so, had it not been for
the unexpected apparition of the third column, come from the South, up the
valley of the Yenisei. They had been cut off, as had been Michael, before being
able even to reach the Dinka, and had been obliged to go back to Lake Baikal.

They had been in the place for three days in much perplexity, when the raft
arrived. The fugitives’ plan was explained to them. There was certainly a chance
that they might be able to pass under cover of the night, and penetrate into
Irkutsk. They resolved to make the attempt.

Alcide directly communicated with the old boatman, and asked a passage for
himself and his companion, offering to pay anything he demanded, whatever it
might be.

"No one pays here," replied the old man gravely; "every one risks his life,


that is all!"

The two correspondents came on board, and Nadia saw them take their
places in the forepart of the raft. Harry Blount was still the reserved Englishman,
who had scarcely addressed a word to her during the whole passage over the
Ural Mountains. Alcide Jolivet seemed to be rather more grave than usual, and it
may be acknowledged that his gravity was justified by the circumstances.

Jolivet had, as has been said, taken his seat on the raft, when he felt a hand
laid on his arm. Turning, he recognized Nadia, the sister of the man who was no
longer Nicholas Korpanoff, but Michael Strogoff, Courier of the Czar. He was
about to make an exclamation of surprise when he saw the young girl lay her
finger on her lips.

"Come," said Nadia. And with a careless air, Alcide rose and followed her,
making a sign to Blount to accompany him.

But if the surprise of the correspondents had been great at meeting Nadia on
the raft it was boundless when they perceived Michael Strogoff, whom they had
believed to be no longer living.

Michael had not moved at their approach. Jolivet turned towards the girl. "He
does not see you, gentlemen," said Nadia. "The Tartars have burnt out his eyes!
My poor brother is blind!"

A feeling of lively compassion exhibited itself on the faces of Blount and his
companion. In a moment they were seated beside Michael, pressing his hand and
waiting until he spoke to them.

"Gentlemen," said Michael, in a low voice, "you ought not to know who I
am, nor what I am come to do in Siberia. I ask you to keep my secret. Will you
promise me to do so?"

"On my honor," answered Jolivet.

"On my word as a gentleman," added Blount.

"Good, gentlemen."

"Can we be of any use to you?" asked Harry Blount. "Could we not help you
to accomplish your task?"

"I prefer to act alone," replied Michael.

"But those blackguards have destroyed your sight," said Alcide.

"I have Nadia, and her eyes are enough for me!"

In half an hour the raft left the little port of Livenitchnaia, and entered the
river. It was five in the evening and getting dusk. The night promised to be dark
and very cold also, for the temperature was already below zero.

Alcide and Blount, though they had promised to keep Michael's secret, did
not leave him. They talked in a low voice, and the blind man, adding what they
told him to what he already knew, was able to form an exact idea of the state of


things. It was certain that the Tartars had actually invested Irkutsk, and that the
three columns had effected a junction. There was no doubt that the Emir and
Ivan Ogareff were before the capital.

But why did the Czar's courier exhibit such haste to get there, now that the
Imperial letter could no longer be given by him to the Grand Duke, and when he
did not even know the contents of it? Alcide Jolivet and Blount could not
understand it any more than Nadia had done.

No one spoke of the past, except when Jolivet thought it his duty to say to
Michael, "We owe you some apology for not shaking hands with you when we
separated at Ichim."

"No, you had reason to think me a coward!"

"At any rate," added the Frenchman, "you knouted the face of that villain
finely, and he will carry the mark of it for a long time!"

"No, not a long time!" replied Michael quietly.

Half an hour after leaving Livenitchnaia, Blount and his companion were
acquainted with the cruel trials through which Michael and his companion had
successively passed. They could not but heartily admire his energy, which was
only equaled by the young girl's devotion. Their opinion of Michael was exactly
what the Czar had expressed at Moscow: "Indeed, this is a Man!"

The raft swiftly threaded its way among the blocks of ice which were carried
along in the current of the Angara. A moving panorama was displayed on both
sides of the river, and, by an optical illusion, it appeared as if it was the raft
which was motionless before a succession of picturesque scenes. Here were high
granite cliffs, there wild gorges, down which rushed a torrent; sometimes
appeared a clearing with a still smoking village, then thick pine forests blazing.
But though the Tartars had left their traces on all sides, they themselves were not
to be seen as yet, for they were more especially massed at the approaches to
Irkutsk.

All this time the pilgrims were repeating their prayers aloud, and the old
boatman, shoving away the blocks of ice which pressed too near them,
imperturbably steered the raft in the middle of the rapid current of the Angara.


CHAPTER XI BETWEEN TWO BANKS


BY eight in the evening, the country, as the state of the sky had foretold, was
enveloped in complete darkness. The moon being new had not yet risen. From
the middle of the river the banks were invisible. The cliffs were confounded with
the heavy, low-hanging clouds. At intervals a puff of wind came from the east,
but it soon died away in the narrow valley of the Angara.

The darkness could not fail to favor in a considerable degree the plans of the
fugitives. Indeed, although the Tartar outposts must have been drawn up on both
banks, the raft had a good chance of passing unperceived. It was not likely either
that the besiegers would have barred the river above Irkutsk, since they knew
that the Russians could not expect any help from the south of the province.
Besides this, before long Nature would herself establish a barrier, by cementing
with frost the blocks of ice accumulated between the two banks.

Perfect silence now reigned on board the raft. The voices of the pilgrims
were no longer heard. They still prayed, but their prayer was but a murmur,
which could not reach as far as either bank. The fugitives lay flat on the
platform, so that the raft was scarcely above the level of the water. The old
boatman crouched down forward among his men, solely occupied in keeping off
the ice blocks, a maneuver which was performed without noise.

The drifting of the ice was a favorable circumstance so long as it did not
offer an insurmountable obstacle to the passage of the raft. If that object had
been alone on the water, it would have run a risk of being seen, even in the
darkness, but, as it was, it was confounded with these moving masses, of all
shapes and sizes, and the tumult caused by the crashing of the blocks against
each other concealed likewise any suspicious noises.

There was a sharp frost. The fugitives suffered cruelly, having no other
shelter than a few branches of birch. They cowered down together, endeavoring
to keep each other warm, the temperature being now ten degrees below freezing
point. The wind, though slight, having passed over the snow-clad mountains of
the east, pierced them through and through.

Michael and Nadia, lying in the afterpart of the raft, bore this increase of
suffering without complaint. Jolivet and Blount, placed near them, stood these
first assaults of the Siberian winter as well as they could. No one now spoke,
even in a low voice. Their situation entirely absorbed them. At any moment an
incident might occur, which they could not escape unscathed.

For a man who hoped soon to accomplish his mission, Michael was


singularly calm. Even in the gravest conjunctures, his energy had never
abandoned him. He already saw the moment when he would be at last allowed to
think of his mother, of Nadia, of himself! He now only dreaded one final
unhappy chance; this was, that the raft might be completely barred by ice before
reaching Irkutsk. He thought but of this, determined beforehand, if necessary, to
attempt some bold stroke.

Restored by a few hours' rest, Nadia had regained the physical energy which
misery had sometimes overcome, although without ever having shaken her
moral energy. She thought, too, that if Michael had to make any fresh effort to
attain his end, she must be there to guide him. But in proportion as she drew
nearer to Irkutsk, the image of her father rose more and more clearly before her
mind. She saw him in the invested town, far from those he loved, but, as she
never doubted, struggling against the invaders with all the spirit of his
patriotism. In a few hours, if Heaven favored them, she would be in his arms,
giving him her mother's last words, and nothing should ever separate them again.
If the term of Wassili Fedor's exile should never come to an end, his daughter
would remain exiled with him. Then, by a natural transition, she came back to
him who would have enabled her to see her father once more, to that generous
companion, that "brother," who, the Tartars driven back, would retake the road to
Moscow, whom she would perhaps never meet again!

As to Alcide Jolivet and Harry Blount, they had one and the same thought,
which was, that the situation was extremely dramatic, and that, well worked up,
it would furnish a most deeply interesting article. The Englishman thought of the
readers of the Daily Telegraph, and the Frenchman of those of his Cousin
Madeleine. At heart, both were not without feeling some emotion.

"Well, so much the better!" thought Alcide Jolivet, "to move others, one must
be moved one's self! I believe there is some celebrated verse on the subject, but
hang me if I can recollect it!" And with his well-practiced eyes he endeavored to
pierce the gloom of the river.

Every now and then a burst of light dispelling the darkness for a time,
exhibited the banks under some fantastic aspect--either a forest on fire, or a still
burning village. The Angara was occasionally illuminated from one bank to the
other. The blocks of ice formed so many mirrors, which, reflecting the flames on
every point and in every color, were whirled along by the caprice of the current.
The raft passed unperceived in the midst of these floating masses.

The danger was not at these points.

But a peril of another nature menaced the fugitives. One that they could not
foresee, and, above all, one that they could not avoid. Chance discovered it to
Alcide Jolivet in this way:--Lying at the right side of the raft, he let his hand


hang over into the water. Suddenly he was surprised by the impression made on
it by the current. It seemed to be of a slimy consistency, as if it had been made of
mineral oil. Alcide, aiding his touch by his sense of smell, could not be
mistaken. It was really a layer of liquid naphtha, floating on the surface of the
river!

Was the raft really floating on this substance, which is in the highest degree
combustible? Where had this naphtha come from? Was it a natural phenomenon
taking place on the surface of the Angara, or was it to serve as an engine of
destruction, put in motion by the Tartars? Did they intend to carry conflagration
into Irkutsk?

Such were the questions which Alcide asked himself, but he thought it best
to make this incident known only to Harry Blount, and they both agreed in not
alarming their companions by revealing to them this new danger.

It is known that the soil of Central Asia is like a sponge impregnated with
liquid hydrogen. At the port of Bakou, on the Persian frontier, on the Caspian
Sea, in Asia Minor, in China, on the Yuen-Kiang, in the Burman Empire, springs
of mineral oil rise in thousands to the surface of the ground. It is an "oil
country," similar to the one which bears this name in North America.

During certain religious festivals, principally at the port of Bakou, the
natives, who are fire-worshipers, throw liquid naphtha on the surface of the sea,
which buoys it up, its density being inferior to that of water. Then at nightfall,
when a layer of mineral oil is thus spread over the Caspian, they light it, and
exhibit the matchless spectacle of an ocean of fire undulating and breaking into
waves under the breeze.

But what is only a sign of rejoicing at Bakou, might prove a fearful disaster
on the waters of the Angara. Whether it was set on fire by malevolence or
imprudence, in the twinkling of an eye a conflagration might spread beyond
Irkutsk. On board the raft no imprudence was to be feared; but everything was to
be dreaded from the conflagrations on both banks of the Angara, for should a
lighted straw or even a spark blow into the water, it would inevitably set the
whole current of naphtha in a blaze.

The apprehensions of Jolivet and Blount may be better understood than
described. Would it not be prudent, in face of this new danger, to land on one of
the banks and wait there? "At any rate," said Alcide, "whatever the danger may
be, I know some one who will not land!"

He alluded to Michael Strogoff.

In the meantime, on glided the raft among the masses of ice which were
gradually getting closer and closer together. Up till then, no Tartar detachment
had been seen, which showed that the raft was not abreast of the outposts. At


about ten o'clock, however, Harry Blount caught sight of a number of black
objects moving on the ice blocks. Springing from one to the other, they rapidly
approached.

"Tartars!" he thought. And creeping up to the old boatman, he pointed out to
him the suspicious objects.

The old man looked attentively. "They are only wolves!" said he. "I like them
better than Tartars. But we must defend ourselves, and without noise!"

The fugitives would indeed have to defend themselves against these
ferocious beasts, whom hunger and cold had sent roaming through the province.
They had smelt out the raft, and would soon attack it. The fugitives must
struggle without using firearms, for they could not now be far from the Tartar
posts. The women and children were collected in the middle of the raft, and the
men, some armed with poles, others with their knives, stood prepared to repulse
their assailants. They did not make a sound, but the howls of the wolves filled
the air.

Michael did not wish to remain inactive. He lay down at the side attacked by
the savage pack. He drew his knife, and every time that a wolf passed within his
reach, his hand found out the way to plunge his weapon into its throat. Neither
were Jolivet and Blount idle, but fought bravely with the brutes. Their
companions gallantly seconded them. The battle was carried on in silence,
although many of the fugitives received severe bites.

The struggle did not appear as if it would soon terminate. The pack was
being continually reinforced from the right bank of the Angara. "This will never
be finished!" said Alcide, brandishing his dagger, red with blood.

In fact, half an hour after the commencement of the attack, the wolves were
still coming in hundreds across the ice. The exhausted fugitives were getting
weaker. The fight was going against them. At that moment, a group of ten huge
wolves, raging with hunger, their eyes glowing in the darkness like red coals,
sprang onto the raft. Jolivet and his companion threw themselves into the midst
of the fierce beasts, and Michael was finding his way towards them, when a
sudden change took place.

In a few moments the wolves had deserted not only the raft, but also the ice
on the river. All the black bodies dispersed, and it was soon certain that they had
in all haste regained the shore. Wolves, like other beasts of prey, require
darkness for their proceedings, and at that moment a bright light illuminated the
entire river.

It was the blaze of an immense fire. The whole of the small town of
Poshkavsk was burning. The Tartars were indeed there, finishing their work.
From this point, they occupied both banks beyond Irkutsk. The fugitives had by


this time reached the dangerous part of their voyage, and they were still twenty
miles from the capital.

It was now half past eleven. The raft continued to glide on amongst the ice,
with which it was quite mingled, but gleams of light sometimes fell upon it. The
fugitives stretched on the platform did not permit themselves to make a
movement by which they might be betrayed.

The conflagration was going on with frightful rapidity. The houses, built of
fir-wood, blazed like torches--a hundred and fifty flaming at once. With the
crackling of the fire was mingled the yells of the Tartars. The old boatman,
getting a foothold on a near piece of ice, managed to shove the raft towards the
right bank, by doing which a distance of from three to four hundred feet divided
it from the flames of Poshkavsk.

Nevertheless, the fugitives, lighted every now and then by the glare, would
have been undoubtedly perceived had not the incendiaries been too much
occupied in their work of destruction.

It may be imagined what were the apprehensions of Jolivet and Blount, when
they thought of the combustible liquid on which the raft floated. Sparks flew in
millions from the houses, which resembled so many glowing furnaces. They rose
among the volumes of smoke to a height of five or six hundred feet. On the right
bank, the trees and cliffs exposed to the fire looked as if they likewise were
burning. A spark falling on the surface of the Angara would be sufficient to
spread the flames along the current, and to carry disaster from one bank to the
other. The result of this would be in a short time the destruction of the raft and of
all those which it carried.

But, happily, the breeze did not blow from that side. It came from the east,
and drove the flames towards the left. It was just possible that the fugitives
would escape this danger. The blazing town was at last passed. Little by little the
glare grew dimmer, the crackling became fainter, and the flames at last
disappeared behind the high cliffs which arose at an abrupt turn of the river.

By this time it was nearly midnight. The deep gloom again threw its
protecting shadows over the raft. The Tartars were there, going to and fro near
the river. They could not be seen, but they could be heard. The fires of the
outposts burned brightly.

In the meantime it had become necessary to steer more carefully among the
blocks of ice. The old boatman stood up, and the moujiks resumed their poles.
They had plenty of work, the management of the raft becoming more and more
difficult as the river was further obstructed.

Michael had crept forward; Jolivet followed; both listened to what the old
boatman and his men were saying.


"Look out on the right!"

"There are blocks drifting on to us on the left!"

"Fend! fend off with your boat-hook!"

"Before an hour is past we shall be stopped!"

"If it is God's will!" answered the old man. "Against His will there is nothing
to be done."

"You hear them," said Alcide.

"Yes," replied Michael, "but God is with us!"

The situation became more and more serious. Should the raft be stopped, not
only would the fugitives not reach Irkutsk, but they would be obliged to leave
their floating platform, for it would be very soon smashed to pieces in the ice.
The osier ropes would break, the fir trunks torn asunder would drift under the
hard crust, and the unhappy people would have no refuge but the ice blocks
themselves. Then, when day came, they would be seen by the Tartars, and
massacred without mercy!

Michael returned to the spot where Nadia was waiting for him. He
approached the girl, took her hand, and put to her the invariable question:
"Nadia, are you ready?" to which she replied as usual, "I am ready!"

For a few versts more the raft continued to drift amongst the floating ice.
Should the river narrow, it would soon form an impassable barrier. Already they
seemed to drift slower. Every moment they encountered severe shocks or were
compelled to make detours; now, to avoid running foul of a block, there to enter
a channel, of which it was necessary to take advantage. At length the stoppages
became still more alarming. There were only a few more hours of night. Could
the fugitives not reach Irkutsk by five o'clock in the morning, they must lose all
hope of ever getting there at all.

At half-past one, notwithstanding all efforts, the raft came up against a thick
barrier and stuck fast. The ice, which was drifting down behind it, pressed it still
closer, and kept it motionless, as though it had been stranded.

At this spot the Angara narrowed, it being half its usual breadth. This was the
cause of the accumulation of ice, which became gradually soldered together,
under the double influence of the increased pressure and of the cold. Five
hundred feet beyond, the river widened again, and the blocks, gradually
detaching themselves from the floe, continued to drift towards Irkutsk. It was
probable that had the banks not narrowed, the barrier would not have formed.
But the misfortune was irreparable, and the fugitives must give up all hope of
attaining their object.

Had they possessed the tools usually employed by whalers to cut channels
through the ice-fields--had they been able to get through to where the river


widened--they might have been saved. But they had nothing which could make
the least incision in the ice, hard as granite in the excessive frost. What were
they to do?

At that moment several shots on the right bank startled the unhappy
fugitives. A shower of balls fell on the raft. The devoted passengers had been
seen. Immediately afterwards shots were heard fired from the left bank. The
fugitives, taken between two fires, became the mark of the Tartar sharpshooters.
Several were wounded, although in the darkness it was only by chance that they
were hit.

"Come, Nadia," whispered Michael in the girl's ear.

Without making a single remark, "ready for anything," Nadia took Michael's
hand.

"We must cross the barrier," he said in a low tone. "Guide me, but let no one
see us leave the raft."

Nadia obeyed. Michael and she glided rapidly over the floe in the obscurity,
only broken now and again by the flashes from the muskets. Nadia crept along in
front of Michael. The shot fell around them like a tempest of hail, and pattered
on the ice. Their hands were soon covered with blood from the sharp and rugged
ice over which they clambered, but still on they went.

In ten minutes, the other side of the barrier was reached. There the waters of
the Angara again flowed freely. Several pieces of ice, detached gradually from
the floe, were swept along in the current down towards the town. Nadia guessed
what Michael wished to attempt. One of the blocks was only held on by a narrow
strip.

"Come," said Nadia. And the two crouched on the piece of ice, which their
weight detached from the floe.

It began to drift. The river widened, the way was open. Michael and Nadia
heard the shots, the cries of distress, the yells of the Tartars. Then, little by little,
the sounds of agony and of ferocious joy grew faint in the distance.

"Our poor companions!" murmured Nadia.

For half an hour the current hurried along the block of ice which bore
Michael and Nadia. They feared every moment that it would give way beneath
them. Swept along in the middle of the current, it was unnecessary to give it an
oblique direction until they drew near the quays of Irkutsk. Michael, his teeth
tight set, his ear on the strain, did not utter a word. Never had he been so near his
object. He felt that he was about to attain it!

Towards two in the morning a double row of lights glittered on the dark
horizon in which were confounded the two banks of the Angara. On the right
hand were the lights of Irkutsk; on the left, the fires of the Tartar camp.


Michael Strogoff was not more than half a verst from the town. "At last!" he
murmured.

But suddenly Nadia uttered a cry.

At the cry Michael stood up on the ice, which was wavering. His hand was
extended up the Angara. His face, on which a bluish light cast a peculiar hue,
became almost fearful to look at, and then, as if his eyes had been opened to the
bright blaze spreading across the river, "Ah!" he exclaimed, "then Heaven itself
is against us!"


CHAPTER XII IRKUTSK


IRKUTSK, the capital of Eastern Siberia, is a populous town, containing, in
ordinary times, thirty thousand inhabitants. On the right side of the Angara rises
a hill, on which are built numerous churches, a lofty cathedral, and dwellings
disposed in picturesque disorder.

Seen at a distance, from the top of the mountain which rises at about twenty
versts off along the Siberian highroad, this town, with its cupolas, its bell-towers,
its steeples slender as minarets, its domes like pot-bellied Chinese jars, presents
something of an oriental aspect. But this similarity vanishes as the traveler
enters.

The town, half Byzantine, half Chinese, becomes European as soon as he
sees its macadamized roads, bordered with pavements, traversed by canals,
planted with gigantic birches, its houses of brick and wood, some of which have
several stories, the numerous equipages which drive along, not only tarantasses
but broughams and coaches; lastly, its numerous inhabitants far advanced in
civilization, to whom the latest Paris fashions are not unknown.

Being the refuge for all the Siberians of the province, Irkutsk was at this time
very full. Stores of every kind had been collected in abundance. Irkutsk is the
emporium of the innumerable kinds of merchandise which are exchanged
between China, Central Asia, and Europe. The authorities had therefore no fear
with regard to admitting the peasants of the valley of the Angara, and leaving a
desert between the invaders and the town.

Irkutsk is the residence of the governor-general of Eastern Siberia. Below
him acts a civil governor, in whose hands is the administration of the province; a
head of police, who has much to do in a town where exiles abound; and, lastly, a
mayor, chief of the merchants, and a person of some importance, from his
immense fortune and the influence which he exercises over the people.

The garrison of Irkutsk was at that time composed of an infantry regiment of
Cossacks, consisting of two thousand men, and a body of police wearing helmets
and blue uniforms laced with silver. Besides, as has been said, in consequence of
the events which had occurred, the brother of the Czar had been shut up in the
town since the beginning of the invasion.

A journey of political importance had taken the Grand Duke to these distant
provinces of Central Asia. After passing through the principal Siberian cities, the
Grand Duke, who traveled en militaire rather than en prince, without any parade,
accompanied by his officers, and escorted by a regiment of Cossacks, arrived in


the Trans-Baikalcine provinces. Nikolaevsk, the last Russian town situated on
the shore of the Sea of Okhotsk, had been honored by a visit from him. Arrived
on the confines of the immense Muscovite Empire, the Grand Duke was
returning towards Irkutsk, from which place he intended to retake the road to
Moscow, when, sudden as a thunder clap, came the news of the invasion.

He hastened to the capital, but only reached it just before communication
with Russia had been interrupted. There was time to receive only a few
telegrams from St. Petersburg and Moscow, and with difficulty to answer them
before the wire was cut. Irkutsk was isolated from the rest of the world.

The Grand Duke had now only to prepare for resistance, and this he did with
that determination and coolness of which, under other circumstances, he had
given incontestable proofs. The news of the taking of Ichim, Omsk, and Tomsk,
successively reached Irkutsk. It was necessary at any price to save the capital of
Siberia. Reinforcements could not be expected for some time. The few troops
scattered about in the provinces of Siberia could not arrive in sufficiently large
numbers to arrest the progress of the Tartar columns. Since therefore it was
impossible for Irkutsk to escape attack, the most important thing to be done was
to put the town in a state to sustain a siege of some duration.

The preparations were begun on the day Tomsk fell into the hands of the
Tartars. At the same time with this last news, the Grand Duke heard that the
Emir of Bokhara and the allied Khans were directing the invasion in person, but
what he did not know was, that the lieutenant of these barbarous chiefs was Ivan
Ogareff, a Russian officer whom he had himself reduced to the ranks, but with
whose person he was not acquainted.

First of all, as we have seen, the inhabitants of the province of Irkutsk were
compelled to abandon the towns and villages. Those who did not take refuge in
the capital had to retire beyond Lake Baikal, a district to which the invasion
would probably not extend its ravages. The harvests of corn and fodder were
collected and stored up in the town, and Irkutsk, the last bulwark of the
Muscovite power in the Far East, was put in a condition to resist the enemy for a
lengthened period.

Irkutsk, founded in 1611, is situated at the confluence of the Irkut and the
Angara, on the right bank of the latter river. Two wooden draw-bridges, built on
piles, connected the town with its suburbs on the left bank. On this side, defence
was easy. The suburbs were abandoned, the bridges destroyed. The Angara being
here very wide, it would not be possible to pass it under the fire of the besieged.

But the river might be crossed both above and below the town, and
consequently, Irkutsk ran a risk of being attacked on its east side, on which there
was no wall to protect it.


The whole population were immediately set to work on the fortifications.
They labored day and night. The Grand Duke observed with satisfaction the zeal
exhibited by the people in the work, whom ere long he would find equally
courageous in the defense. Soldiers, merchants, exiles, peasants, all devoted
themselves to the common safety. A week before the Tartars appeared on the
Angara, earthworks had been raised. A fosse, flooded by the waters of the
Angara, was dug between the scarp and counterscarp. The town could not now
be taken by a coup de main. It must be invested and besieged.

The third Tartar column--the one which came up the valley of the Yenisei on
the 24th of September--appeared in sight of Irkutsk. It immediately occupied the
deserted suburbs, every building in which had been destroyed so as not to
impede the fire of the Grand Duke's guns, unfortunately but few in number and
of small caliber. The Tartar troops as they arrived organized a camp on the bank
of the Angara, whilst waiting the arrival of the two other columns, commanded
by the Emir and his allies.

The junction of these different bodies was effected on the 25th of September,
in the Angara camp, and the whole of the invading army, except the garrisons
left in the principal conquered towns, was concentrated under the command of
Feofar-Khan.

The passage of the Angara in front of Irkutsk having been regarded by
Ogareff as impracticable, a strong body of troops crossed, several versts up the
river, by means of bridges formed with boats. The Grand Duke did not attempt to
oppose the enemy in their passage. He could only impede, not prevent it, having
no field-artillery at his disposal, and he therefore remained in Irkutsk.

The Tartars now occupied the right bank of the river; then, advancing
towards the town, they burnt, in passing, the summer-house of the governor-
general, and at last having entirely invested Irkutsk, took up their positions for
the siege.

Ivan Ogareff, who was a clever engineer, was perfectly competent to direct a
regular siege; but he did not possess the materials for operating rapidly. He was
disappointed too in the chief object of all his efforts--the surprise of Irkutsk.
Things had not turned out as he hoped. First, the march of the Tartar army was
delayed by the battle of Tomsk; and secondly, the preparations for the defense
were made far more rapidly than he had supposed possible; these two things had
balked his plans. He was now under the necessity of instituting a regular siege of
the town.

However, by his suggestion, the Emir twice attempted the capture of the
place, at the cost of a large sacrifice of men. He threw soldiers on the earthworks
which presented any weak point; but these two assaults were repulsed with the


greatest courage. The Grand Duke and his officers did not spare themselves on
this occasion. They appeared in person; they led the civil population to the
ramparts. Citizens and peasants both did their duty.

At the second attack, the Tartars managed to force one of the gates. A fight
took place at the head of Bolchaia Street, two versts long, on the banks of the
Angara. But the Cossacks, the police, the citizens, united in so fierce a resistance
that the Tartars were driven out.

Ivan Ogareff then thought of obtaining by stratagem what he could not gain
by force. We have said that his plan was to penetrate into the town, make his
way to the Grand Duke, gain his confidence, and, when the time came, give up
the gates to the besiegers; and, that done, wreak his vengeance on the brother of
the Czar. The Tsigane Sangarre, who had accompanied him to the Angara, urged
him to put this plan in execution.

Indeed, it was necessary to act without delay. The Russian troops from the
government of Yakutsk were advancing towards Irkutsk. They had concentrated
along the upper course of the Lena. In six days they would arrive. Therefore,
before six days had passed, Irkutsk must be betrayed. Ogareff hesitated no
longer.

One evening, the 2d of October, a council of war was held in the grand
saloon of the palace of the governor-general. This palace, standing at the end of
Bolchaia Street, overlooked the river. From its windows could be seen the camp
of the Tartars, and had the invaders possessed guns of wider range, they would
have rendered the palace uninhabitable.

The Grand Duke, General Voranzoff, the governor of the town, and the chief
of the merchants, with several officers, had collected to determine upon various
proposals.

"Gentlemen," said the Grand Duke, "you know our situation exactly. I have
the firm hope that we shall be able to hold out until the arrival of the Yakutsk
troops. We shall then be able to drive off these barbarian hordes, and it will not
be my fault if they do not pay dearly for this invasion of the Muscovite territory."

"Your Highness knows that all the population of Irkutsk may be relied on,"
said General Voranzoff.

"Yes, general," replied the Grand Duke, "and I do justice to their patriotism.
Thanks to God, they have not yet been subjected to the horrors of epidemic and
famine, and I have reason to hope that they will escape them; but I cannot
admire their courage on the ramparts enough. You hear my words, Sir Merchant,
and I beg you to repeat such to them."

"I thank your Highness in the name of the town," answered the merchant
chief. "May I ask you what is the most distant date when we may expect the


relieving army?"

"Six days at most, sir," replied the Grand Duke. "A brave and clever
messenger managed this morning to get into the town, and he told me that fifty
thousand Russians under General Kisselef, are advancing by forced marches.
Two days ago, they were on the banks of the Lena, at Kirensk, and now, neither
frost nor snow will keep them back. Fifty thousand good men, taking the Tartars
on the flank, will soon set us free."

"I will add," said the chief of the merchants, "that we shall be ready to
execute your orders, any day that your Highness may command a sortie."

"Good, sir," replied the Grand Duke. "Wait till the heads of the relieving
columns appear on the heights, and we will speedily crush these invaders."

Then turning to General Voranzoff, "To-morrow," said he, "we will visit the
works on the right bank. Ice is drifting down the Angara, which will not be long
in freezing, and in that case the Tartars might perhaps cross."

"Will your Highness allow me to make an observation?" said the chief of the
merchants.

"Do so, sir."

"I have more than once seen the temperature fall to thirty and forty degrees
below zero, and the Angara has still carried down drifting ice without entirely
freezing. This is no doubt owing to the swiftness of its current. If therefore the
Tartars have no other means of crossing the river, I can assure your Highness
that they will not enter Irkutsk in that way."

The governor-general confirmed this assertion.

"It is a fortunate circumstance," responded the Grand Duke. "Nevertheless,
we must hold ourselves ready for any emergency."

He then, turning towards the head of the police, asked, "Have you nothing to
say to me, sir?”

"I have your Highness," answered the head of police, "a petition which is
addressed to you through me."

"Addressed by whom?"

"By the Siberian exiles, whom, as your Highness knows, are in the town to
the number of five hundred."

The political exiles, distributed over the province, had been collected in
Irkutsk, from the beginning of the invasion. They had obeyed the order to rally
in the town, and leave the villages where they exercised their different
professions, some doctors, some professors, either at the Gymnasium, or at the
Japanese School, or at the School of Navigation. The Grand Duke, trusting like
the Czar in their patriotism, had armed them, and they had thoroughly proved
their bravery.


"What do the exiles ask?" said the Grand Duke.

"They ask the consent of your Highness," answered the head of police, "to
their forming a special corps and being placed in the front of the first sortie."

"Yes," replied the Grand Duke with an emotion which he did not seek to
hide, "these exiles are Russians, and it is their right to fight for their country!"

"I believe I may assure your Highness," said the governor-general, "you will
have no better soldiers."

"But they must have a chief,” said the Grand Duke, "who will he be?"

"They wish to recommend to your Highness," said the head of police, "one
of their number, who has distinguished himself on several occasions."

"Is he a Russian?"

"Yes, a Russian from the Baltic provinces."

"His name?"

"Is Wassili Fedor."

This exile was Nadia's father. Wassili Fedor, as we have already said,
followed his profession of a medical man in Irkutsk. He was clever and
charitable, and also possessed the greatest courage and most sincere patriotism.
All the time which he did not devote to the sick he employed in organizing the
defense. It was he who had united his companions in exile in the common cause.
The exiles, till then mingled with the population, had behaved in such a way as
to draw on themselves the attention of the Grand Duke. In several sorties, they
had paid with their blood their debt to holy Russia--holy as they believe, and
adored by her children! Wassili Fedor had behaved heroically; his name had
been mentioned several times, but he never asked either thanks or favors, and
when the exiles of Irkutsk thought of forming themselves into a special corps, he
was ignorant of their intention of choosing him for their captain.

When the head of police mentioned this name, the Grand Duke answered
that it was not unknown to him.

"Indeed," remarked General Voranzoff, "Wassili Fedor is a man of worth and
courage. His influence over his companions has always been very great."

"How long has he been at Irkutsk?" asked the Duke.

"For two years."

"And his conduct?"

"His conduct," answered the head of police, "is that of a man obedient to the
special laws which govern him."

"General," said the Grand Duke, "General, be good enough to present him to
me immediately."

The orders of the Grand Duke were obeyed, and before half an hour had
passed, Fedor was introduced into his presence. He was a man over forty, tall, of


a stern and sad countenance. One felt that his whole life was summed up in a
single word--strife--he had striven and suffered. His features bore a marked
resemblance to those of his daughter, Nadia Fedor.

This Tartar invasion had severely wounded him in his tenderest affections,
and ruined the hope of the father, exiled eight thousand versts from his native
town. A letter had apprised him of the death of his wife, and at the same time of
the departure of his daughter, who had obtained from the government an
authorization to join him at Irkutsk. Nadia must have left Riga on the 10th of
July. The invasion had begun on the 15th of July; if at that time Nadia had
passed the frontier, what could have become of her in the midst of the invaders?
The anxiety of the unhappy father may be supposed when, from that time, he had
no further news of his daughter.

Wassili Fedor entered the presence of the Grand Duke, bowed, and waited to
be questioned.

"Wassili Fedor," said the Grand Duke, "your companions in exile have asked
to be allowed to form a select corps. They are not ignorant that in this corps they
must make up their minds to be killed to the last man?"

"They are not ignorant of it," replied Fedor.

"They wish to have you for their captain."

"I, your Highness?"

"Do you consent to be placed at their head?"

"Yes, if it is for the good of Russia."

"Captain Fedor," said the Grand Duke, "you are no longer an exile."

"Thanks, your Highness, but can I command those who are so still?"

"They are so no longer!" The brother of the Czar had granted a pardon to all
Fedor's companions in exile, now his companions in arms!

Wassili Fedor wrung, with emotion, the hand which the Grand Duke held out
to him, and retired.

The latter, turned to his officers, "The Czar will not refuse to ratify that
pardon," said he, smiling; "we need heroes to defend the capital of Siberia, and I
have just made some."

This pardon, so generously accorded to the exiles of Irkutsk, was indeed an
act of real justice and sound policy.

It was now night. Through the windows of the palace burned the fires of the
Tartar camp, flickering beyond the Angara. Down the river drifted numerous
blocks of ice, some of which stuck on the piles of the old bridges; others were
swept along by the current with great rapidity. It was evident, as the merchant
had observed, that it would be very difficult for the Angara to freeze all over.
The defenders of Irkutsk had not to dread being attacked on that side. Ten


o'clock had just struck. The Grand Duke was about to dismiss his officers and
retire to his apartments, when a tumult was heard outside the palace.

Almost immediately the door was thrown open, an aide-de-camp appeared,
and advanced rapidly towards the Grand Duke.

"Your Highness," said he, "a courier from the Czar!"


CHAPTER XII THE CZAR'S COURIER


ALL the members of the council simultaneously started forward. A courier
from the Czar arrived in Irkutsk! Had these officers for a moment considered the
improbability of this fact, they would certainly not have credited what they
heard.

The Grand Duke advanced quickly to his aide-de-camp. "This courier!" he
exclaimed.

A man entered. He appeared exhausted with fatigue. He wore the dress of a
Siberian peasant, worn into tatters, and exhibiting several shot-holes. A
Muscovite cap was on his head. His face was disfigured by a recently-healed
scar. The man had evidently had a long and painful journey; his shoes being in a
state which showed that he had been obliged to make part of it on foot.

"His Highness the Grand Duke?" he asked.

The Grand Duke went up to him. "You are a courier from the Czar?" he
asked.

"Yes, your Highness."

“You come?"

"From Moscow."

"You left Moscow?"

"On the 15th of July."

"Your name?"

"Michael Strogoff."

It was Ivan Ogareff. He had taken the designation of the man whom he
believed that he had rendered powerless. Neither the Grand Duke nor anyone
knew him in Irkutsk, and he had not even to disguise his features. As he was ina
position to prove his pretended identity, no one could have any reason for
doubting him. He came, therefore, sustained by his iron will, to hasten by
treason and assassination the great object of the invasion.

After Ogareff had replied, the Grand Duke signed to all his officers to
withdraw. He and the false Michael Strogoff remained alone in the saloon.

The Grand Duke looked at Ivan Ogareff for some moments with extreme
attention. Then he said, "On the 15th of July you were at Moscow?"

"Yes, your Highness; and on the night of the 14th I saw His Majesty the Czar
at the New Palace."

"Have you a letter from the Czar?"

"Here it is.”


And Ivan Ogareff handed to the Grand Duke the Imperial letter, crumpled to
almost microscopic size.

"Was the letter given you in this state?"

"No, your Highness, but I was obliged to tear the envelope, the better to hide
it from the Emir's soldiers."

"Were you taken prisoner by the Tartars?"

"Yes, your Highness, I was their prisoner for several days," answered
Ogareff. "That is the reason that, having left Moscow on the 15th of July, as the
date of that letter shows, I only reached Irkutsk on the 2d of October, after
traveling seventy-nine days."

The Grand Duke took the letter. He unfolded it and recognized the Czar's
signature, preceded by the decisive formula, written by his brother's hand. There
was no possible doubt of the authenticity of this letter, nor of the identity of the
courier. Though Ogareff's countenance had at first inspired the Grand Duke with
some distrust, he let nothing of it appear, and it soon vanished.

The Grand Duke remained for a few minutes without speaking. He read the
letter slowly, so as to take in its meaning fully. "Michael Strogoff, do you know
the contents of this letter?" he asked.

"Yes, your Highness. I might have been obliged to destroy it, to prevent its
falling into the hands of the Tartars, and should such have been the case, I
wished to be able to bring the contents of it to your Highness."

"You know that this letter enjoins us all to die, rather than give up the town?"

"T know it."

"You know also that it informs me of the movements of the troops which
have combined to stop the invasion?"

"Yes, your Highness, but the movements have failed."

"What do you mean?"

"I mean that Ichim, Omsk, Tomsk, to speak only of the more important
towns of the two Siberias, have been successively occupied by the soldiers of
Feofar-Khan."

"But there has been fighting? Have not our Cossacks met the Tartars?"

"Several times, your Highness."

"And they were repulsed?"

"They were not in sufficient force to oppose the enemy."

"Where did the encounters take place?"

"At Kolyvan, at Tomsk." Until now, Ogareff had only spoken the truth, but,
in the hope of troubling the defenders of Irkutsk by exaggerating the defeats, he
added, "And a third time before Krasnoiarsk."

"And what of this last engagement?" asked the Grand Duke, through whose


compressed lips the words could scarcely pass.

"Tt was more than an engagement, your Highness,” answered Ogareff; "it was
a battle."

"A battle?”

"Twenty thousand Russians, from the frontier provinces and the government
of Tobolsk, engaged with a hundred and fifty thousand Tartars, and,
notwithstanding their courage, were overwhelmed."

"You lie!" exclaimed the Grand Duke, endeavoring in vain to curb his
passion.

"IT speak the truth, your Highness," replied Ivan Ogareff coldly. "I was
present at the battle of Krasnoiarsk, and it was there I was made prisoner!"

The Grand Duke grew calmer, and by a significant gesture he gave Ogareff
to understand that he did not doubt his veracity. "What day did this battle of
Krasnoiarsk take place?" he asked.

"On the 2d of September."

"And now all the Tartar troops are concentrated here?"

"All."

"And you estimate them?"

"At about four hundred thousand men."

Another exaggeration of Ogareff's in the estimate of the Tartar army, with the
same object as before.

"And I must not expect any help from the West provinces?" asked the Grand
Duke.

"None, your Highness, at any rate before the end of the winter."

"Well, hear this, Michael Strogoff. Though I must expect no help either from
the East or from the West, even were these barbarians six hundred thousand
strong, I will never give up Irkutsk!"

Ogareff's evil eye slightly contracted. The traitor thought to himself that the
brother of the Czar did not reckon the result of treason.

The Grand Duke, who was of a nervous temperament, had great difficulty in
keeping calm whilst hearing this disastrous news. He walked to and fro in the
room, under the gaze of Ogareff, who eyed him as a victim reserved for
vengeance. He stopped at the windows, he looked forth at the fires in the Tartar
camp, he listened to the noise of the ice-blocks drifting down the Angara.

A quarter of an hour passed without his putting any more questions. Then
taking up the letter, he re-read a passage and said, "You know that in this letter I
am warned of a traitor, of whom I must beware?"

"Yes, your Highness."

"He will try to enter Irkutsk in disguise; gain my confidence, and betray the


town to the Tartars."

"I know all that, your Highness, and I know also that Ivan Ogareff has sworn
to revenge himself personally on the Czar's brother."

"Why?"

"Tt is said that the officer in question was condemned by the Grand Duke to a
humiliating degradation."

"Yes, I remember. But it is a proof that the villain, who could afterwards
serve against his country and head an invasion of barbarians, deserved it."

"His Majesty the Czar," said Ogareff, "was particularly anxious that you
should be warned of the criminal projects of Ivan Ogareff against your person."

"Yes; of that the letter informs me."

"And His Majesty himself spoke to me of it, telling me I was above all things
to beware of the traitor."

"Did you meet with him?"

"Yes, your Highness, after the battle of Krasnoiarsk. If he had only guessed
that I was the bearer of a letter addressed to your Highness, in which his plans
were revealed, I should not have got off so easily."

"No; you would have been lost!" replied the Grand Duke. "And how did you
manage to escape?"

"By throwing myself into the Irtych."

"And how did you enter Irkutsk?"

"Under cover of a sortie, which was made this evening to repulse a Tartar
detachment. I mingled with the defenders of the town, made myself known, and
was immediately conducted before your Highness."

"Good, Michael Strogoff," answered the Grand Duke. "You have shown
courage and zeal in your difficult mission. I will not forget you. Have you any
favor to ask?"

"None; unless it is to be allowed to fight at the side of your Highness,"
replied Ogareff.

"So be it, Strogoff. I attach you from to-day to my person, and you shall be
lodged in the palace."

"And if according to his intention, Ivan Ogareff should present himself to
your Highness under a false name?"

"We will unmask him, thanks to you, who know him, and I will make him
die under the knout. Go!"

Ogareff gave a military salute, not forgetting that he was a captain of the
couriers of the Czar, and retired.

Ogareff had so far played his unworthy part with success. The Grand Duke's
entire confidence had been accorded him. He could now betray it whenever it


suited him. He would inhabit the very palace. He would be in the secret of all the
operations for the defense of the town. He thus held the situation in his hand, as
it were. No one in Irkutsk knew him, no one could snatch off his mask. He
resolved therefore to set to work without delay.

Indeed, time pressed. The town must be captured before the arrival of the
Russians from the North and East, and that was only a question of a few days.
The Tartars once masters of Irkutsk, it would not be easy to take it again from
them. At any rate, even if they were obliged to abandon it later, they would not
do so before they had utterly destroyed it, and before the head of the Grand Duke
had rolled at the feet of Feofar-Khan.

Ivan Ogareff, having every facility for seeing, observing, and acting,
occupied himself the next day with visiting the ramparts. He was everywhere
received with cordial congratulations from officers, soldiers, and citizens. To
them this courier from the Czar was a link which connected them with the
empire.

Ogareff recounted, with an assurance which never failed, numerous fictitious
events of his journey. Then, with the cunning for which he was noted, without
dwelling too much on it at first, he spoke of the gravity of the situation,
exaggerating the success of the Tartars and the numbers of the barbarian forces,
as he had when speaking to the Grand Duke. According to him, the expected
succors would be insufficient, if ever they arrived at all, and it was to be feared
that a battle fought under the walls of Irkutsk would be as fatal as the battles of
Kolyvan, Tomsk, and Krasnoiarsk.

Ogareff was not too free in these insinuations. He wished to allow them to
sink gradually into the minds of the defenders of Irkutsk. He pretended only to
answer with reluctance when much pressed with questions. He always added that
they must fight to the last man, and blow up the town rather than yield!

These false statements would have done more harm had it been possible; but
the garrison and the population of Irkutsk were too patriotic to let themselves be
moved. Of all the soldiers and citizens shut up in this town, isolated at the
extremity of the Asiatic world, not one dreamed of even speaking of a
capitulation. The contempt of the Russians for these barbarians was boundless.

No one suspected the odious part played by Ivan Ogareff; no one guessed
that the pretended courier of the Czar was a traitor. It occurred very naturally
that on his arrival in Irkutsk, a frequent intercourse was established between
Ogareff and one of the bravest defenders of the town, Wassili Fedor. We know
what anxiety this unhappy father suffered. If his daughter, Nadia Fedor, had left
Russia on the date fixed by the last letter he had received from Riga, what had
become of her? Was she still trying to cross the invaded provinces, or had she


long since been taken prisoner? The only alleviation to Wassili Fedor's anxiety
was when he could obtain an opportunity of engaging in battle with the Tartars--
opportunities which came too seldom for his taste. The very evening the
pretended courier arrived, Wassili Fedor went to the governor-general's palace
and, acquainting Ogareff with the circumstances under which his daughter must
have left European Russia, told him all his uneasiness about her. Ogareff did not
know Nadia, although he had met her at Ichim on the day she was there with
Michael Strogoff; but then, he had not paid more attention to her than to the two
reporters, who at the same time were in the post-house; he therefore could give
Wassili Fedor no news of his daughter.

"But at what time,” asked Ogareff, "must your daughter have left the Russian
territory?"

"About the same time that you did," replied Fedor.

"I left Moscow on the 15th of July."

"Nadia must also have quitted Moscow at that time. Her letter told me so
expressly."

"She was in Moscow on the 15th of July?"

"Yes, certainly, by that date."

"Then it was impossible for her--But no, I am mistaken--I was confusing
dates. Unfortunately, it is too probable that your daughter must have passed the
frontier, and you can only have one hope, that she stopped on learning the news
of the Tartar invasion!"

The father's head fell! He knew Nadia, and he knew too well that nothing
would have prevented her from setting out. Ivan Ogareff had just committed
gratuitously an act of real cruelty. With a word he might have reassured Fedor.
Although Nadia had passed the frontier under circumstances with which we are
acquainted, Fedor, by comparing the date on which his daughter would have
been at Nijni-Novgorod, and the date of the proclamation which forbade anyone
to leave it, would no doubt have concluded thus: that Nadia had not been
exposed to the dangers of the invasion, and that she was still, in spite of herself,
in the European territory of the Empire.

Ogareff obedient to his nature, a man who was never touched by the
sufferings of others, might have said that word. He did not say it. Fedor retired
with his heart broken. In that interview his last hope was crushed.

During the two following days, the 3rd and 4th of October, the Grand Duke
often spoke to the pretended Michael Strogoff, and made him repeat all that he
had heard in the Imperial Cabinet of the New Palace. Ogareff, prepared for all
these questions, replied without the least hesitation. He intentionally did not
conceal that the Czar's government had been utterly surprised by the invasion,


that the insurrection had been prepared in the greatest possible secrecy, that the
Tartars were already masters of the line of the Obi when the news reached
Moscow, and lastly, that none of the necessary preparations were completed in
the Russian provinces for sending into Siberia the troops requisite for repulsing
the invaders.

Ivan Ogareff, being entirely free in his movements, began to study Irkutsk,
the state of its fortifications, their weak points, so as to profit subsequently by his
observations, in the event of being prevented from consummating his act of
treason. He examined particularly the Bolchaia Gate, the one he wished to
deliver up.

Twice in the evening he came upon the glacis of this gate. He walked up and
down, without fear of being discovered by the besiegers, whose nearest posts
were at least a mile from the ramparts. He fancied that he was recognized by no
one, till he caught sight of a shadow gliding along outside the earthworks.
Sangarre had come at the risk of her life for the purpose of putting herself in
communication with Ivan Ogareff.

For two days the besieged had enjoyed a tranquillity to which the Tartars had
not accustomed them since the commencement of the investment. This was by
Ogareff's orders. Feofar-Khan's lieutenant wished that all attempts to take the
town by force should be suspended. He hoped the watchfulness of the besieged
would relax. At any rate, several thousand Tartars were kept in readiness at the
outposts, to attack the gate, deserted, as Ogareff anticipated that it would be, by
its defenders, whenever he should summon the besiegers to the assault.

This he could not now delay in doing. All must be over by the time that the
Russian troops should come in sight of Irkutsk. Ogareff's arrangements were
made, and on this evening a note fell from the top of the earthworks into
Sangarre's hands.

On the next day, that is to say during the hours of darkness from the 5th to
the 6th of October, at two o'clock in the morning, Ivan Ogareff had resolved to
deliver up Irkutsk.


CHAPTER XIV THE NIGHT OF THE FIFTH OF OCTOBER

IVAN OGAREFF'S plan had been contrived with the greatest care, and
except for some unforeseen accident he believed that it must succeed. It was of
importance that the Bolchaia Gate should be unguarded or only feebly held when
he gave it up. The attention of the besieged was therefore to be drawn to another
part of the town. A diversion was agreed upon with the Emir.

This diversion was to be effected both up and down the river, on the Irkutsk


bank. The attack on these two points was to be conducted in earnest, and at the
same time a feigned attempt at crossing the Angara from the left bank was to be
made. The Bolchaia Gate, would be probably deserted, so much the more
because on this side the Tartar outposts having drawn back, would appear to
have broken up.

It was the 5th of October. In four and twenty hours, the capital of Eastern
Siberia would be in the hands of the Emir, and the Grand Duke in the power of
Ivan Ogareff.

During the day, an unusual stir was going on in the Angara camp. From the
windows of the palace important preparations on the opposite shore could be
distinctly seen. Numerous Tartar detachments were converging towards the
camp, and from hour to hour reinforced the Emir's troops. These movements,
intended to deceive the besieged, were conducted in the most open manner
possible before their eyes.

Ogareff had warned the Grand Duke that an attack was to be feared. He
knew, he said, that an assault was to be made, both above and below the town,
and he counselled the Duke to reinforce the two directly threatened points.
Accordingly, after a council of war had been held in the palace, orders were
issued to concentrate the defense on the bank of the Angara and at the two ends
of the town, where the earthworks protected the river.

This was exactly what Ogareff wished. He did not expect that the Bolchaia
Gate would be left entirely without defenders, but that there would only be a
small number. Besides, Ogareff meant to give such importance to the diversion,
that the Grand Duke would be obliged to oppose it with all his available forces.
The traitor planned also to produce so frightful a catastrophe that terror must
inevitably overwhelm the hearts of the besieged.

All day the garrison and population of Irkutsk were on the alert. The
measures to repel an attack on the points hitherto unassailed had been taken. The
Grand Duke and General Voranzoff visited the posts, strengthened by their
orders. Wassili Fedor's corps occupied the North of the town, but with orders to
throw themselves where the danger was greatest. The right bank of the Angara
had been protected with the few guns possessed by the defenders. With these
measures, taken in time, thanks to the advice so opportunely given by Ivan
Ogareff, there was good reason to hope that the expected attack would be
repulsed. In that case the Tartars, momentarily discouraged, would no doubt not
make another attempt against the town for several days. Now the troops
expected by the Grand Duke might arrive at any hour. The safety or the loss of
Irkutsk hung only by a thread.

On this day, the sun which had risen at twenty minutes to six, set at forty


minutes past five, having traced its diurnal arc for eleven hours above the
horizon. The twilight would struggle with the night for another two hours. Then
it would be intensely dark, for the sky was cloudy, and there would be no moon.
This gloom would favor the plans of Ivan Ogareff.

For a few days already a sharp frost had given warning of the approaching
rigor of the Siberian winter, and this evening it was especially severe. The
Russians posted by the bank of the Angara, obliged to conceal their position,
lighted no fires. They suffered cruelly from the low temperature. A few feet
below them, the ice in large masses drifted down the current. All day these
masses had been seen passing rapidly between the two banks.

This had been considered by the Grand Duke and his officers as fortunate.
Should the channel of the Angara continue to be thus obstructed, the passage
must be impracticable. The Tartars could use neither rafts nor boats. As to their
crossing the river on the ice, that was not possible. The newly-frozen plain could
not bear the weight of an assaulting column.

This circumstance, as it appeared favorable to the defenders of Irkutsk,
Ogareff might have regretted. He did not do so, however. The traitor knew well
that the Tartars would not try to pass the Angara, and that, on its side at least,
their attempt was only a feint.

About ten in the evening, the state of the river sensibly improved, to the great
surprise of the besieged and still more to their disadvantage. The passage till
then impracticable, became all at once possible. The bed of the Angara was
clear. The blocks of ice, which had for some days drifted past in large numbers,
disappeared down the current, and five or six only now occupied the space
between the banks. The Russian officers reported this change in the river to the
Grand Duke. They suggested that it was probably caused by the circumstance
that in some narrower part of the Angara, the blocks had accumulated so as to
form a barrier.

We know this was the case. The passage of the Angara was thus open to the
besiegers. There was great reason for the Russians to be on their guard.

Up to midnight nothing had occurred. On the Eastern side, beyond the
Bolchaia Gate, all was quiet. Not a glimmer was seen in the dense forest, which
appeared confounded on the horizon with the masses of clouds hanging low
down in the sky. Lights flitting to and fro in the Angara camp, showed that a
considerable movement was taking place. From a verst above and below the
point where the scarp met the river's bank, came a dull murmur, proving that the
Tartars were on foot, expecting some signal. An hour passed. Nothing new.

The bell of the Irkutsk cathedral was about to strike two o'clock in the
morming, and not a movement amongst the besiegers had yet shown that they


were about to commence the assault. The Grand Duke and his officers began to
suspect that they had been mistaken. Had it really been the Tartars' plan to
surprise the town? The preceding nights had not been nearly so quiet--musketry
rattling from the outposts, shells whistling through the air; and this time,
nothing. The officers waited, ready to give their orders, according to
circumstances.

We have said that Ogareff occupied a room in the palace. It was a large
chamber on the ground floor, its windows opening on a side terrace. By taking a
few steps along this terrace, a view of the river could be obtained.

Profound darkness reigned in the room. Ogareff stood by a window, awaiting
the hour to act. The signal, of course, could come from him, alone. This signal
once given, when the greater part of the defenders of Irkutsk would be
summoned to the points openly attacked, his plan was to leave the palace and
hurry to the Bolchaia Gate. If it was unguarded, he would open it; or at least he
would direct the overwhelming mass of its assailants against the few defenders.

He now crouched in the shadow, like a wild beast ready to spring on its prey.
A few minutes before two o'clock, the Grand Duke desired that Michael
Strogoff--which was the only name they could give to Ivan Ogareff--should be
brought to him. An aide-de-camp came to the room, the door of which was
closed. He called.

Ogareff, motionless near the window, and invisible in the shade did not
answer. The Grand Duke was therefore informed that the Czar's courier was not
at that moment in the palace.

Two o'clock struck. Now was the time to cause the diversion agreed upon
with the Tartars, waiting for the assault. Ivan Ogareff opened the window and
stationed himself at the North angle of the side terrace.

Below him flowed the roaring waters of the Angara. Ogareff took a match
from his pocket, struck it and lighted a small bunch of tow, impregnated with
priming powder, which he threw into the river.

It was by the orders of Ivan Ogareff that the torrents of mineral oil had been
thrown on the surface of the Angara! There are numerous naphtha springs above
Irkutsk, on the right bank, between the suburb of Poshkavsk and the town.
Ogareff had resolved to employ this terrible means to carry fire into Irkutsk. He
therefore took possession of the immense reservoirs which contained the
combustible liquid. It was only necessary to demolish a piece of wall in order to
allow it to flow out in a vast stream.

This had been done that night, a few hours previously, and this was the
reason that the raft which carried the true Courier of the Czar, Nadia, and the
fugitives, floated on a current of mineral oil. Through the breaches in these


reservoirs of enormous dimensions rushed the naphtha in torrents, and, following
the inclination of the ground, it spread over the surface of the river, where its
density allowed it to float. This was the way Ivan Ogareff carried on warfare!
Allied with Tartars, he acted like a Tartar, and against his own countrymen!

The tow had been thrown on the waters of the Angara. In an instant, with
electrical rapidity, as if the current had been of alcohol, the whole river was in a
blaze above and below the town. Columns of blue flames ran between the two
banks. Volumes of vapor curled up above. The few pieces of ice which still
drifted were seized by the burning liquid, and melted like wax on the top of a
furnace, the evaporated water escaping in shrill hisses.

At the same moment, firing broke out on the North and South of the town.
The enemy's batteries discharged their guns at random. Several thousand Tartars
rushed to the assault of the earthworks. The houses on the bank, built of wood,
took fire in every direction. A bright light dissipated the darkness of the night.

"At last!" said Ivan Ogareff.

He had good reason for congratulating himself. The diversion which he had
planned was terrible. The defenders of Irkutsk found themselves between the
attack of the Tartars and the fearful effects of fire. The bells rang, and all the
able-bodied of the population ran, some towards the points attacked, and others
towards the houses in the grasp of the flames, which it seemed too probable
would ere long envelop the whole town.

The Gate of Bolchaia was nearly free. Only a very small guard had been left
there. And by the traitor's suggestion, and in order that the event might be
explained apart from him, as if by political hate, this small guard had been
chosen from the little band of exiles.

Ogareff re-entered his room, now brilliantly lighted by the flames from the
Angara; then he made ready to go out. But scarcely had he opened the door,
when a woman rushed into the room, her clothes drenched, her hair in disorder.

"Sangarre!" exclaimed Ogareff, in the first moment of surprise, and not
supposing that it could be any other woman than the gypsy.

It was not Sangarre; it was Nadia!

At the moment when, floating on the ice, the girl had uttered a cry on seeing
the fire spreading along the current, Michael had seized her in his arms, and
plunged with her into the river itself to seek a refuge in its depths from the
flames. The block which bore them was not thirty fathoms from the first quay of
Irkutsk.

Swimming beneath the water, Michael managed to get a footing with Nadia
on the quay. Michael Strogoff had reached his journey's end! He was in Irkutsk!

"To the governor's palace!" said he to Nadia.


In less than ten minutes, they arrived at the entrance to the palace. Long
tongues of flame from the Angara licked its walls, but were powerless to set it on
fire. Beyond the houses on the bank were in a blaze.

The palace being open to all, Michael and Nadia entered without difficulty.
In the confusion, no one remarked them, although their garments were dripping.
A crowd of officers coming for orders, and of soldiers running to execute them,
filled the great hall on the ground floor. There, in a sudden eddy of the confused
multitude, Michael and the young girl were separated from each other.

Nadia ran distracted through the passages, calling her companion, and asking
to be taken to the Grand Duke. A door into a room flooded with light opened
before her. She entered, and found herself suddenly face to face with the man
whom she had met at Ichim, whom she had seen at Tomsk; face to face with the
one whose villainous hand would an instant later betray the town!

"Ivan Ogareff!" she cried.

On hearing his name pronounced, the wretch started. His real name known,
all his plans would be balked. There was but one thing to be done: to kill the
person who had just uttered it. Ogareff darted at Nadia; but the girl, a knife in
her hand, retreated against the wall, determined to defend herself.

"Ivan Ogareff!" again cried Nadia, knowing well that so detested a name
would soon bring her help.

"Ah! Be silent!" hissed out the traitor between his clenched teeth.

"Ivan Ogareff!" exclaimed a third time the brave young girl, in a voice to
which hate had added ten-fold strength.

Mad with fury, Ogareff, drawing a dagger from his belt, again rushed at
Nadia and compelled her to retreat into a corner of the room. Her last hope
appeared gone, when the villain, suddenly lifted by an irresistible force, was
dashed to the ground.

"Michael!" cried Nadia.

It was Michael Strogoff. Michael had heard Nadia's call. Guided by her
voice, he had just in time reached Ivan Ogareff's room, and entered by the open
door.

"Fear nothing, Nadia," said he, placing himself between her and Ogareff.

"Ah!" cried the girl, "take care, brother! The traitor is armed! He can see!"

Ogareff rose, and, thinking he had an immeasurable advantage over the blind
man leaped upon him. But with one hand, the blind man grasped the arm of his
enemy, seized his weapon, and hurled him again to the ground.

Pale with rage and shame, Ogareff remembered that he wore a sword. He
drew it and returned a second time to the charge. A blind man! Ogareff had only
to deal with a blind man! He was more than a match for him!


Nadia, terrified at the danger which threatened her companion ran to the door
calling for help!

"Close the door, Nadia!" said Michael. "Call no one, and leave me alone!
The Czar's courier has nothing to fear to-day from this villain! Let him come on,
if he dares! I am ready for him."

In the mean time, Ogareff, gathering himself together like a tiger about to
spring, uttered not a word. The noise of his footsteps, his very breathing, he
endeavored to conceal from the ear of the blind man. His object was to strike
before his opponent was aware of his approach, to strike him with a deadly blow.

Nadia, terrified and at the same time confident, watched this terrible scene
with involuntary admiration. Michael's calm bearing seemed to have inspired
her. Michael's sole weapon was his Siberian knife. He did not see his adversary
armed with a sword, it is true; but Heaven's support seemed to be afforded him.
How, almost without stirring, did he always face the point of the sword?

Ivan Ogareff watched his strange adversary with visible anxiety. His
superhuman calm had an effect upon him. In vain, appealing to his reason, did he
tell himself that in so unequal a combat all the advantages were on his side. The
immobility of the blind man froze him. He had settled on the place where he
would strike his victim. He had fixed upon it! What, then, hindered him from
putting an end to his blind antagonist?

At last, with a spring he drove his sword full at Michael's breast. An
imperceptible movement of the blind man's knife turned aside the blow. Michael
had not been touched, and coolly he awaited a second attack.

Cold drops stood on Ogareff's brow. He drew back a step, then again leaped
forward. But as had the first, this second attempt failed. The knife had simply
parried the blow from the traitor's useless sword.

Mad with rage and terror before this living statue, he gazed into the wide-
open eyes of the blind man. Those eyes which seemed to pierce to the bottom of
his soul, and yet which did not, could not, see--exercised a sort of dreadful
fascination over him.

All at once, Ogareff uttered a cry. A sudden light flashed across his brain.
"He sees!" he exclaimed, "he sees!" And like a wild beast trying to retreat into its
den, step by step, terrified, he drew back to the end of the room.

Then the statue became animated, the blind man walked straight up to Ivan
Ogareff, and placing himself right before him, "Yes, I see!" said he. "I see the
mark of the knout which I gave you, traitor and coward! I see the place where I
am about to strike you! Defend your life! It is a duel I deign to offer you! My
knife against your sword!"

"He sees!" said Nadia. "Gracious Heaven, is it possible!"


Ogareff felt that he was lost. But mustering all his courage, he sprang
forward on his impassible adversary. The two blades crossed, but at a touch from
Michael's knife, wielded in the hand of the Siberian hunter, the sword flew in
splinters, and the wretch, stabbed to the heart, fell lifeless on the ground.

At the same moment, the door was thrown open. The Grand Duke,
accompanied by some of his officers, appeared on the threshold. The Grand
Duke advanced. In the body lying on the ground, he recognized the man whom
he believed to be the Czar's courier.

Then, in a threatening voice, "Who killed that man?" he asked.

"I," replied Michael.

One of the officers put a pistol to his temple, ready to fire.

"Your name?" asked the Grand Duke, before giving the order for his brains
to be blown out.

"Your Highness," answered Michael, "ask me rather the name of the man
who lies at your feet!"

"That man, I know him! He is a servant of my brother! He is the Czar's
courier!"

"That man, your Highness, is not a courier of the Czar! He is Ivan Ogareff!"

"Ivan Ogareff!" exclaimed the Grand Duke.

"Yes, Ivan the Traitor!"

"But who are you, then?"

"Michael Strogoff!"


CHAPTER XV CONCLUSION


MICHAEL STROGOFF was not, had never been, blind. A purely human
phenomenon, at the same time moral and physical, had neutralized the action of
the incandescent blade which Feofar's executioner had passed before his eyes.

It may be remembered, that at the moment of the execution, Marfa Strogoff
was present, stretching out her hands towards her son. Michael gazed at her as a
son would gaze at his mother, when it is for the last time. The tears, which his
pride in vain endeavored to subdue, welling up from his heart, gathered under
his eyelids, and volatiliz-ing on the cornea, had saved his sight. The vapor
formed by his tears interposing between the glowing saber and his eyeballs, had
been sufficient to annihilate the action of the heat. A similar effect is produced,
when a workman smelter, after dipping his hand in vapor, can with impunity
hold it over a stream of melted iron.

Michael had immediately understood the danger in which he would be
placed should he make known his secret to anyone. He at once saw, on the other
hand, that he might make use of his supposed blindness for the accomplishment
of his designs. Because it was believed that he was blind, he would be allowed to
go free. He must therefore be blind, blind to all, even to Nadia, blind
everywhere, and not a gesture at any moment must let the truth be suspected. His
resolution was taken. He must risk his life even to afford to all he might meet the
proof of his want of sight. We know how perfectly he acted the part he had
determined on.

His mother alone knew the truth, and he had whispered it to her in Tomsk
itself, when bending over her in the dark he covered her with kisses.

When Ogareff had in his cruel irony held the Imperial letter before the eyes
which he believed were destroyed, Michael had been able to read, and had read
the letter which disclosed the odious plans of the traitor. This was the reason of
the wonderful resolution he exhibited during the second part of his journey. This
was the reason of his unalterable longing to reach Irkutsk, so as to perform his
mission by word of mouth. He knew that the town would be betrayed! He knew
that the life of the Grand Duke was threatened! The safety of the Czar's brother
and of Siberia was in his hands.

This story was told in a few words to the Grand Duke, and Michael repeated
also--and with what emotion!--the part Nadia had taken in these events.

"Who is this girl?" asked the Grand Duke.

"The daughter of the exile, Wassili Fedor," replied Michael.


"The daughter of Captain Fedor," said the Grand Duke, "has ceased to be the
daughter of an exile. There are no longer exiles in Irkutsk."

Nadia, less strong in joy than she had been in grief, fell on her knees before
the Grand Duke, who raised her with one hand, while he extended the other to
Michael.

An hour after, Nadia was in her father's arms. Michael Strogoff, Nadia, and
Wassili Fedor were united. This was the height of happiness to them all.

The Tartars had been repulsed in their double attack on the town. Wassili
Fedor, with his little band, had driven back the first assailants who presented
themselves at the Bolchaia Gate, expecting to find it open and which, by an
instinctive feeling, often arising from sound judgment, he had determined to
remain at and defend.

At the same time as the Tartars were driven back the besieged had mastered
the fire. The liquid naphtha having rapidly burnt to the surface of the water, the
flames did not go beyond the houses on the shore, and left the other quarters of
the town uninjured. Before daybreak the troops of Feofar-Khan had retreated
into their camp, leaving a large number of dead on and below the ramparts.

Among the dead was the gypsy Sangarre, who had vainly endeavored to join
Ivan Ogareff.

For two days the besiegers attempted no fresh assault. They were
discouraged by the death of Ogareff. This man was the mainspring of the
invasion, and he alone, by his plots long since contrived, had had sufficient
influence over the khans and their hordes to bring them to the conquest of
Asiatic Russia.

However, the defenders of Irkutsk kept on their guard, and the investment
still continued; but on the 7th of October, at daybreak, cannon boomed out from
the heights around Irkutsk. It was the succoring army under the command of
General Kisselef, and it was thus that he made known his welcome arrival to the
Grand Duke.

The Tartars did not wait to be attacked. Not daring to run the risk of a battle
under the walls of Irkutsk, they immediately broke up the Angara camp. Irkutsk
was at last relieved.

With the first Russian soldiers, two of Michael's friends entered the city.
They were the inseparable Blount and Jolivet. On gaining the right bank of the
Angara by means of the icy barrier, they had escaped, as had the other fugitives,
before the flames had reached their raft. This had been noted by Alcide Jolivet in
his book in this way: "Ran a narrow chance of being finished up like a lemon in
a bowl of punch!"

Their joy was great on finding Nadia and Michael safe and sound; above all,


when they learnt that their brave companion was not blind. Harry Blount
inscribed this observation: "Red-hot iron is insufficient in some cases to destroy
the sensibility of the optic nerve."

Then the two correspondents, settled for a time in Irkutsk, busied themselves
in putting the notes and impressions of their journey in order. Thence were sent
to London and Paris two interesting articles relative to the Tartar invasion, and
which--a rare thing--did not contradict each other even on the least important
points.

The remainder of the campaign was unfortunate to the Emir and his allies.
This invasion, futile as all which attack the Russian Colossus must be, was very
fatal to them. They soon found themselves cut off by the Czar's troops, who
retook in succession all the conquered towns. Besides this, the winter was
terrible, and, decimated by the cold, only a small part of these hordes returned to
the steppes of Tartary.

The Irkutsk road, by way of the Ural Mountains, was now open. The Grand
Duke was anxious to return to Moscow, but he delayed his journey to be present
at a touching ceremony, which took place a few days after the entry of the
Russian troops.

Michael Strogoff sought Nadia, and in her father's presence said to her,
"Nadia, my sister still, when you left Riga to come to Irkutsk, did you leave it
with any other regret than that for your mother?"

"No," replied Nadia, "none of any sort whatever."

"Then, nothing of your heart remains there?"

"Nothing, brother."

"Then, Nadia," said Michael, "I think that God, in allowing us to meet, and
to go through so many severe trials together, must have meant us to be united
forever."

"Ah!" said Nadia, falling into Michael's arms. Then turning towards Wassili
Fedor, "My father,” said she, blushing.

"Nadia," said Captain Fedor, "it will be my joy to call you both my
children!"

The marriage ceremony took place in Irkutsk cathedral.

Jolivet and Blount very naturally assisted at this marriage, of which they
wished to give an account to their readers.

"And doesn't it make you wish to imitate them?" asked Alcide of his friend.

"Pooh!" said Blount. "Now if I had a cousin like you--"

"My cousin isn't to be married!" answered Alcide, laughing.

"So much the better," returned Blount, "for they speak of difficulties arising
between London and Pekin. Have you no wish to go and see what is going on


there?”

"By Jove, my dear Blount!" exclaimed Alcide Jolivet, "I was just going to
make the same proposal to you."

And that was how the two inseparables set off for China.

A few days after the ceremony, Michael and Nadia Strogoff, accompanied by
Wassili Fedor, took the route to Europe. The road so full of suffering when
going, was a road of joy in returning. They traveled swiftly, in one of those
sleighs which glide like an express train across the frozen steppes of Siberia.

However, when they reached the banks of the Dinka, just before Birskoe,
they stopped for a while. Michael found the place where he had buried poor
Nicholas. A cross was erected there, and Nadia prayed a last time on the grave of
the humble and heroic friend, whom neither of them would ever forget.

At Omsk, old Marfa awaited them in the little house of the Strogoffs. She
clasped passionately in her arms the girl whom in her heart she had already a
hundred times called "daughter." The brave old Siberian, on that day, had the
right to recognize her son and say she was proud of him.

After a few days passed at Omsk, Michael and Nadia entered Europe, and,
Wassili Fedor settling down in St. Petersburg, neither his son nor his daughter
had any occasion to leave him, except to go and see their old mother.

The young courier was received by the Czar, who attached him specially to
his own person, and gave him the Cross of St. George. In the course of time,
Michael Strogoff reached a high station in the Empire. But it is not the history of
his success, but the history of his trials, which deserves to be related.


OFF ON A COMET OR HECTOR SERVADAC
By Jules Verne


BOOK I.

CHAPTER I. ACHALLENGE

"Nothing, sir, can induce me to surrender my claim."

"I am sorry, count, but in such a matter your views cannot modify mine."

"But allow me to point out that my seniority unquestionably gives me a prior
right."

"Mere seniority, I assert, in an affair of this kind, cannot possibly entitle you
to any prior claim whatever."


"Then, captain, no alternative is left but for me to compel you to yield at the
sword's point."

"As you please, count; but neither sword nor pistol can force me to forego
my pretensions. Here is my card."

"And mine."

This rapid altercation was thus brought to an end by the formal interchange
of the names of the disputants. On one of the cards was inscribed:

Captain Hector Servadac, Staff Officer, Mostaganem.

On the other was the title:

Count Wassili Timascheff, On board the Schooner "Dobryna."

It did not take long to arrange that seconds should be appointed, who would
meet in Mostaganem at two o'clock that day; and the captain and the count were
on the point of parting from each other, with a salute of punctilious courtesy,
when Timascheff, as if struck by a sudden thought, said abruptly: "Perhaps it
would be better, captain, not to allow the real cause of this to transpire?"

"Far better," replied Servadac; "it is undesirable in every way for any names
to be mentioned."

"In that case, however," continued the count, "it will be necessary to assign
an ostensible pretext of some kind. Shall we allege a musical dispute? a
contention in which I feel bound to defend Wagner, while you are the zealous
champion of Rossini?"

"I am quite content,” answered Servadac, with a smile; and with another low
bow they parted.

The scene, as here depicted, took place upon the extremity of a little cape on
the Algerian coast, between Mostaganem and Tenes, about two miles from the
mouth of the Shelif. The headland rose more than sixty feet above the sea-level,
and the azure waters of the Mediterranean, as they softly kissed the strand, were
tinged with the reddish hue of the ferriferous rocks that formed its base. It was
the 31st of December. The noontide sun, which usually illuminated the various
projections of the coast with a dazzling brightness, was hidden by a dense mass
of cloud, and the fog, which for some unaccountable cause, had hung for the last
two months over nearly every region in the world, causing serious interruption to
traffic between continent and continent, spread its dreary veil across land and
sea.

After taking leave of the staff-officer, Count Wassili Timascheff wended his
way down to a small creek, and took his seat in the stern of a light four-oar that
had been awaiting his return; this was immediately pushed off from shore, and
was soon alongside a pleasure-yacht, that was lying to, not many cable lengths
away.


At a sign from Servadac, an orderly, who had been standing at a respectful
distance, led forward a magnificent Arabian horse; the captain vaulted into the
saddle, and followed by his attendant, well mounted as himself, started off
towards Mostaganem. It was half-past twelve when the two riders crossed the
bridge that had been recently erected over the Shelif, and a quarter of an hour
later their steeds, flecked with foam, dashed through the Mascara Gate, which
was one of five entrances opened in the embattled wall that encircled the town.

At that date, Mostaganem contained about fifteen thousand inhabitants, three
thousand of whom were French. Besides being one of the principal district towns
of the province of Oran, it was also a military station. Mostaganem rejoiced in a
well-sheltered harbor, which enabled her to utilize all the rich products of the
Mina and the Lower Shelif. It was the existence of so good a harbor amidst the
exposed cliffs of this coast that had induced the owner of the Dobryna to winter
in these parts, and for two months the Russian standard had been seen floating
from her yard, whilst on her mast-head was hoisted the pennant of the French
Yacht Club, with the distinctive letters M. C. W. T., the initials of Count
Timascheff.

Having entered the town, Captain Servadac made his way towards Matmore,
the military quarter, and was not long in finding two friends on whom he might
rely--a major of the 2nd Fusileers, and a captain of the 8th Artillery. The two
officers listened gravely enough to Servadac's request that they would act as his
seconds in an affair of honor, but could not resist a smile on hearing that the
dispute between him and the count had originated in a musical discussion.
Surely, they suggested, the matter might be easily arranged; a few slight
concessions on either side, and all might be amicably adjusted. But no
representations on their part were of any avail. Hector Servadac was inflexible.

"No concession is possible," he replied, resolutely. "Rossini has been deeply
injured, and I cannot suffer the injury to be unavenged. Wagner is a fool. I shall
keep my word. I am quite firm."

"Be it so, then,” replied one of the officers; "and after all, you know, a sword-
cut need not be a very serious affair."

"Certainly not," rejoined Servadac; "and especially in my case, when I have
not the slightest intention of being wounded at all."

Incredulous as they naturally were as to the assigned cause of the quarrel,
Servadac's friends had no alternative but to accept his explanation, and without
farther parley they started for the staff office, where, at two o'clock precisely,
they were to meet the seconds of Count Timascheff. Two hours later they had
returned. All the preliminaries had been arranged; the count, who like many
Russians abroad was an aide-de-camp of the Czar, had of course proposed


swords as the most appropriate weapons, and the duel was to take place on the
following morning, the first of January, at nine o'clock, upon the cliff at a spot
about a mile and a half from the mouth of the Shelif. With the assurance that
they would not fail to keep their appointment with military punctuality, the two
officers cordially wrung their friend's hand and retired to the Zulma Cafe for a
game at piquet. Captain Servadac at once retraced his steps and left the town.

For the last fortnight Servadac had not been occupying his proper lodgings in
the military quarters; having been appointed to make a local levy, he had been
living in a gourbi, or native hut, on the Mostaganem coast, between four and five
miles from the Shelif. His orderly was his sole companion, and by any other man
than the captain the enforced exile would have been esteemed little short of a
severe penance.

On his way to the gourbi, his mental occupation was a very laborious effort
to put together what he was pleased to call a rondo, upon a model of
versification all but obsolete. This rondo, it is unnecessary to conceal, was to be
an ode addressed to a young widow by whom he had been captivated, and whom
he was anxious to marry, and the tenor of his muse was intended to prove that
when once a man has found an object in all respects worthy of his affections, he
should love her "in all simplicity." Whether the aphorism were universally true
was not very material to the gallant captain, whose sole ambition at present was
to construct a roundelay of which this should be the prevailing sentiment. He
indulged the fancy that he might succeed in producing a composition which
would have a fine effect here in Algeria, where poetry in that form was all but
unknown.

"I know well enough," he said repeatedly to himself, "what I want to say. I
want to tell her that I love her sincerely, and wish to marry her; but, confound it!
the words won't rhyme. Plague on it! Does nothing rhyme with 'simplicity'’? Ah!
I have it now:

‘Lovers should, whoe'er they be, Love in all simplicity.’

But what next? how am I to go on? I say, Ben Zoof," he called aloud to his
orderly, who was trotting silently close in his rear, "did you ever compose any
poetry?"

"No, captain," answered the man promptly: "I have never made any verses,
but I have seen them made fast enough at a booth during the fete of
Montmartre."

"Can you remember them?"

"Remember them! to be sure I can. This is the way they began:

‘Come in! come in! you'll not repent The entrance money you have spent;
The wondrous mirror in this place Reveals your future sweetheart's face.""


"Bosh!" cried Servadac in disgust; "your verses are detestable trash."

"As good as any others, captain, squeaked through a reed pipe."

"Hold your tongue, man," said Servadac peremptorily; "I have made another
couplet.

‘Lovers should, whoe'er they be, Love in all simplicity; Lover, loving
honestly, Offer I myself to thee."

Beyond this, however, the captain's poetical genius was impotent to carry
him; his farther efforts were unavailing, and when at six o'clock he reached the
gourbi, the four lines still remained the limit of his composition.


CHAPTER I. CAPTAIN SERVADAC AND HIS ORDERLY

At the time of which I write, there might be seen in the registers of the
Minister of War the following entry:

SERVADAC (_Hector_), born at St. Trelody in the district of Lesparre,
department of the Gironde, July 19th, 18--.

Property: 1200 francs in rentes.

Length of service: Fourteen years, three months, and five days.

Service: Two years at school at St. Cyr; two years at L'Ecole d'Application;
two years in the 8th Regiment of the Line; two years in the 3rd Light Cavalry;
seven years in Algeria.

Campaigns: Soudan and Japan.

Rank: Captain on the staff at Mostaganem.

Decorations: Chevalier of the Legion of Honor, March 13th, 18--.

Hector Servadac was thirty years of age, an orphan without lineage and
almost without means. Thirsting for glory rather than for gold, slightly scatter-
brained, but warm-hearted, generous, and brave, he was eminently formed to be
the protege of the god of battles.

For the first year and a half of his existence he had been the foster-child of
the sturdy wife of a vine-dresser of Medoc--a lineal descendant of the heroes of
ancient prowess; in a word, he was one of those individuals whom nature seems
to have predestined for remarkable things, and around whose cradle have
hovered the fairy godmothers of adventure and good luck.

In appearance Hector Servadac was quite the type of an officer; he was rather
more than five feet six inches high, slim and graceful, with dark curling hair and
mustaches, well-formed hands and feet, and a clear blue eye. He seemed born to
please without being conscious of the power he possessed. It must be owned,
and no one was more ready to confess it than himself, that his literary
attainments were by no means of a high order. "We don't spin tops" is a favorite


saying amongst artillery officers, indicating that they do not shirk their duty by
frivolous pursuits; but it must be confessed that Servadac, being naturally idle,
was very much given to "spinning tops." His good abilities, however, and his
ready intelligence had carried him successfully through the curriculum of his
early career. He was a good draughtsman, an excellent rider--having thoroughly
mastered the successor to the famous "Uncle Tom" at the riding-school of St.
Cyr--and in the records of his military service his name had several times been
included in the order of the day.

The following episode may suffice, in a certain degree, to illustrate his
character. Once, in action, he was leading a detachment of infantry through an
intrenchment. They came to a place where the side-work of the trench had been
so riddled by shell that a portion of it had actually fallen in, leaving an aperture
quite unsheltered from the grape-shot that was pouring in thick and fast. The
men hesitated. In an instant Servadac mounted the side-work, laid himself down
in the gap, and thus filling up the breach by his own body, shouted, "March on!"

And through a storm of shot, not one of which touched the prostrate officer,
the troop passed in safety.

Since leaving the military college, Servadac, with the exception of his two
campaigns in the Soudan and Japan, had been always stationed in Algeria. He
had now a staff appointment at Mostaganem, and had lately been entrusted with
some topographical work on the coast between Tenes and the Shelif. It was a
matter of little consequence to him that the gourbi, in which of necessity he was
quartered, was uncomfortable and ill-contrived; he loved the open air, and the
independence of his life suited him well. Sometimes he would wander on foot
upon the sandy shore, and sometimes he would enjoy a ride along the summit of
the cliff; altogether being in no hurry at all to bring his task to an end. His
occupation, moreover, was not so engrossing but that he could find leisure for
taking a short railway journey once or twice a week; so that he was ever and
again putting in an appearance at the general's receptions at Oran, and at the
fetes given by the governor at Algiers.

It was on one of these occasions that he had first met Madame de L----, the
lady to whom he was desirous of dedicating the rondo, the first four lines of
which had just seen the light. She was a colonel's widow, young and handsome,
very reserved, not to say haughty in her manner, and either indifferent or
impervious to the admiration which she inspired. Captain Servadac had not yet
ventured to declare his attachment; of rivals he was well aware he had not a few,
and amongst these not the least formidable was the Russian Count Timascheff.
And although the young widow was all unconscious of the share she had in the
matter, it was she, and she alone, who was the cause of the challenge just given


and accepted by her two ardent admirers.

During his residence in the gourbi, Hector Servadac's sole companion was
his orderly, Ben Zoof. Ben Zoof was devoted, body and soul, to his superior
officer. His own personal ambition was so entirely absorbed in his master's
welfare, that it is certain no offer of promotion--even had it been that of aide-de-
camp to the Governor-General of Algiers--would have induced him to quit that
master's service. His name might seem to imply that he was a native of Algeria;
but such was by no means the case. His true name was Laurent; he was a native
of Montmartre in Paris, and how or why he had obtained his patronymic was one
of those anomalies which the most sagacious of etymologists would find it hard
to explain.

Born on the hill of Montmartre, between the Solferino tower and the mill of
La Galette, Ben Zoof had ever possessed the most unreserved admiration for his
birthplace; and to his eyes the heights and district of Montmartre represented an
epitome of all the wonders of the world. In all his travels, and these had been not
a few, he had never beheld scenery which could compete with that of his native
home. No cathedral--not even Burgos itself--could vie with the church at
Montmartre. Its race-course could well hold its own against that at Pentelique;
its reservoir would throw the Mediterranean into the shade; its forests had
flourished long before the invasion of the Celts; and its very mill produced no
ordinary flour, but provided material for cakes of world-wide renown. To crown
all, Montmartre boasted a mountain--a veritable mountain; envious tongues
indeed might pronounce it little more than a hill; but Ben Zoof would have
allowed himself to be hewn in pieces rather than admit that it was anything less
than fifteen thousand feet in height.

Ben Zoof's most ambitious desire was to induce the captain to go with him
and end his days in his much-loved home, and so incessantly were Servadac's
ears besieged with descriptions of the unparalleled beauties and advantages of
this eighteenth arrondissement of Paris, that he could scarcely hear the name of
Montmartre without a conscious thrill of aversion. Ben Zoof, however, did not
despair of ultimately converting the captain, and meanwhile had resolved never
to leave him. When a private in the 8th Cavalry, he had been on the point of
quitting the army at twenty-eight years of age, but unexpectedly he had been
appointed orderly to Captain Servadac. Side by side they fought in two
campaigns. Servadac had saved Ben Zoof's life in Japan; Ben Zoof had rendered
his master a like service in the Soudan. The bond of union thus effected could
never be severed; and although Ben Zoof's achievements had fairly earned him
the right of retirement, he firmly declined all honors or any pension that might
part him from his superior officer. Two stout arms, an iron constitution, a


powerful frame, and an indomitable courage were all loyally devoted to his
master's service, and fairly entitled him to his soi-disant designation of "The
Rampart of Montmartre." Unlike his master, he made no pretension to any gift of
poetic power, but his inexhaustible memory made him a living encyclopaedia;
and for his stock of anecdotes and trooper's tales he was matchless.

Thoroughly appreciating his servant's good qualities, Captain Servadac
endured with imperturbable good humor those idiosyncrasies, which in a less
faithful follower would have been intolerable, and from time to time he would
drop a word of sympathy that served to deepen his subordinate's devotion.

On one occasion, when Ben Zoof had mounted his hobby-horse, and was
indulging in high-flown praises about his beloved eighteenth arrondissement, the
captain had remarked gravely, "Do you know, Ben Zoof, that Montmartre only
requires a matter of some thirteen thousand feet to make it as high as Mont
Blanc?"

Ben Zoof's eyes glistened with delight; and from that moment Hector
Servadac and Montmartre held equal places in his affection.


CHAPTER II. INTERRUPTED EFFUSIONS

Composed of mud and loose stones, and covered with a thatch of turf and
straw, known to the natives by the name of "driss," the gourbi, though a grade
better than the tents of the nomad Arabs, was yet far inferior to any habitation
built of brick or stone. It adjoined an old stone hostelry, previously occupied by a
detachment of engineers, and which now afforded shelter for Ben Zoof and the
two horses. It still contained a considerable number of tools, such as mattocks,
shovels, and pick-axes.

Uncomfortable as was their temporary abode, Servadac and his attendant
made no complaints; neither of them was dainty in the matter either of board or
lodging. After dinner, leaving his orderly to stow away the remains of the repast
in what he was pleased to term the "cupboard of his stomach." Captain Servadac
turned out into the open air to smoke his pipe upon the edge of the cliff. The
shades of night were drawing on. An hour previously, veiled in heavy clouds, the
sun had sunk below the horizon that bounded the plain beyond the Shelif.

The sky presented a most singular appearance. Towards the north, although
the darkness rendered it impossible to see beyond a quarter of a mile, the upper
strata of the atmosphere were suffused with a rosy glare. No well-defined fringe
of light, nor arch of luminous rays, betokened a display of aurora borealis, even
had such a phenomenon been possible in these latitudes; and the most
experienced meteorologist would have been puzzled to explain the cause of this


striking illumination on this 31st of December, the last evening of the passing
year.

But Captain Servadac was no meteorologist, and it is to be doubted whether,
since leaving school, he had ever opened his "Course of Cosmography." Besides,
he had other thoughts to occupy his mind. The prospects of the morrow offered
serious matter for consideration. The captain was actuated by no personal
animosity against the count; though rivals, the two men regarded each other with
sincere respect; they had simply reached a crisis in which one of them was de
trop; which of them, fate must decide.

At eight o'clock, Captain Servadac re-entered the gourbi, the single
apartment of which contained his bed, a small writing-table, and some trunks
that served instead of cupboards. The orderly performed his culinary operations
in the adjoining building, which he also used as a bed-room, and where,
extended on what he called his "good oak mattress," he would sleep soundly as a
dormouse for twelve hours at a stretch. Ben Zoof had not yet received his orders
to retire, and ensconcing himself in a corner of the gourbi, he endeavored to
doze--a task which the unusual agitation of his master rendered somewhat
difficult. Captain Servadac was evidently in no hurry to betake himself to rest,
but seating himself at his table, with a pair of compasses and a sheet of tracing-
paper, he began to draw, with red and blue crayons, a variety of colored lines,
which could hardly be supposed to have much connection with a topographical
survey. In truth, his character of staff-officer was now entirely absorbed in that
of Gascon poet. Whether he imagined that the compasses would bestow upon his
verses the measure of a mathematical accuracy, or whether he fancied that the
parti-colored lines would lend variety to his rhythm, it is impossible to
determine; be that as it may, he was devoting all his energies to the compilation
of his rondo, and supremely difficult he found the task.

"Hang it!" he ejaculated, "whatever induced me to choose this meter? It is as
hard to find rhymes as to rally fugitive in a battle. But, by all the powers! it
shan't be said that a French officer cannot cope with a piece of poetry. One
battalion has fought--now for the rest!"

Perseverance had its reward. Presently two lines, one red, the other blue,
appeared upon the paper, and the captain murmured:

"Words, mere words, cannot avail, Telling true heart's tender tale."

"What on earth ails my master?" muttered Ben Zoof; "for the last hour he has
been as fidgety as a bird returning after its winter migration."

Servadac suddenly started from his seat, and as he paced the room with all
the frenzy of poetic inspiration, read out:

"Empty words cannot convey All a lover's heart would say."


"Well, to be sure, he is at his everlasting verses again!" said Ben Zoof to
himself, as he roused himself in his corner. "Impossible to sleep in such a noise;"
and he gave vent to a loud groan.

"How now, Ben Zoof?" said the captain sharply. "What ails you?"

"Nothing, sir, only the nightmare."

"Curse the fellow, he has quite interrupted me!" ejaculated the captain. "Ben
Zoof!" he called aloud.

"Here, sir!" was the prompt reply; and in an instant the orderly was upon his
feet, standing in a military attitude, one hand to his forehead, the other closely
pressed to his trouser-seam.

"Stay where you are! don't move an inch!" shouted Servadac; "I have just
thought of the end of my rondo." And in a voice of inspiration, accompanying
his words with dramatic gestures, Servadac began to declaim:

"Listen, lady, to my vows-- O, consent to be my spouse; Constant ever I will
be, Constant..."

No closing lines were uttered. All at once, with unutterable violence, the
captain and his orderly were dashed, face downwards, to the ground.


CHAPTER IV. A CONVULSION OF NATURE

Whence came it that at that very moment the horizon underwent so strange
and sudden a modification, that the eye of the most practiced mariner could not
distinguish between sea and sky?

Whence came it that the billows raged and rose to a height hitherto
unregistered in the records of science?

Whence came it that the elements united in one deafening crash; that the
earth groaned as though the whole framework of the globe were ruptured; that
the waters roared from their innermost depths; that the air shrieked with all the
fury of a cyclone?

Whence came it that a radiance, intenser than the effulgence of the Northern
Lights, overspread the firmament, and momentarily dimmed the splendor of the
brightest stars?

Whence came it that the Mediterranean, one instant emptied of its waters,
was the next flooded with a foaming surge?

Whence came it that in the space of a few seconds the moon's disc reached a
magnitude as though it were but a tenth part of its ordinary distance from the
earth?

Whence came it that a new blazing spheroid, hitherto unknown to astronomy,
now appeared suddenly in the firmament, though it were but to lose itself


immediately behind masses of accumulated cloud?

What phenomenon was this that had produced a cataclysm so tremendous in
effect upon earth, sky, and sea?

Was it possible that a single human being could have survived the
convulsion? and if so, could he explain its mystery?


CHAPTER V. AMYSTERIOUS SEA

Violent as the commotion had been, that portion of the Algerian coast which
is bounded on the north by the Mediterranean, and on the west by the right bank
of the Shelif, appeared to have suffered little change. It is true that indentations
were perceptible in the fertile plain, and the surface of the sea was ruffled with
an agitation that was quite unusual; but the rugged outline of the cliff was the
same as heretofore, and the aspect of the entire scene appeared unaltered. The
stone hostelry, with the exception of some deep clefts in its walls, had sustained
little injury; but the gourbi, like a house of cards destroyed by an infant's breath,
had completely subsided, and its two inmates lay motionless, buried under the
sunken thatch.

It was two hours after the catastrophe that Captain Servadac regained
consciousness; he had some trouble to collect his thoughts, and the first sounds
that escaped his lips were the concluding words of the rondo which had been so
ruthlessly interrupted;

"Constant ever I will be, Constant..."

His next thought was to wonder what had happened; and in order to find an
answer, he pushed aside the broken thatch, so that his head appeared above the
debris. "The gourbi leveled to the ground!" he exclaimed, "surely a waterspout
has passed along the coast."

He felt all over his body to perceive what injuries he had sustained, but not a
sprain nor a scratch could he discover. "Where are you, Ben Zoof?" he shouted.

"Here, sir!" and with military promptitude a second head protruded from the
rubbish.

"Have you any notion what has happened, Ben Zoof?"

"T've a notion, captain, that it's all up with us."

"Nonsense, Ben Zoof; it is nothing but a waterspout!"

"Very good, sir," was the philosophical reply, immediately followed by the
query, "Any bones broken, sir?"

"None whatever," said the captain.

Both men were soon on their feet, and began to make a vigorous clearance of
the ruins, beneath which they found that their arms, cooking utensils, and other


property, had sustained little injury.

"By-the-by, what o'clock is it?” asked the captain.

"Tt must be eight o'clock, at least," said Ben Zoof, looking at the sun, which
was a considerable height above the horizon. "It is almost time for us to start."

"To start! what for?"

"To keep your appointment with Count Timascheff."

"By Jove! I had forgotten all about it!" exclaimed Servadac. Then looking at
his watch, he cried, "What are you thinking of, Ben Zoof? It is scarcely two
o'clock."

"Two in the morning, or two in the afternoon?" asked Ben Zoof, again
regarding the sun.

Servadac raised his watch to his ear. "It is going,” said he; "but, by all the
wines of Medoc, I am puzzled. Don't you see the sun is in the west? It must be
near setting.”

"Setting, captain! Why, it is rising finely, like a conscript at the sound of the
reveille. It is considerably higher since we have been talking."

Incredible as it might appear, the fact was undeniable that the sun was rising
over the Shelif from that quarter of the horizon behind which it usually sank for
the latter portion of its daily round. They were utterly bewildered. Some
mysterious phenomenon must not only have altered the position of the sun in the
sidereal system, but must even have brought about an important modification of
the earth's rotation on her axis.

Captain Servadac consoled himself with the prospect of reading an
explanation of the mystery in next week's newspapers, and turned his attention to
what was to him of more immediate importance. "Come, let us be off," said he to
his orderly; "though heaven and earth be topsy-turvy, I must be at my post this
morning."

"To do Count Timascheff the honor of running him through the body," added
Ben Zoof.

If Servadac and his orderly had been less preoccupied, they would have
noticed that a variety of other physical changes besides the apparent alteration in
the movement of the sun had been evolved during the atmospheric disturbances
of that New Year's night. As they descended the steep footpath leading from the
cliff towards the Shelif, they were unconscious that their respiration became
forced and rapid, like that of a mountaineer when he has reached an altitude
where the air has become less charged with oxygen. They were also unconscious
that their voices were thin and feeble; either they must themselves have become
rather deaf, or it was evident that the air had become less capable of transmitting
sound.


The weather, which on the previous evening had been very foggy, had
entirely changed. The sky had assumed a singular tint, and was soon covered
with lowering clouds that completely hid the sun. There were, indeed, all the
signs of a coming storm, but the vapor, on account of the insufficient
condensation, failed to fall.


The sea appeared quite deserted, a most unusual circumstance along this
coast, and not a sail nor a trail of smoke broke the gray monotony of water and
sky. The limits of the horizon, too, had become much circumscribed. On land, as
well as on sea, the remote distance had completely disappeared, and it seemed as
though the globe had assumed a more decided convexity.

At the pace at which they were walking, it was very evident that the captain
and his attendant would not take long to accomplish the three miles that lay
between the gourbi and the place of rendezvous. They did not exchange a word,
but each was conscious of an unusual buoyancy, which appeared to lift up their
bodies and give as it were, wings to their feet. If Ben Zoof had expressed his
sensations in words, he would have said that he felt "up to anything," and he had
even forgotten to taste so much as a crust of bread, a lapse of memory of which
the worthy soldier was rarely guilty.

As these thoughts were crossing his mind, a harsh bark was heard to the left
of the footpath, and a jackal was seen emerging from a large grove of lentisks.
Regarding the two wayfarers with manifest uneasiness, the beast took up its
position at the foot of a rock, more than thirty feet in height. It belonged to an
African species distinguished by a black spotted skin, and a black line down the
front of the legs. At night-time, when they scour the country in herds, the
creatures are somewhat formidable, but singly they are no more dangerous than
a dog. Though by no means afraid of them, Ben Zoof had a particular aversion to
jackals, perhaps because they had no place among the fauna of his beloved
Montmartre. He accordingly began to make threatening gestures, when, to the
unmitigated astonishment of himself and the captain, the animal darted forward,
and in one single bound gained the summit of the rock.

"Good Heavens!" cried Ben Zoof, "that leap must have been thirty feet at
least."

"True enough," replied the captain; "I never saw such a jump."

Meantime the jackal had seated itself upon its haunches, and was staring at
the two men with an air of impudent defiance. This was too much for Ben Zoof's
forbearance, and stooping down he caught up a huge stone, when to his surprise,
he found that it was no heavier than a piece of petrified sponge. "Confound the
brute!" he exclaimed, "I might as well throw a piece of bread at him. What
accounts for its being as light as this?"

Nothing daunted, however, he hurled the stone into the air. It missed its aim;
but the jackal, deeming it on the whole prudent to decamp, disappeared across
the trees and hedges with a series of bounds, which could only be likened to
those that might be made by an india-rubber kangaroo. Ben Zoof was sure that
his own powers of propelling must equal those of a howitzer, for his stone, after


a lengthened flight through the air, fell to the ground full five hundred paces the
other side of the rock.

The orderly was now some yards ahead of his master, and had reached a
ditch full of water, and about ten feet wide. With the intention of clearing it, he
made a spring, when a loud cry burst from Servadac. "Ben Zoof, you idiot! What
are you about? You will break your back!"

And well might he be alarmed, for Ben Zoof had sprung to a height of forty
feet into the air. Fearful of the consequences that would attend the descent of his
servant to terra firma, Servadac bounded forwards, to be on the other side of the
ditch in time to break his fall. But the muscular effort that he made carried him
in his turn to an altitude of thirty feet; in his ascent he passed Ben Zoof, who had
already commenced his downward course; and then, obedient to the laws of
gravitation, he descended with increasing rapidity, and alighted upon the earth
without experiencing a shock greater than if he had merely made a bound of four
or five feet high.

Ben Zoof burst into a roar of laughter. "Bravo!" he said, "we should make a
good pair of clowns."

But the captain was inclined to take a more serious view of the matter. For a
few seconds he stood lost in thought, then said solemnly, "Ben Zoof, I must be
dreaming. Pinch me hard; I must be either asleep or mad."

"It is very certain that something has happened to us," said Ben Zoof. "I have
occasionally dreamed that I was a swallow flying over the Montmartre, but I
never experienced anything of this kind before; it must be peculiar to the coast of
Algeria."

Servadac was stupefied; he felt instinctively that he was not dreaming, and
yet was powerless to solve the mystery. He was not, however, the man to puzzle
himself for long over any insoluble problem. "Come what may," he presently
exclaimed, "we will make up our minds for the future to be surprised at
nothing.”

"Right, captain," replied Ben Zoof; "and, first of all, let us settle our little
score with Count Timascheff."

Beyond the ditch lay a small piece of meadow land, about an acre in extent.
A soft and delicious herbage carpeted the soil, whilst trees formed a charming
framework to the whole. No spot could have been chosen more suitable for the
meeting between the two adversaries.

Servadac cast a hasty glance round. No one was in sight. "We are the first on
the field," he said.

"Not so sure of that, sir," said Ben Zoof.

"What do you mean?" asked Servadac, looking at his watch, which he had


set as nearly as possible by the sun before leaving the gourbi; "it is not nine
o'clock yet."

"Look up there, sir. 1 am much mistaken if that is not the sun;" and as Ben
Zoof spoke, he pointed directly overhead to where a faint white disc was dimly
visible through the haze of clouds.

"Nonsense!" exclaimed Servadac. "How can the sun be in the zenith, in the
month of January, in lat. 39 degrees N.?"

"Can't say, sir. I only know the sun is there; and at the rate he has been
traveling, I would lay my cap to a dish of couscous that in less than three hours
he will have set."

Hector Servadac, mute and motionless, stood with folded arms. Presently he
roused himself, and began to look about again. "What means all this?" he
murmured. "Laws of gravity disturbed! Points of the compass reversed! The
length of day reduced one half! Surely this will indefinitely postpone my
meeting with the count. Something has happened; Ben Zoof and I cannot both be
mad!"

The orderly, meantime, surveyed his master with the greatest equanimity; no
phenomenon, however extraordinary, would have drawn from him a single
exclamation of surprise. "Do you see anyone, Ben Zoof?" asked the captain, at
last.

"No one, sir; the count has evidently been and gone." "But supposing that to
be the case," persisted the captain, "my seconds would have waited, and not
seeing me, would have come on towards the gourbi. I can only conclude that
they have been unable to get here; and as for Count Timascheff--"

Without finishing his sentence. Captain Servadac, thinking it just probable
that the count, as on the previous evening, might come by water, walked to the
ridge of rock that overhung the shore, in order to ascertain if the Dobryna were
anywhere in sight. But the sea was deserted, and for the first time the captain
noticed that, although the wind was calm, the waters were unusually agitated,
and seethed and foamed as though they were boiling. It was very certain that the
yacht would have found a difficulty in holding her own in such a swell. Another
thing that now struck Servadac was the extraordinary contraction of the horizon.
Under ordinary circumstances, his elevated position would have allowed him a
radius of vision at least five and twenty miles in length; but the terrestrial sphere
seemed, in the course of the last few hours, to have become considerably
reduced in volume, and he could now see for a distance of only six miles in
every direction.

Meantime, with the agility of a monkey, Ben Zoof had clambered to the top
of a eucalyptus, and from his lofty perch was surveying the country to the south,


as well as towards both Tenes and Mostaganem. On descending, be informed the
captain that the plain was deserted.

"We will make our way to the river, and get over into Mostaganem," said the
captain.

The Shelif was not more than a mile and a half from the meadow, but no time
was to be lost if the two men were to reach the town before nightfall. Though
still hidden by heavy clouds, the sun was evidently declining fast; and what was
equally inexplicable, it was not following the oblique curve that in these
latitudes and at this time of year might be expected, but was sinking
perpendicularly on to the horizon.

As he went along, Captain Servadac pondered deeply. Perchance some
unheard-of phenomenon had modified the rotary motion of the globe; or perhaps
the Algerian coast had been transported beyond the equator into the southern
hemisphere. Yet the earth, with the exception of the alteration in its convexity, in
this part of Africa at least, seemed to have undergone no change of any very
great importance. As far as the eye could reach, the shore was, as it had ever
been, a succession of cliffs, beach, and arid rocks, tinged with a red ferruginous
hue. To the south--if south, in this inverted order of things, it might still be
called--the face of the country also appeared unaltered, and some leagues away,
the peaks of the Merdeyah mountains still retained their accustomed outline.

Presently a rift in the clouds gave passage to an oblique ray of light that
clearly proved that the sun was setting in the east.

"Well, I am curious to know what they think of all this at Mostaganem,"” said
the captain. "I wonder, too, what the Minister of War will say when he receives a
telegram informing him that his African colony has become, not morally, but
physically disorganized; that the cardinal points are at variance with ordinary
rules, and that the sun in the month of January is shining down vertically upon
our heads."

Ben Zoof, whose ideas of discipline were extremely rigid, at once suggested
that the colony should be put under the surveillance of the police, that the
cardinal points should be placed under restraint, and that the sun should be shot
for breach of discipline.

Meantime, they were both advancing with the utmost speed. The
decompression of the atmosphere made the specific gravity of their bodies
extraordinarily light, and they ran like hares and leaped like chamois. Leaving
the devious windings of the footpath, they went as a crow would fly across the
country. Hedges, trees, and streams were cleared at a bound, and under these
conditions Ben Zoof felt that he could have overstepped Montmartre at a single
stride. The earth seemed as elastic as the springboard of an acrobat; they scarcely


touched it with their feet, and their only fear was lest the height to which they
were propelled would consume the time which they were saving by their short
cut across the fields.

It was not long before their wild career brought them to the right bank of the
Shelif. Here they were compelled to stop, for not only had the bridge completely
disappeared, but the river itself no longer existed. Of the left bank there was not
the slightest trace, and the right bank, which on the previous evening had
bounded the yellow stream, as it murmured peacefully along the fertile plain,
had now become the shore of a tumultuous ocean, its azure waters extending
westwards far as the eye could reach, and annihilating the tract of country which
had hitherto formed the district of Mostaganem. The shore coincided exactly
with what had been the right bank of the Shelif, and in a slightly curved line ran
north and south, whilst the adjacent groves and meadows all retained their
previous positions. But the river-bank had become the shore of an unknown sea.

Eager to throw some light upon the mystery, Servadac hurriedly made his
way through the oleander bushes that overhung the shore, took up some water in
the hollow of his hand, and carried it to his lips. "Salt as brine!" he exclaimed, as
soon as he had tasted it. "The sea has undoubtedly swallowed up all the western
part of Algeria."

"Tt will not last long, sir," said Ben Zoof. "It is, probably, only a severe
flood."

The captain shook his head. "Worse than that, I fear, Ben Zoof," he replied
with emotion. "It is a catastrophe that may have very serious consequences.
What can have become of all my friends and fellow-officers?"

Ben Zoof was silent. Rarely had he seen his master so much agitated; and
though himself inclined to receive these phenomena with philosophic
indifference, his notions of military duty caused his countenance to reflect the
captain's expression of amazement.

But there was little time for Servadac to examine the changes which a few
hours had wrought. The sun had already reached the eastern horizon, and just as
though it were crossing the ecliptic under the tropics, it sank like a cannon ball
into the sea. Without any warning, day gave place to night, and earth, sea, and
sky were immediately wrapped in profound obscurity.


CHAPTER VI. THE CAPTAIN MAKES AN EXPLORATION

Hector Servadac was not the man to remain long unnerved by any untoward
event. It was part of his character to discover the why and the wherefore of
everything that came under his observation, and he would have faced a cannon


ball the more unflinchingly from understanding the dynamic force by which it
was propelled. Such being his temperament, it may well be imagined that he was
anxious not to remain long in ignorance of the cause of the phenomena which
had been so startling in their consequences.

"We must inquire into this to-morrow," he exclaimed, as darkness fell
suddenly upon him. Then, after a pause, he added: "That is to say, if there is to
be a to-morrow; for if I were to be put to the torture, I could not tell what has
become of the sun."

"May I ask, sir, what we are to do now?" put in Ben Zoof.

"Stay where we are for the present; and when daylight appears--if it ever
does appear--we will explore the coast to the west and south, and return to the
gourbi. If we can find out nothing else, we must at least discover where we are."

"Meanwhile, sir, may we go to sleep?"

"Certainly, if you like, and if you can."

Nothing loath to avail himself of his master's permission, Ben Zoof crouched
down in an angle of the shore, threw his arms over his eyes, and very soon slept
the sleep of the ignorant, which is often sounder than the sleep of the just.
Overwhelmed by the questions that crowded upon his brain, Captain Servadac
could only wander up and down the shore. Again and again he asked himself
what the catastrophe could portend. Had the towns of Algiers, Oran, and
Mostaganem escaped the inundation? Could he bring himself to believe that all
the inhabitants, his friends, and comrades had perished; or was it not more
probable that the Mediterranean had merely invaded the region of the mouth of
the Shelif? But this supposition did not in the least explain the other physical
disturbances. Another hypothesis that presented itself to his mind was that the
African coast might have been suddenly transported to the equatorial zone. But
although this might get over the difficulty of the altered altitude of the sun and
the absence of twilight, yet it would neither account for the sun setting in the
east, nor for the length of the day being reduced to six hours.

"We must wait till to-morrow," he repeated; adding, for he had become
distrustful of the future, "that is to say, if to-morrow ever comes."

Although not very learned in astronomy, Servadac was acquainted with the
position of the principal constellations. It was therefore a considerable
disappointment to him that, in consequence of the heavy clouds, not a star was
visible in the firmament. To have ascertained that the pole-star had become
displaced would have been an undeniable proof that the earth was revolving ona
new axis; but not a rift appeared in the lowering clouds, which seemed to
threaten torrents of rain.

It happened that the moon was new on that very day; naturally, therefore, it


would have set at the same time as the sun. What, then, was the captain's
bewilderment when, after he had been walking for about an hour and a half, he
noticed on the western horizon a strong glare that penetrated even the masses of
the clouds.

"The moon in the west!" he cried aloud; but suddenly bethinking himself, he
added: "But no, that cannot be the moon; unless she had shifted very much
nearer the earth, she could never give a light as intense as this."

As he spoke the screen of vapor was illuminated to such a degree that the
whole country was as it were bathed in twilight. "What can this be?"
soliloquized the captain. "It cannot be the sun, for the sun set in the east only an
hour and a half ago. Would that those clouds would disclose what enormous
luminary lies behind them! What a fool I was not to have learnt more astronomy!
Perhaps, after all, I am racking my brain over something that is quite in the
ordinary course of nature.”

But, reason as he might, the mysteries of the heavens still remained
impenetrable. For about an hour some luminous body, its disc evidently of
gigantic dimensions, shed its rays upon the upper strata of the clouds; then,
marvelous to relate, instead of obeying the ordinary laws of celestial mechanism,
and descending upon the opposite horizon, it seemed to retreat farther off, grew
dimmer, and vanished.

The darkness that returned to the face of the earth was not more profound
than the gloom which fell upon the captain's soul. Everything was
incomprehensible. The simplest mechanical rules seemed falsified; the planets
had defied the laws of gravitation; the motions of the celestial spheres were
erroneous as those of a watch with a defective mainspring, and there was reason
to fear that the sun would never again shed his radiance upon the earth.

But these last fears were groundless. In three hours' time, without any
intervening twilight, the morning sun made its appearance in the west, and day
once more had dawned. On consulting his watch, Servadac found that night had
lasted precisely six hours. Ben Zoof, who was unaccustomed to so brief a period
of repose, was still slumbering soundly.

"Come, wake up!" said Servadac, shaking him by the shoulder; "it is time to
start."

"Time to start?" exclaimed Ben Zoof, rubbing his eyes. "I feel as if I had
only just gone to sleep."

"You have slept all night, at any rate," replied the captain; "it has only been
for six hours, but you must make it enough."

"Enough it shall be, sir," was the submissive rejoinder.

"And now," continued Servadac, "we will take the shortest way back to the


gourbi, and see what our horses think about it all."

"They will think that they ought to be groomed," said the orderly.

"Very good; you may groom them and saddle them as quickly as you like. I
want to know what has become of the rest of Algeria: if we cannot get round by
the south to Mostaganem, we must go eastwards to Tenes." And forthwith they
started. Beginning to feel hungry, they had no hesitation in gathering figs, dates,
and oranges from the plantations that formed a continuous rich and luxuriant
orchard along their path. The district was quite deserted, and they had no reason
to fear any legal penalty.

In an hour and a half they reached the gourbi. Everything was just as they
had left it, and it was evident that no one had visited the place during their
absence. All was desolate as the shore they had quitted.

The preparations for the expedition were brief and simple. Ben Zoof saddled
the horses and filled his pouch with biscuits and game; water, he felt certain,
could be obtained in abundance from the numerous affluents of the Shelif,
which, although they had now become tributaries of the Mediterranean, still
meandered through the plain. Captain Servadac mounted his horse Zephyr, and
Ben Zoof simultaneously got astride his mare Galette, named after the mill of
Montmartre. They galloped off in the direction of the Shelif, and were not long
in discovering that the diminution in the pressure of the atmosphere had
precisely the same effect upon their horses as it had had upon themselves. Their
muscular strength seemed five times as great as hitherto; their hoofs scarcely
touched the ground, and they seemed transformed from ordinary quadrupeds into
veritable hippogriffs. Happily, Servadac and his orderly were fearless riders;
they made no attempt to curb their steeds, but even urged them to still greater
exertions. Twenty minutes sufficed to carry them over the four or five miles that
intervened between the gourbi and the mouth of the Shelif; then, slackening their
speed, they proceeded at a more leisurely pace to the southeast, along what had
once been the right bank of the river, but which, although it still retained its
former characteristics, was now the boundary of a sea, which extending farther
than the limits of the horizon, must have swallowed up at least a large portion of
the province of Oran. Captain Servadac knew the country well; he had at one
time been engaged upon a trigonometrical survey of the district, and
consequently had an accurate knowledge of its topography. His idea now was to
draw up a report of his investigations: to whom that report should be delivered
was a problem he had yet to solve.

During the four hours of daylight that still remained, the travelers rode about
twenty-one miles from the river mouth. To their vast surprise, they did not meet
a single human being. At nightfall they again encamped in a slight bend of the


shore, at a point which on the previous evening had faced the mouth of the Mina,
one of the left-hand affluents of the Shelif, but now absorbed into the newly
revealed ocean. Ben Zoof made the sleeping accommodation as comfortable as
the circumstances would allow; the horses were clogged and turned out to feed
upon the rich pasture that clothed the shore, and the night passed without special
incident.

At sunrise on the following morning, the 2nd of January, or what, according
to the ordinary calendar, would have been the night of the 1st, the captain and his
orderly remounted their horses, and during the six-hours' day accomplished a
distance of forty-two miles. The right bank of the river still continued to be the
margin of the land, and only in one spot had its integrity been impaired. This was
about twelve miles from the Mina, and on the site of the annex or suburb of
Surkelmittoo. Here a large portion of the bank had been swept away, and the
hamlet, with its eight hundred inhabitants, had no doubt been swallowed up by
the encroaching waters. It seemed, therefore, more than probable that a similar
fate had overtaken the larger towns beyond the Shelif.

In the evening the explorers encamped, as previously, in a nook of the shore
which here abruptly terminated their new domain, not far from where they might
have expected to find the important village of Memounturroy; but of this, too,
there was now no trace. "I had quite reckoned upon a supper and a bed at
Orleansville to-night," said Servadac, as, full of despondency, he surveyed the
waste of water.

"Quite impossible," replied Ben Zoof, "except you had gone by a boat. But
cheer up, sir, cheer up; we will soon devise some means for getting across to
Mostaganem."

"If, as I hope," rejoined the captain, "we are on a peninsula, we are more
likely to get to Tenes; there we shall hear the news."

"Far more likely to carry the news ourselves," answered Ben Zoof, as he
threw himself down for his night's rest.

Six hours later, only waiting for sunrise, Captain Servadac set himself in
movement again to renew his investigations. At this spot the shore, that hitherto
had been running in a southeasterly direction, turned abruptly to the north, being
no longer formed by the natural bank of the Shelif, but consisting of an
absolutely new coast-line. No land was in sight. Nothing could be seen of
Orleansville, which ought to have been about six miles to the southwest; and
Ben Zoof, who had mounted the highest point of view attainable, could
distinguish sea, and nothing but sea, to the farthest horizon.

Quitting their encampment and riding on, the bewildered explorers kept
close to the new shore. This, since it had ceased to be formed by the original


river bank, had considerably altered its aspect. Frequent landslips occurred, and
in many places deep chasms rifted the ground; great gaps furrowed the fields,
and trees, half uprooted, overhung the water, remarkable by the fantastic
distortions of their gnarled trunks, looking as though they had been chopped by a
hatchet.

The sinuosities of the coast line, alternately gully and headland, had the
effect of making a devious progress for the travelers, and at sunset, although they
had accomplished more than twenty miles, they had only just arrived at the foot
of the Merdeyah Mountains, which, before the cataclysm, had formed the
extremity of the chain of the Little Atlas. The ridge, however, had been violently
ruptured, and now rose perpendicularly from the water.

On the following morning Servadac and Ben Zoof traversed one of the
mountain gorges; and next, in order to make a more thorough acquaintance with
the limits and condition of the section of Algerian territory of which they seemed
to be left as the sole occupants, they dismounted, and proceeded on foot to the
summit of one of the highest peaks. From this elevation they ascertained that
from the base of the Merdeyah to the Mediterranean, a distance of about
eighteen miles, a new coast line had come into existence; no land was visible in
any direction; no isthmus existed to form a connecting link with the territory of
Tenes, which had entirely disappeared. The result was that Captain Servadac was
driven to the irresistible conclusion that the tract of land which he had been
surveying was not, as he had at first imagined, a peninsula; it was actually an
island.

Strictly speaking, this island was quadrilateral, but the sides were so irregular
that it was much more nearly a triangle, the comparison of the sides exhibiting
these proportions: The section of the right bank of the Shelif, seventy-two miles;
the southern boundary from the Shelif to the chain of the Little Atlas, twenty-one
miles; from the Little Atlas to the Mediterranean, eighteen miles; and sixty miles
of the shore of the Mediterranean itself, making in all an entire circumference of
about 171 miles.

"What does it all mean?" exclaimed the captain, every hour growing more
and more bewildered.

"The will of Providence, and we must submit," replied Ben Zoof, calm and
undisturbed. With this reflection, the two men silently descended the mountain
and remounted their horses. Before evening they had reached the Mediterranean.
On their road they failed to discern a vestige of the little town of Montenotte;
like Tenes, of which not so much as a ruined cottage was visible on the horizon,
it seemed to be annihilated.

On the following day, the 6th of January, the two men made a forced march


along the coast of the Mediterranean, which they found less altered than the
captain had at first supposed; but four villages had entirely disappeared, and the
headlands, unable to resist the shock of the convulsion, had been detached from
the mainland.

The circuit of the island had been now completed, and the explorers, after a
period of sixty hours, found themselves once more beside the ruins of their
gourbi. Five days, or what, according to the established order of things, would
have been two days and a half, had been occupied in tracing the boundaries of
their new domain; and they had ascertained beyond a doubt that they were the
sole human inhabitants left upon the island.

"Well, sir, here you are, Governor General of Algeria!" exclaimed Ben Zoof,
as they reached the gourbi.

"With not a soul to govern," gloomily rejoined the captain.

"How so? Do you not reckon me?"

"Pshaw! Ben Zoof, what are you?"

"What am I? Why, I am the population."

The captain deigned no reply, but, muttering some expressions of regret for
the fruitless trouble he had taken about his rondo, betook himself to rest.


CHAPTER VII. BEN ZOOF WATCHES IN VAIN

In a few minutes the governor general and his population were asleep. The
gourbi being in ruins, they were obliged to put up with the best accommodation
they could find in the adjacent erection. It must be owned that the captain's
slumbers were by no means sound; he was agitated by the consciousness that he
had hitherto been unable to account for his strange experiences by any
reasonable theory. Though far from being advanced in the knowledge of natural
philosophy, he had been instructed, to a certain degree, in its elementary
principles; and, by an effort of memory, he managed to recall some general laws
which he had almost forgotten. He could understand that an altered inclination of
the earth's axis with regard to the ecliptic would introduce a change of position
in the cardinal points, and bring about a displacement of the sea; but the
hypothesis entirely failed to account, either for the shortening of the days, or for
the diminution in the pressure of the atmosphere. He felt that his judgment was
utterly baffled; his only remaining hope was that the chain of marvels was not
yet complete, and that something farther might throw some light upon the
mystery.

Ben Zoof's first care on the following morning was to provide a good
breakfast. To use his own phrase, he was as hungry as the whole population of


three million Algerians, of whom he was the representative, and he must have
enough to eat. The catastrophe which had overwhelmed the country had left a
dozen eggs uninjured, and upon these, with a good dish of his famous couscous,
he hoped that he and his master might have a sufficiently substantial meal. The
stove was ready for use, the copper skillet was as bright as hands could make it,
and the beads of condensed steam upon the surface of a large stone al-caraza
gave evidence that it was supplied with water. Ben Zoof at once lighted a fire,
singing all the time, according to his wont, a snatch of an old military refrain.

Ever on the lookout for fresh phenomena, Captain Servadac watched the
preparations with a curious eye. It struck him that perhaps the air, in its strangely
modified condition, would fail to supply sufficient oxygen, and that the stove, in
consequence, might not fulfill its function. But no; the fire was lighted just as
usual, and fanned into vigor by Ben Zoof applying his mouth in lieu of bellows,
and a bright flame started up from the midst of the twigs and coal. The skillet
was duly set upon the stove, and Ben Zoof was prepared to wait awhile for the
water to boil. Taking up the eggs, he was surprised to notice that they hardly
weighed more than they would if they had been mere shells; but he was still
more surprised when he saw that before the water had been two minutes over the
fire it was at full boil.

"By jingo!" he exclaimed, "a precious hot fire!"

Servadac reflected. "It cannot be that the fire is hotter," he said, "the
peculiarity must be in the water." And taking down a centigrade thermometer,
which hung upon the wall, he plunged it into the skillet. Instead of 100 degrees,
the instrument registered only 66 degrees.

"Take my advice, Ben Zoof," he said; "leave your eggs in the saucepan a
good quarter of an hour."

"Boil them hard! That will never do," objected the orderly.

"You will not find them hard, my good fellow. Trust me, we shall be able to
dip our sippets into the yolks easily enough."

The captain was quite right in his conjecture, that this new phenomenon was
caused by a diminution in the pressure of the atmosphere. Water boiling at a
temperature of 66 degrees was itself an evidence that the column of air above the
earth's surface had become reduced by one-third of its altitude. The identical
phenomenon would have occurred at the summit of a mountain 35,000 feet high;
and had Servadac been in possession of a barometer, he would have immediately
discovered the fact that only now for the first time, as the result of experiment,
revealed itself to him--a fact, moreover, which accounted for the compression of
the blood-vessels which both he and Ben Zoof had experienced, as well as for
the attenuation of their voices and their accelerated breathing. "And yet," he


argued with himself, "if our encampment has been projected to so great an
elevation, how is it that the sea remains at its proper level?"

Once again Hector Servadac, though capable of tracing consequences, felt
himself totally at a loss to comprehend their cause; hence his agitation and
bewilderment!

After their prolonged immersion in the boiling water, the eggs were found to
be only just sufficiently cooked; the couscous was very much in the same
condition; and Ben Zoof came to the conclusion that in future he must be careful
to commence his culinary operations an hour earlier. He was rejoiced at last to
help his master, who, in spite of his perplexed preoccupation, seemed to have a
very fair appetite for breakfast.

"Well, captain?" said Ben Zoof presently, such being his ordinary way of
opening conversation.

"Well, Ben Zoof?" was the captain's invariable response to his servant's
formula.

"What are we to do now, sir?"

"We can only for the present wait patiently where we are. We are encamped
upon an island, and therefore we can only be rescued by sea."

"But do you suppose that any of our friends are still alive?" asked Ben Zoof.

"Oh, I think we must indulge the hope that this catastrophe has not extended
far. We must trust that it has limited its mischief to some small portion of the
Algerian coast, and that our friends are all alive and well. No doubt the governor
general will be anxious to investigate the full extent of the damage, and will send
a vessel from Algiers to explore. It is not likely that we shall be forgotten. What,
then, you have to do, Ben Zoof, is to keep a sharp lookout, and to be ready, in
case a vessel should appear, to make signals at once."

"But if no vessel should appear!" sighed the orderly.

"Then we must build a boat, and go in search of those who do not come in
search of us."

"Very good. But what sort of a sailor are you?"

"Everyone can be a sailor when he must," said Servadac calmly.

Ben Zoof said no more. For several succeeding days he scanned the horizon
unintermittently with his telescope. His watching was in vain. No ship appeared
upon the desert sea. "By the name of a Kabyle!" he broke out impatiently, "his
Excellency is grossly negligent!"

Although the days and nights had become reduced from twenty-four hours to
twelve, Captain Servadac would not accept the new condition of things, but
resolved to adhere to the computations of the old calendar. Notwithstanding,
therefore, that the sun had risen and set twelve times since the commencement of


the new year, he persisted in calling the following day the 6th of January. His
watch enabled him to keep an accurate account of the passing hours.

In the course of his life, Ben Zoof had read a few books. After pondering one
day, he said: "It seems to me, captain, that you have turned into Robinson
Crusoe, and that I am your man Friday. I hope I have not become a negro."

"No," replied the captain. "Your complexion isn't the fairest in the world, but
you are not black yet."

"Well, I had much sooner be a white Friday than a black one," rejoined Ben
Zoot.

Still no ship appeared; and Captain Servadac, after the example of all
previous Crusoes, began to consider it advisable to investigate the resources of
his domain. The new territory of which he had become the monarch he named
Gourbi Island. It had a superficial area of about nine hundred square miles.
Bullocks, cows, goats, and sheep existed in considerable numbers; and as there
seemed already to be an abundance of game, it was hardly likely that a future
supply would fail them. The condition of the cereals was such as to promise a
fine ingathering of wheat, maize, and rice; so that for the governor and his
population, with their two horses, not only was there ample provision, but even
if other human inhabitants besides themselves should yet be discovered, there
was not the remotest prospect of any of them perishing by starvation.

From the 6th to the 13th of January the rain came down in torrents; and, what
was quite an unusual occurrence at this season of the year, several heavy storms
broke over the island. In spite, however, of the continual downfall, the heavens
still remained veiled in cloud. Servadac, moreover, did not fail to observe that
for the season the temperature was unusually high; and, as a matter still more
surprising, that it kept steadily increasing, as though the earth were gradually and
continuously approximating to the sun. In proportion to the rise of temperature,
the light also assumed greater intensity; and if it had not been for the screen of
vapor interposed between the sky and the island, the irradiation which would
have illumined all terrestrial objects would have been vivid beyond all
precedent.

But neither sun, moon, nor star ever appeared; and Servadac's irritation and
annoyance at being unable to identify any one point of the firmament may be
more readily imagined than described. On one occasion Ben Zoof endeavored to
mitigate his master's impatience by exhorting him to assume the resignation,
even if he did not feel the indifference, which he himself experienced; but his
advice was received with so angry a rebuff that he retired in all haste, abashed, to
résumé his watchman's duty, which he performed with exemplary perseverance.
Day and night, with the shortest possible intervals of rest, despite wind, rain, and


storm, he mounted guard upon the cliff--but all in vain. Not a speck appeared
upon the desolate horizon. To say the truth, no vessel could have stood against
the weather. The hurricane raged with tremendous fury, and the waves rose to a
height that seemed to defy calculation. Never, even in the second era of creation,
when, under the influence of internal heat, the waters rose in vapor to descend in
deluge back upon the world, could meteorological phenomena have been
developed with more impressive intensity.

But by the night of the 13th the tempest appeared to have spent its fury; the
wind dropped; the rain ceased as if by a spell; and Servadac, who for the last six
days had confined himself to the shelter of his roof, hastened to join Ben Zoof at
his post upon the cliff. Now, he thought, there might be a chance of solving his
perplexity; perhaps now the huge disc, of which he had had an imperfect glimpse
on the night of the 31st of December, might again reveal itself; at any rate, he
hoped for an opportunity of observing the constellations in a clear firmament
above.

The night was magnificent. Not a cloud dimmed the luster of the stars, which
spangled the heavens in surpassing brilliancy, and several nebulae which hitherto
no astronomer had been able to discern without the aid of a telescope were
clearly visible to the naked eye.

By a natural impulse, Servadac's first thought was to observe the position of
the pole-star. It was in sight, but so near to the horizon as to suggest the utter
impossibility of its being any longer the central pivot of the sidereal system; it
occupied a position through which it was out of the question that the axis of the
earth indefinitely prolonged could ever pass. In his impression he was more
thoroughly confirmed when, an hour later, he noticed that the star had
approached still nearer the horizon, as though it had belonged to one of the
zodiacal constellations.

The pole-star being manifestly thus displaced, it remained to be discovered
whether any other of the celestial bodies had become a fixed center around
which the constellations made their apparent daily revolutions. To the solution of
this problem Servadac applied himself with the most thoughtful diligence. After
patient observation, he satisfied himself that the required conditions were
answered by a certain star that was stationary not far from the horizon. This was
Vega, in the constellation Lyra, a star which, according to the precession of the
equinoxes, will take the place of our pole-star 12,000 years hence. The most
daring imagination could not suppose that a period of 12,000 years had been
crowded into the space of a fortnight; and therefore the captain came, as to an
easier conclusion, to the opinion that the earth's axis had been suddenly and
immensely shifted; and from the fact that the axis, if produced, would pass


through a point so little removed above the horizon, he deduced the inference
that the Mediterranean must have been transported to the equator.

Lost in bewildering maze of thought, he gazed long and intently upon the
heavens. His eyes wandered from where the tail of the Great Bear, now a
zodiacal constellation, was scarcely visible above the waters, to where the stars
of the southern hemisphere were just breaking on his view. A cry from Ben Zoof
recalled him to himself.

"The moon!" shouted the orderly, as though overjoyed at once again
beholding what the poet has called:

"The kind companion of terrestrial night;"

and he pointed to a disc that was rising at a spot precisely opposite the place
where they would have expected to see the sun. "The moon!" again he cried.

But Captain Servadac could not altogether enter into his servant's
enthusiasm. If this were actually the moon, her distance from the earth must
have been increased by some millions of miles. He was rather disposed to
suspect that it was not the earth's satellite at all, but some planet with its apparent
magnitude greatly enlarged by its approximation to the earth. Taking up the
powerful field-glass which he was accustomed to use in his surveying
operations, he proceeded to investigate more carefully the luminous orb. But he
failed to trace any of the lineaments, supposed to resemble a human face, that
mark the lunar surface; he failed to decipher any indications of hill and plain; nor
could he make out the aureole of light which emanates from what astronomers
have designated Mount Tycho. "It is not the moon," he said slowly.

"Not the moon?" cried Ben Zoof. "Why not?"

"Tt is not the moon," again affirmed the captain.

"Why not?" repeated Ben Zoof, unwilling to renounce his first impression.

"Because there is a small satellite in attendance." And the captain drew his
servant's attention to a bright speck, apparently about the size of one of Jupiter's
satellites seen through a moderate telescope, that was clearly visible just within
the focus of his glass.

Here, then, was a fresh mystery. The orbit of this planet was assuredly
interior to the orbit of the earth, because it accompanied the sun in its apparent
motion; yet it was neither Mercury nor Venus, because neither one nor the other
of these has any satellite at all.

The captain stamped and stamped again with mingled vexation, agitation,
and bewilderment. "Confound it!" he cried, "if this is neither Venus nor Mercury,
it must be the moon; but if it is the moon, whence, in the name of all the gods,
has she picked up another moon for herself?"

The captain was in dire perplexity.


CHAPTER VIII. VENUS IN PERILOUS PROXIMITY

The light of the returning sun soon extinguished the glory of the stars, and
rendered it necessary for the captain to postpone his observations. He had sought
in vain for further trace of the huge disc that had so excited his wonder on the
1st, and it seemed most probable that, in its irregular orbit, it had been carried
beyond the range of vision.

The weather was still superb. The wind, after veering to the west, had sunk
to a perfect calm. Pursuing its inverted course, the sun rose and set with
undeviating regularity; and the days and nights were still divided into periods of
precisely six hours each--a sure proof that the sun remained close to the new
equator which manifestly passed through Gourbi Island.

Meanwhile the temperature was steadily increasing. The captain kept his
thermometer close at hand where he could repeatedly consult it, and on the 15th
he found that it registered 50 degrees centigrade in the shade.

No attempt had been made to rebuild the gourbi, but the captain and Ben
Zoof managed to make up quarters sufficiently comfortable in the principal
apartment of the adjoining structure, where the stone walls, that at first afforded
a refuge from the torrents of rain, now formed an equally acceptable shelter from
the burning sun. The heat was becoming insufferable, surpassing the heat of
Senegal and other equatorial regions; not a cloud ever tempered the intensity of
the solar rays; and unless some modification ensued, it seemed inevitable that all
vegetation should become scorched and burnt off from the face of the island.

In spite, however, of the profuse perspirations from which he suffered, Ben
Zoof, constant to his principles, expressed no surprise at the unwonted heat. No
remonstrances from his master could induce him to abandon his watch from the
cliff. To withstand the vertical beams of that noontide sun would seem to require
a skin of brass and a brain of adamant; but yet, hour after hour, he would remain
conscientiously scanning the surface of the Mediterranean, which, calm and
deserted, lay outstretched before him. On one occasion, Servadac, in reference to
his orderly's indomitable perseverance, happened to remark that he thought he
must have been born in the heart of equatorial Africa; to which Ben Zoof
replied, with the utmost dignity, that he was born at Montmartre, which was all
the same. The worthy fellow was unwilling to own that, even in the matter of
heat, the tropics could in any way surpass his own much-loved home.

This unprecedented temperature very soon began to take effect upon the
products of the soil. The sap rose rapidly in the trees, so that in the course of a
few days buds, leaves, flowers, and fruit had come to full maturity. It was the


same with the cereals; wheat and maize sprouted and ripened as if by magic, and
for a while a rank and luxuriant pasturage clothed the meadows. Summer and
autumn seemed blended into one. If Captain Servadac had been more deeply
versed in astronomy, he would perhaps have been able to bring to bear his
knowledge that if the axis of the earth, as everything seemed to indicate, now
formed a right angle with the plane of the ecliptic, her various seasons, like those
of the planet Jupiter, would become limited to certain zones, in which they
would remain invariable. But even if he had understood the rationale of the
change, the convulsion that had brought it about would have been as much a
mystery as ever.

The precocity of vegetation caused some embarrassment. The time for the
corn and fruit harvest had fallen simultaneously with that of the haymaking; and
as the extreme heat precluded any prolonged exertions, it was evident "the
population" of the island would find it difficult to provide the necessary amount
of labor. Not that the prospect gave them much concern: the provisions of the
gourbi were still far from exhausted, and now that the roughness of the weather
had so happily subsided, they had every encouragement to hope that a ship of
some sort would soon appear. Not only was that part of the Mediterranean
systematically frequented by the government steamers that watched the coast,
but vessels of all nations were constantly cruising off the shore.

In spite, however, of all their sanguine speculations, no ship appeared. Ben
Zoof admitted the necessity of extemporizing a kind of parasol for himself,
otherwise he must literally have been roasted to death upon the exposed summit
of the cliff.

Meanwhile, Servadac was doing his utmost--it must be acknowledged, with
indifferent success--to recall the lessons of his school-days. He would plunge
into the wildest speculations in his endeavors to unravel the difficulties of the
new situation, and struggled into a kind of conviction that if there had been a
change of manner in the earth's rotation on her axis, there would be a
corresponding change in her revolution round the sun, which would involve the
consequence of the length of the year being either diminished or increased.

Independently of the increased and increasing heat, there was another very
conclusive demonstration that the earth had thus suddenly approximated towards
the sun. The diameter of the solar disc was now exactly twice what it ordinarily
looks to the naked eye; in fact, it was precisely such as it would appear to an
observer on the surface of the planet Venus. The most obvious inference would
therefore be that the earth's distance from the sun had been diminished from
91,000,000 to 66,000,000 miles. If the just equilibrium of the earth had thus been
destroyed, and should this diminution of distance still continue, would there not


be reason to fear that the terrestrial world would be carried onwards to actual
contact with the sun, which must result in its total annihilation?

The continuance of the splendid weather afforded Servadac every facility for
observing the heavens. Night after night, constellations in their beauty lay
stretched before his eyes--an alphabet which, to his mortification, not to say his
rage, he was unable to decipher. In the apparent dimensions of the fixed stars, in
their distance, in their relative position with regard to each other, he could
observe no change. Although it is established that our sun is approaching the
constellation of Hercules at the rate of more than 126,000,000 miles a year, and
although Arcturus is traveling through space at the rate of fifty-four miles a
second--three times faster than the earth goes round the sun,--yet such is the
remoteness of those stars that no appreciable change is evident to the senses. The
fixed stars taught him nothing.

Far otherwise was it with the planets. The orbits of Venus and Mercury are
within the orbit of the earth, Venus rotating at an average distance of 66,130,000
miles from the sun, and Mercury at that of 35,393,000. After pondering long,
and as profoundly as he could, upon these figures, Captain Servadac came to the
conclusion that, as the earth was now receiving about double the amount of light
and heat that it had been receiving before the catastrophe, it was receiving about
the same as the planet Venus; he was driven, therefore, to the estimate of the
measure in which the earth must have approximated to the sun, a deduction in
which he was confirmed when the opportunity came for him to observe Venus
herself in the splendid proportions that she now assumed.

That magnificent planet which--as Phosphorus or Lucifer, Hesperus or
Vesper, the evening star, the morning star, or the shepherd's star--has never failed
to attract the rapturous admiration of the most indifferent observers, here
revealed herself with unprecedented glory, exhibiting all the phases of a lustrous
moon in miniature. Various indentations in the outline of its crescent showed that
the solar beams were refracted into regions of its surface where the sun had
already set, and proved, beyond a doubt, that the planet had an atmosphere of her
own; and certain luminous points projecting from the crescent as plainly marked
the existence of mountains. As the result of Servadac's computations, he formed
the opinion that Venus could hardly be at a greater distance than 6,000,000 miles
from the earth.

"And a very safe distance, too," said Ben Zoof, when his master told him the
conclusion at which he had arrived.

"All very well for two armies, but for a couple of planets not quite so safe,
perhaps, as you may imagine. It is my impression that it is more than likely we
may run foul of Venus," said the captain.


"Plenty of air and water there, sir?" inquired the orderly.

"Yes; as far as I can tell, plenty," replied Servadac.

"Then why shouldn't we go and visit Venus?"

Servadac did his best to explain that as the two planets were of about equal
volume, and were traveling with great velocity in opposite directions, any
collision between them must be attended with the most disastrous consequences
to one or both of them. But Ben Zoof failed to see that, even at the worst, the
catastrophe could be much more serious than the collision of two railway trains.

The captain became exasperated. "You idiot!" he angrily exclaimed; "cannot
you understand that the planets are traveling a thousand times faster than the
fastest express, and that if they meet, either one or the other must be destroyed?
What would become of your darling Montmartre then?"

The captain had touched a tender chord. For a moment Ben Zoof stood with
clenched teeth and contracted muscles; then, in a voice of real concern, he
inquired whether anything could be done to avert the calamity.

"Nothing whatever; so you may go about your own business," was the
captain's brusque rejoinder.

All discomfited and bewildered, Ben Zoof retired without a word.

During the ensuing days the distance between the two planets continued to
decrease, and it became more and more obvious that the earth, on her new orbit,
was about to cross the orbit of Venus. Throughout this time the earth had been
making a perceptible approach towards Mercury, and that planet--which is rarely
visible to the naked eye, and then only at what are termed the periods of its
greatest eastern and western elongations--now appeared in all its splendor. It
amply justified the epithet of "sparkling" which the ancients were accustomed to
confer upon it, and could scarcely fail to awaken a new interest. The periodic
recurrence of its phases; its reflection of the sun's rays, shedding upon it a light
and a heat seven times greater than that received by the earth; its glacial and its
torrid zones, which, on account of the great inclination of the axis, are scarcely
separable; its equatorial bands; its mountains eleven miles high;--were all
subjects of observation worthy of the most studious regard.

But no danger was to be apprehended from Mercury; with Venus only did
collision appear imminent. By the 18th of January the distance between that
planet and the earth had become reduced to between two and three millions of
miles, and the intensity of its light cast heavy shadows from all terrestrial
objects. It might be observed to turn upon its own axis in twenty-three hours
twenty-one minutes--an evidence, from the unaltered duration of its days, that
the planet had not shared in the disturbance. On its disc the clouds formed from
its atmospheric vapor were plainly perceptible, as also were the seven spots,


which, according to Bianchini, are a chain of seas. It was now visible in broad
daylight. Buonaparte, when under the Directory, once had his attention called to
Venus at noon, and immediately hailed it joyfully, recognizing it as his own
peculiar star in the ascendant. Captain Servadac, it may well be imagined, did
not experience the same gratifying emotion.

On the 20th, the distance between the two bodies had again sensibly
diminished. The captain had ceased to be surprised that no vessel had been sent
to rescue himself and his companion from their strange imprisonment; the
governor general and the minister of war were doubtless far differently occupied,
and their interests far otherwise engrossed. What sensational articles, he thought,
must now be teeming to the newspapers! What crowds must be flocking to the
churches! The end of the world approaching! the great climax close at hand!
Two days more, and the earth, shivered into a myriad atoms, would be lost in
boundless space!

These dire forebodings, however, were not destined to be realized. Gradually
the distance between the two planets began to increase; the planes of their orbits
did not coincide, and accordingly the dreaded catastrophe did not ensue. By the
25th, Venus was sufficiently remote to preclude any further fear of collision. Ben
Zoof gave a sigh of relief when the captain communicated the glad intelligence.

Their proximity to Venus had been close enough to demonstrate that beyond
a doubt that planet has no moon or satellite such as Cassini, Short, Montaigne of
Limoges, Montbarron, and some other astronomers have imagined to exist. "Had
there been such a satellite," said Servadac, "we might have captured it in
passing. But what can be the meaning,” he added seriously, "of all this
displacement of the heavenly bodies?"

"What is that great building at Paris, captain, with a top like a cap?" asked
Ben Zoof.

"Do you mean the Observatory?"

"Yes, the Observatory. Are there not people living in the Observatory who
could explain all this?"

"Very likely; but what of that?"

"Let us be philosophers, and wait patiently until we can hear their
explanation."

Servadac smiled. "Do you know what it is to be a philosopher, Ben Zoof?"
he asked.

"I am a soldier, sir," was the servant's prompt rejoinder, "and I have learnt to
know that 'what can't be cured must be endured."

The captain made no reply, but for a time, at least, he desisted from puzzling
himself over matters which he felt he was utterly incompetent to explain. But an


event soon afterwards occurred which awakened his keenest interest.

About nine o'clock on the morning of the 27th, Ben Zoof walked deliberately
into his master's apartment, and, in reply to a question as to what he wanted,
announced with the utmost composure that a ship was in sight.

"A ship!" exclaimed Servadac, starting to his feet. "A ship! Ben Zoof, you
donkey! you speak as unconcemedly as though you were telling me that my
dinner was ready."

"Are we not philosophers, captain?" said the orderly.

But the captain was out of hearing.


CHAPTER IX. INQUIRIES UNSATISFIED

Fast as his legs could carry him, Servadac had made his way to the top of the
cliff. It was quite true that a vessel was in sight, hardly more than six miles from
the shore; but owing to the increase in the earth's convexity, and the consequent
limitation of the range of vision, the rigging of the topmasts alone was visible
above the water. This was enough, however, to indicate that the ship was a
schooner--an impression that was confirmed when, two hours later, she came
entirely in sight.

"The Dobryna!" exclaimed Servadac, keeping his eye unmoved at his
telescope.

"Impossible, sir!" rejoined Ben Zoof; "there are no signs of smoke."

"The Dobryna!" repeated the captain, positively. "She is under sail; but she is
Count Timascheff's yacht."

He was right. If the count were on board, a strange fatality was bringing him
to the presence of his rival. But no longer now could Servadac regard him in the
light of an adversary; circumstances had changed, and all animosity was
absorbed in the eagerness with which he hailed the prospect of obtaining some
information about the recent startling and inexplicable events. During the
twenty-seven days that she had been absent, the Dobryna, he conjectured, would
have explored the Mediterranean, would very probably have visited Spain,
France, or Italy, and accordingly would convey to Gourbi Island some
intelligence from one or other of those countries. He reckoned, therefore, not
only upon ascertaining the extent of the late catastrophe, but upon learning its
cause. Count Timascheff was, no doubt, magnanimously coming to the rescue of
himself and his orderly.

The wind being adverse, the Dobryna did not make very rapid progress; but
as the weather, in spite of a few clouds, remained calm, and the sea was quite
smooth, she was enabled to hold a steady course. It seemed unaccountable that


she should not use her engine, as whoever was on board, would be naturally
impatient to reconnoiter the new island, which must just have come within their
view. The probability that suggested itself was that the schooner's fuel was
exhausted.

Servadac took it for granted that the Dobryna was endeavoring to put in. It
occurred to him, however, that the count, on discovering an island where he had
expected to find the mainland of Africa, would not unlikely be at a loss for a
place of anchorage. The yacht was evidently making her way in the direction of
the former mouth of the Shelif, and the captain was struck with the idea that he
would do well to investigate whether there was any suitable mooring towards
which he might signal her. Zephyr and Galette were soon saddled, and in twenty
minutes had carried their riders to the western extremity of the island, where
they both dismounted and began to explore the coast.

They were not long in ascertaining that on the farther side of the point there
was a small well-sheltered creek of sufficient depth to accommodate a vessel of
moderate tonnage. A narrow channel formed a passage through the ridge of
rocks that protected it from the open sea, and which, even in the roughest
weather, would ensure the calmness of its waters.

Whilst examining the rocky shore, the captain observed, to his great surprise,
long and well-defined rows of seaweed, which undoubtedly betokened that there
had been a very considerable ebb and flow of the waters--a thing unknown in the
Mediterranean, where there is scarcely any perceptible tide. What, however,
seemed most remarkable, was the manifest evidence that ever since the highest
flood (which was caused, in all probability, by the proximity of the body of
which the huge disc had been so conspicuous on the night of the 31st of
December) the phenomenon had been gradually lessening, and in fact was now
reduced to the normal limits which had characterized it before the convulsion.

Without doing more than note the circumstance, Servadac turned his entire
attention to the Dobryna, which, now little more than a mile from shore, could
not fail to see and understand his signals. Slightly changing her course, she first
struck her mainsail, and, in order to facilitate the movements of her helmsman,
soon carried nothing but her two topsails, brigantine and jib. After rounding the
peak, she steered direct for the channel to which Servadac by his gestures was
pointing her, and was not long in entering the creek. As soon as the anchor,
imbedded in the sandy bottom, had made good its hold, a boat was lowered. In a
few minutes more Count Timascheff had landed on the island. Captain Servadac
hastened towards him.

"First of all, count," he exclaimed impetuously, "before we speak one other
word, tell me what has happened."


The count, whose imperturbable composure presented a singular contrast to
the French officer's enthusiastic vivacity, made a stiff bow, and in his Russian
accent replied: "First of all, permit me to express my surprise at seeing you here.
I left you on a continent, and here I have the honor of finding you on an island."

"I assure you, count, I have never left the place."

"IT am quite aware of it. Captain Servadac, and I now beg to offer you my
sincere apologies for failing to keep my appointment with you."

"Never mind, now," interposed the captain; "we will talk of that by-and-by.
First, tell me what has happened."

"The very question I was about to put to you, Captain Servadac."

"Do you mean to say you know nothing of the cause, and can tell me nothing
of the extent, of the catastrophe which has transformed this part of Africa into an
island?"

"Nothing more than you know yourself."

"But surely, Count Timascheff, you can inform me whether upon the
northern shore of the Mediterranean--"

"Are you certain that this is the Mediterranean?" asked the count
significantly, and added, "I have discovered no sign of land."

The captain stared in silent bewilderment. For some moments he seemed
perfectly stupefied; then, recovering himself, he began to overwhelm the count
with a torrent of questions. Had he noticed, ever since the 1st of January, that the
sun had risen in the west? Had he noticed that the days had been only six hours
long, and that the weight of the atmosphere was so much diminished? Had he
observed that the moon had quite disappeared, and that the earth had been in
imminent hazard of running foul of the planet Venus? Was he aware, in short,
that the entire motions of the terrestrial sphere had undergone a complete
modification? To all these inquiries, the count responded in the affirmative. He
was acquainted with everything that had transpired; but, to Servadac's increasing
astonishment, he could throw no light upon the cause of any of the phenomena.

"On the night of the 31st of December," he said, "I was proceeding by sea to
our appointed place of meeting, when my yacht was suddenly caught on the crest
of an enormous wave, and carried to a height which it is beyond my power to
estimate. Some mysterious force seemed to have brought about a convulsion of
the elements. Our engine was damaged, nay disabled, and we drifted entirely at
the mercy of the terrible hurricane that raged during the succeeding days. That
the Dobryna escaped at all is little less than a miracle, and I can only attribute
her safety to the fact that she occupied the center of the vast cyclone, and
consequently did not experience much change of position."

He paused, and added: "Your island is the first land we have seen."


"Then let us put out to sea at once and ascertain the extent of the disaster,"
cried the captain, eagerly. "You will take me on board, count, will you not?"

"My yacht is at your service, sir, even should you require to make a tour
round the world."

"A tour round the Mediterranean will suffice for the present, I think," said the
captain, smiling.

The count shook his head.

"I am not sure," said he, "but what the tour of the Mediterranean will prove
to be the tour of the world."

Servadac made no reply, but for a time remained silent and absorbed in
thought.

After the silence was broken, they consulted as to what course was best to
pursue; and the plan they proposed was, in the first place, to discover how much
of the African coast still remained, and to carry on the tidings of their own
experiences to Algiers; or, in the event of the southern shore having actually
disappeared, they would make their way northwards and put themselves in
communication with the population on the river banks of Europe.

Before starting, it was indispensable that the engine of the Dobryna should
be repaired: to sail under canvas only would in contrary winds and rough seas be
both tedious and difficult. The stock of coal on board was adequate for two
months' consumption; but as it would at the expiration of that time be exhausted,
it was obviously the part of prudence to employ it in reaching a port where fuel
could be replenished.

The damage sustained by the engine proved to be not very serious; and in
three days after her arrival the Dobryna was again ready to put to sea.

Servadac employed the interval in making the count acquainted with all he
knew about his small domain. They made an entire circuit of the island, and both
agreed that it must be beyond the limits of that circumscribed territory that they
must seek an explanation of what had so strangely transpired.

It was on the last day of January that the repairs of the schooner were
completed. A slight diminution in the excessively high temperature which had
prevailed for the last few weeks, was the only apparent change in the general
order of things; but whether this was to be attributed to any alteration in the
earth's orbit was a question which would still require several days to decide. The
weather remained fine, and although a few clouds had accumulated, and might
have caused a trifling fall of the barometer, they were not sufficiently threatening
to delay the departure of the Dobryna.

Doubts now arose, and some discussion followed, whether or not it was
desirable for Ben Zoof to accompany his master. There were various reasons


why he should be left behind, not the least important being that the schooner had
no accommodation for horses, and the orderly would have found it hard to part
with Zephyr, and much more with his own favorite Galette; besides, it was
advisable that there should be some one left to receive any strangers that might
possibly arrive, as well as to keep an eye upon the herds of cattle which, in the
dubious prospect before them, might prove to be the sole resource of the
survivors of the catastrophe. Altogether, taking into consideration that the brave
fellow would incur no personal risk by remaining upon the island, the captain
was induced with much reluctance to forego the attendance of his servant,
hoping very shortly to return and to restore him to his country, when he had
ascertained the reason of the mysteries in which they were enveloped.

On the 31st, then, Ben Zoof was "invested with governor's powers," and took
an affecting leave of his master, begging him, if chance should carry him near
Montmartre, to ascertain whether the beloved "mountain" had been left
unmoved.

Farewells over, the Dobryna was carefully steered through the creek, and
was soon upon the open sea.


CHAPTER X. ASEARCH FOR ALGERIA

The Dobryna, a strong craft of 200 tons burden, had been built in the famous
shipbuilding yards in the Isle of Wight. Her sea going qualities were excellent,
and would have amply sufficed for a circumnavigation of the globe. Count
Timascheff was himself no sailor, but had the greatest confidence in leaving the
command of his yacht in the hands of Lieutenant Procope, a man of about thirty
years of age, and an excellent seaman. Born on the count's estates, the son of a
serf who had been emancipated long before the famous edict of the Emperor
Alexander, Procope was sincerely attached, by a tie of gratitude as well as of
duty and affection, to his patron's service. After an apprenticeship on a merchant
ship he had entered the imperial navy, and had already reached the rank of
lieutenant when the count appointed him to the charge of his own private yacht,
in which he was accustomed to spend by far the greater part of his time,
throughout the winter generally cruising in the Mediterranean, whilst in the
summer he visited more northern waters.

The ship could not have been in better hands. The lieutenant was well
informed in many matters outside the pale of his profession, and his attainments
were alike creditable to himself and to the liberal friend who had given him his
education. He had an excellent crew, consisting of Tiglew the engineer, four
sailors named Niegoch, Tolstoy, Etkef, and Panofka, and Mochel the cook.


These men, without exception, were all sons of the count's tenants, and so
tenaciously, even out at sea, did they cling to their old traditions, that it mattered
little to them what physical disorganization ensued, so long as they felt they
were sharing the experiences of their lord and master. The late astounding
events, however, had rendered Procope manifestly uneasy, and not the less so
from his consciousness that the count secretly partook of his own anxiety.

Steam up and canvas spread, the schooner started eastwards. With a
favorable wind she would certainly have made eleven knots an hour had not the
high waves somewhat impeded her progress. Although only a moderate breeze
was blowing, the sea was rough, a circumstance to be accounted for only by the
diminution in the force of the earth's attraction rendering the liquid particles so
buoyant, that by the mere effect of oscillation they were carried to a height that
was quite unprecedented. M. Arago has fixed twenty-five or twenty-six feet as
the maximum elevation ever attained by the highest waves, and his astonishment
would have been very great to see them rising fifty or even sixty feet. Nor did
these waves in the usual way partially unfurl themselves and rebound against the
sides of the vessel; they might rather be described as long undulations carrying
the schooner (its weight diminished from the same cause as that of the water)
alternately to such heights and depths, that if Captain Servadac had been subject
to seasickness he must have found himself in sorry plight. As the pitching,
however, was the result of a long uniform swell, the yacht did not labor much
harder than she would against the ordinary short strong waves of the
Mediterranean; the main inconvenience that was experienced was the diminution
in her proper rate of speed.

For a few miles she followed the line hitherto presumably occupied by the
coast of Algeria; but no land appeared to the south. The changed positions of the
planets rendered them of no avail for purposes of nautical observation, nor could
Lieutenant Procope calculate his latitude and longitude by the altitude of the sun,
as his reckonings would be useless when applied to charts that had been
constructed for the old order of things; but nevertheless, by means of the log,
which gave him the rate of progress, and by the compass which indicated the
direction in which they were sailing, he was able to form an estimate of his
position that was sufficiently free from error for his immediate need.

Happily the recent phenomena had no effect upon the compass; the magnetic
needle, which in these regions had pointed about 22 degrees from the north pole,
had never deviated in the least--a proof that, although east and west had
apparently changed places, north and south continued to retain their normal
position as cardinal points. The log and the compass, therefore, were able to be
called upon to do the work of the sextant, which had become utterly useless.


On the first morning of the cruise Lieutenant Procope, who, like most
Russians, spoke French fluently, was explaining these peculiarities to Captain
Servadac; the count was present, and the conversation perpetually recurred, as
naturally it would, to the phenomena which remained so inexplicable to them all.

"It is very evident," said the lieutenant, "that ever since the 1st of January the
earth has been moving in a new orbit, and from some unknown cause has drawn
nearer to the sun."

"No doubt about that," said Servadac; "and I suppose that, having crossed the
orbit of Venus, we have a good chance of running into the orbit of Mercury."

"And finish up by a collision with the sun!" added the count.

"There is no fear of that, sir. The earth has undoubtedly entered upon a new
orbit, but she is not incurring any probable risk of being precipitated onto the
sun."

"Can you satisfy us of that?" asked the count.

"I can, sir. I can give you a proof which I think you will own is conclusive.
If, as you suppose, the earth is being drawn on so as to be precipitated against
the sun, the great center of attraction of our system, it could only be because the
centrifugal and centripetal forces that cause the planets to rotate in their several
orbits had been entirely suspended: in that case, indeed, the earth would rush
onwards towards the sun, and in sixty-four days and a half the catastrophe you
dread would inevitably happen."

"And what demonstration do you offer," asked Servadac eagerly, "that it will
not happen?"

"Simply this, captain: that since the earth entered her new orbit half the sixty-
four days has already elapsed, and yet it is only just recently that she has crossed
the orbit of Venus, hardly one-third of the distance to be traversed to reach the
sun."

The lieutenant paused to allow time for reflection, and added: "Moreover, I
have every reason to believe that we are not so near the sun as we have been.
The temperature has been gradually diminishing; the heat upon Gourbi Island is
not greater now than we might ordinarily expect to find in Algeria. At the same
time, we have the problem still unsolved that the Mediterranean has evidently
been transported to the equatorial zone."

Both the count and the captain expressed themselves reassured by his
representations, and observed that they must now do all in their power to
discover what had become of the vast continent of Africa, of which, they were
hitherto failing so completely to find a vestige.

Twenty-four hours after leaving the island, the Dobryna had passed over the
sites where Tenes, Cherchil, Koleah, and Sidi-Feruch once had been, but of these


towns not one appeared within range of the telescope. Ocean reigned supreme.
Lieutenant Procope was absolutely certain that he had not mistaken his direction;
the compass showed that the wind had never shifted from the west, and this, with
the rate of speed as estimated by the log, combined to assure him that at this
date, the 2d of February, the schooner was in lat. 36 degrees 49 min N. and long.
3 degrees 25 min E., the very spot which ought to have been occupied by the
Algerian capital. But Algiers, like all the other coast-towns, had apparently been
absorbed into the bowels of the earth.

Captain Servadac, with clenched teeth and knitted brow, stood sternly, almost
fiercely, regarding the boundless waste of water. His pulse beat fast as he
recalled the friends and comrades with whom he had spent the last few years in
that vanished city. All the images of his past life floated upon his memory; his
thoughts sped away to his native France, only to return again to wonder whether
the depths of ocean would reveal any traces of the Algerian metropolis.

"Is it not impossible," he murmured aloud, "that any city should disappear so
completely? Would not the loftiest eminences of the city at least be visible?
Surely some portion of the Casbah must still rise above the waves? The imperial
fort, too, was built upon an elevation of 750 feet; it is incredible that it should be
so totally submerged. Unless some vestiges of these are found, I shall begin to
suspect that the whole of Africa has been swallowed in some vast abyss."

Another circumstance was most remarkable. Not a material object of any
kind was to be noticed floating on the surface of the water; not one branch of a
tree had been seen drifting by, nor one spar belonging to one of the numerous
vessels that a month previously had been moored in the magnificent bay which
stretched twelve miles across from Cape Matafuz to Point Pexade. Perhaps the
depths might disclose what the surface failed to reveal, and Count Timascheff,
anxious that Servadac should have every facility afforded him for solving his
doubts, called for the sounding-line. Forthwith, the lead was greased and
lowered. To the surprise of all, and especially of Lieutenant Procope, the line
indicated a bottom at a nearly uniform depth of from four to five fathoms; and
although the sounding was persevered with continuously for more than two
hours over a considerable area, the differences of level were insignificant, not
corresponding in any degree to what would be expected over the site of a city
that had been terraced like the seats of an amphitheater. Astounding as it seemed,
what alternative was left but to suppose that the Algerian capital had been
completely leveled by the flood?

The sea-bottom was composed of neither rock, mud, sand, nor shells; the
sounding-lead brought up nothing but a kind of metallic dust, which glittered
with a strange iridescence, and the nature of which it was impossible to


determine, as it was totally unlike what had ever been known to be raised from
the bed of the Mediterranean.

"You must see, lieutenant, I should think, that we are not so near the coast of
Algeria as you imagined."

The lieutenant shook his head. After pondering awhile, he said: "If we were
farther away I should expect to find a depth of two or three hundred fathoms
instead of five fathoms. Five fathoms! I confess I am puzzled."

For the next thirty-six hours, until the 4th of February, the sea was examined
and explored with the most unflagging perseverance. Its depth remained
invariable, still four, or at most five, fathoms; and although its bottom was
assiduously dredged, it was only to prove it barren of marine production of any
type.

The yacht made its way to lat. 36 degrees, and by reference to the charts it
was tolerably certain that she was cruising over the site of the Sahel, the ridge
that had separated the rich plain of the Mitidja from the sea, and of which the
highest peak, Mount Boujereah, had reached an altitude of 1,200 feet; but even
this peak, which might have been expected to emerge like an islet above the
surface of the sea, was nowhere to be traced. Nothing was to be done but to put
about, and return in disappointment towards the north.

Thus the Dobryna regained the waters of the Mediterranean without
discovering a trace of the missing province of Algeria.


CHAPTER XI. AN ISLAND TOMB

No longer, then, could there be any doubt as to the annihilation of a
considerable portion of the colony. Not merely had there been a submersion of
the land, but the impression was more and more confirmed that the very bowels
of the earth must have yawned and closed again upon a large territory. Of the
rocky substratum of the province it became more evident than ever that not a
trace remained, and a new soil of unknown formation had certainly taken the
place of the old sandy sea-bottom. As it altogether transcended the powers of
those on board to elucidate the origin of this catastrophe, it was felt to be
incumbent on them at least to ascertain its extent.

After a long and somewhat wavering discussion, it was at length decided that
the schooner should take advantage of the favorable wind and weather, and
proceed at first towards the east, thus following the outline of what had formerly
represented the coast of Africa, until that coast had been lost in boundless sea.

Not a vestige of it all remained; from Cape Matafuz to Tunis it had all gone,
as though it had never been. The maritime town of Dellis, built like Algiers,


amphitheater-wise, had totally disappeared; the highest points were quite
invisible; not a trace on the horizon was left of the Jurjura chain, the topmost
point of which was known to have an altitude of more than 7,000 feet.

Unsparing of her fuel, the Dobryna made her way at full steam towards Cape
Blanc. Neither Cape Negro nor Cape Serrat was to be seen. The town of Bizerta,
once charming in its oriental beauty, had vanished utterly; its marabouts, or
temple-tombs, shaded by magnificent palms that fringed the gulf, which by
reason of its narrow mouth had the semblance of a lake, all had disappeared,
giving place to a vast waste of sea, the transparent waves of which, as still
demonstrated by the sounding-line, had ever the same uniform and arid bottom.

In the course of the day the schooner rounded the point where, five weeks
previously, Cape Blanc had been so conspicuous an object, and she was now
stemming the waters of what once had been the Bay of Tunis. But bay there was
none, and the town from which it had derived its name, with the Arsenal, the
Goletta, and the two peaks of Bou-Kournein, had all vanished from the view.
Cape Bon, too, the most northern promontory of Africa and the point of the
continent nearest to the island of Sicily, had been included in the general
devastation.

Before the occurrence of the recent prodigy, the bottom of the Mediterranean
just at this point had formed a sudden ridge across the Straits of Libya. The sides
of the ridge had shelved to so great an extent that, while the depth of water on
the summit had been little more than eleven fathoms, that on either hand of the
elevation was little short of a hundred fathoms. A formation such as this plainly
indicated that at some remote epoch Cape Bon had been connected with Cape
Furina, the extremity of Sicily, in the same manner as Ceuta has doubtless been
connected with Gibraltar.

Lieutenant Procope was too well acquainted with the Mediterranean to be
unaware of this peculiarity, and would not lose the opportunity of ascertaining
whether the submarine ridge still existed, or whether the sea-bottom between
Sicily and Africa had undergone any modification.

Both Timascheff and Servadac were much interested in watching the
operations. At a sign from the lieutenant, a sailor who was stationed at the foot
of the fore-shrouds dropped the sounding-lead into the water, and in reply to
Procope's inquiries, reported--"Five fathoms and a flat bottom."

The next aim was to determine the amount of depression on either side of the
ridge, and for this purpose the Dobryna was shifted for a distance of half a mile
both to the right and left, and the soundings taken at each station. "Five fathoms
and a flat bottom," was the unvaried announcement after each operation. Not
only, therefore, was it evident that the submerged chain between Cape Bon and


Cape Furina no longer existed, but it was equally clear that the convulsion had
caused a general leveling of the sea-bottom, and that the soil, degenerated, as it
has been said, into a metallic dust of unrecognized composition, bore no trace of
the sponges, sea-anemones, star-fish, sea-nettles, hydrophytes, and shells with
which the submarine rocks of the Mediterranean had hitherto been prodigally
clothed.

The Dobryna now put about and resumed her explorations in a southerly
direction. It remained, however, as remarkable as ever how completely
throughout the voyage the sea continued to be deserted; all expectations of
hailing a vessel bearing news from Europe were entirely falsified, so that more
and more each member of the crew began to be conscious of his isolation, and to
believe that the schooner, like a second Noah's ark, carried the sole survivors of
a calamity that had overwhelmed the earth.

On the 9th of February the Dobryna passed over the site of the city of Dido,
the ancient Byrsa--a Carthage, however, which was now more completely
destroyed than ever Punic Carthage had been destroyed by Scipio Africanus or
Roman Carthage by Hassan the Saracen.

In the evening, as the sun was sinking below the eastern horizon, Captain
Servadac was lounging moodily against the taffrail. From the heaven above,
where stars kept peeping fitfully from behind the moving clouds, his eye
wandered mechanically to the waters below, where the long waves were rising
and falling with the evening breeze.

All at once, his attention was arrested by a luminous speck straight ahead on
the southern horizon. At first, imagining that he was the victim of some spectral
illusion, he observed it with silent attention; but when, after some minutes, he
became convinced that what he saw was actually a distant light, he appealed to
one of the sailors, by whom his impression was fully corroborated. The
intelligence was immediately imparted to Count Timascheff and the lieutenant.

"Is it land, do you suppose?" inquired Servadac, eagerly.

"I should be more inclined to think it is a light on board some ship," replied
the count.

"Whatever it is, in another hour we shall know all about it," said Servadac.

"No, captain," interposed Lieutenant Procope; "we shall know nothing until
to-morrow."

"What! not bear down upon it at once?" asked the count in surprise.

"No, sir; I should much rather lay to and wait till daylight. If we are really
near land, I should be afraid to approach it in the dark."

The count expressed his approval of the lieutenant's caution, and thereupon
all sail was shortened so as to keep the Dobryna from making any considerable


progress all through the hours of night. Few as those hours were, they seemed to
those on board as if their end would never come. Fearful lest the faint glimmer
should at any moment cease to be visible, Hector Servadac did not quit his post
upon the deck; but the light continued unchanged. It shone with about the same
degree of luster as a star of the second magnitude, and from the fact of its
remaining stationary, Procope became more and more convinced that it was on
land and did not belong to a passing vessel.

At sunrise every telescope was pointed with keenest interest towards the
center of attraction. The light, of course, had ceased to be visible, but in the
direction where it had been seen, and at a distance of about ten miles, there was
the distinct outline of a solitary island of very small extent; rather, as the count
observed, it had the appearance of being the projecting summit of a mountain all
but submerged. Whatever it was, it was agreed that its true character must be
ascertained, not only to gratify their own curiosity, but for the benefit of all
future navigators. The schooner accordingly was steered directly towards it, and
in less than an hour had cast anchor within a few cables' lengths of the shore.

The little island proved to be nothing more than an arid rock rising abruptly
about forty feet above the water. It had no outlying reefs, a circumstance that
seemed to suggest the probability that in the recent convulsion it had sunk
gradually, until it had reached its present position of equilibrium.

Without removing his eye from his telescope, Servadac exclaimed: "There is
a habitation on the place; I can see an erection of some kind quite distinctly.
Who can tell whether we shall not come across a human being?"

Lieutenant Procope looked doubtful. The island had all the appearance of
being deserted, nor did a cannon-shot fired from the schooner have the effect of
bringing any resident to the shore. Nevertheless, it was undeniable that there was
a stone building situated on the top of the rock, and that this building had much
the character of an Arabian mosque.

The boat was lowered and manned by the four sailors; Servadac, Timascheff
and Procope were quickly rowed ashore, and lost no time in commencing their
ascent of the steep acclivity. Upon reaching the summit, they found their
progress arrested by a kind of wall, or rampart of singular construction, its
materials consisting mainly of vases, fragments of columns, carved bas-reliefs,
statues, and portions of broken stelae, all piled promiscuously together without
any pretense to artistic arrangement. They made their way into the enclosure,
and finding an open door, they passed through and soon came to a second door,
also open, which admitted them to the interior of the mosque, consisting of a
single chamber, the walls of which were ornamented in the Arabian style by
sculptures of indifferent execution. In the center was a tomb of the very simplest


kind, and above the tomb was suspended a large silver lamp with a capacious
reservoir of oil, in which floated a long lighted wick, the flame of which was
evidently the light that had attracted Servadac's attention on the previous night.

"Must there not have been a custodian of the shrine?" they mutually asked;
but if such there had ever been, he must, they concluded, either have fled or have
perished on that eventful night. Not a soul was there in charge, and the sole
living occupants were a flock of wild cormorants which, startled at the entrance
of the intruders, rose on wing, and took a rapid flight towards the south.

An old French prayer-book was lying on the corner of the tomb; the volume
was open, and the page exposed to view was that which contained the office for
the celebration of the 25th of August. A sudden revelation dashed across
Servadac's mind. The solemn isolation of the island tomb, the open breviary, the
ritual of the ancient anniversary, all combined to apprise him of the sanctity of
the spot upon which he stood.

"The tomb of St. Louis!" he exclaimed, and his companions involuntarily
followed his example, and made a reverential obeisance to the venerated
monument.

It was, in truth, the very spot on which tradition asserts that the canonized
monarch came to die, a spot to which for six centuries and more his countrymen
had paid the homage of a pious regard. The lamp that had been kindled at the
memorial shrine of a saint was now in all probability the only beacon that threw
a light across the waters of the Mediterranean, and even this ere long must itself
expire.

There was nothing more to explore. The three together quitted the mosque,
and descended the rock to the shore, whence their boat re-conveyed them to the
schooner, which was soon again on her southward voyage; and it was not long
before the tomb of St. Louis, the only spot that had survived the mysterious
shock, was lost to view.


CHAPTER XII. AT THE MERCY OF THE WINDS

As the affrighted cormorants had winged their flight towards the south, there
sprang up a sanguine hope on board the schooner that land might be discovered
in that direction. Thither, accordingly, it was determined to proceed, and in a few
hours after quitting the island of the tomb, the Dobryna was traversing the
shallow waters that now covered the peninsula of Dakhul, which had separated
the Bay of Tunis from the Gulf of Hammamet. For two days she continued an
undeviating course, and after a futile search for the coast of Tunis, reached the
latitude of 34 degrees.


Here, on the 11th of February, there suddenly arose the cry of "Land!" and in
the extreme horizon, right ahead, where land had never been before, it was true
enough that a shore was distinctly to be seen. What could it be? It could not be
the coast of Tripoli; for not only would that lowlying shore be quite invisible at
such a distance, but it was certain, moreover, that it lay two degrees at least still
further south. It was soon observed that this newly discovered land was of very
irregular elevation, that it extended due east and west across the horizon, thus
dividing the gulf into two separate sections and completely concealing the island
of Jerba, which must lie behind. Its position was duly traced on the Dobryna's
chart.

"How strange," exclaimed Hector Servadac, "that after sailing all this time
over sea where we expected to find land, we have at last come upon land where
we thought to find sea!"

"Strange, indeed," replied Lieutenant Procope; "and what appears to me
almost as remarkable is that we have never once caught sight either of one of the
Maltese tartans or one of the Levantine xebecs that traffic so regularly on the
Mediterranean."

"Eastwards or westwards," asked the count--"which shall be our course? All
farther progress to the south is checked."

"Westwards, by all means," replied Servadac quickly. "I am longing to know
whether anything of Algeria is left beyond the Shelif; besides, as we pass Gourbi
Island we might take Ben Zoof on board, and then make away for Gibraltar,
where we should be sure to learn something, at least, of European news."

With his usual air of stately courtesy, Count Timascheff begged the captain
to consider the yacht at his own disposal, and desired him to give the lieutenant
instructions accordingly.

Lieutenant Procope, however, hesitated, and after revolving matters for a few
moments in his mind, pointed out that as the wind was blowing directly from the
west, and seemed likely to increase, if they went to the west in the teeth of the
weather, the schooner would be reduced to the use of her engine only, and would
have much difficulty in making any headway; on the other hand, by taking an
eastward course, not only would they have the advantage of the wind, but, under
steam and canvas, might hope in a few days to be off the coast of Egypt, and
from Alexandria or some other port they would have the same opportunity of
getting tidings from Europe as they would at Gibraltar.

Intensely anxious as he was to revisit the province of Oran, and eager, too, to
satisfy himself of the welfare of his faithful Ben Zoof, Servadac could not but
own the reasonableness of the lieutenant's objections, and yielded to the proposal
that the eastward course should be adopted. The wind gave signs only too


threatening of the breeze rising to a gale; but, fortunately, the waves did not
culminate in breakers, but rather in a long swell which ran in the same direction
as the vessel.

During the last fortnight the high temperature had been gradually
diminishing, until it now reached an average of 20 degrees Cent. (or 68 degrees
Fahr.), and sometimes descended as low as 15 degrees. That this diminution was
to be attributed to the change in the earth's orbit was a question that admitted of
little doubt. After approaching so near to the sun as to cross the orbit of Venus,
the earth must now have receded so far from the sun that its normal distance of
ninety-one millions of miles was greatly increased, and the probability was great
that it was approximating to the orbit of Mars, that planet which in its physical
constitution most nearly resembles our own. Nor was this supposition suggested
merely by the lowering of the temperature; it was strongly corroborated by the
reduction of the apparent diameter of the sun's disc to the precise dimensions
which it would assume to an observer actually stationed on the surface of Mars.
The necessary inference that seemed to follow from these phenomena was that
the earth had been projected into a new orbit, which had the form of a very
elongated ellipse.

Very slight, however, in comparison was the regard which these astronomical
wonders attracted on board the Dobryna. All interest there was too much
absorbed in terrestrial matters, and in ascertaining what changes had taken place
in the configuration of the earth itself, to permit much attention to be paid to its
erratic movements through space.

The schooner kept bravely on her way, but well out to sea, at a distance of
two miles from land. There was good need of this precaution, for so precipitous
was the shore that a vessel driven upon it must inevitably have gone to pieces; it
did not offer a single harbor of refuge, but, smooth and perpendicular as the
walls of a fortress, it rose to a height of two hundred, and occasionally of three
hundred feet. The waves dashed violently against its base. Upon the general
substratum rested a massive conglomerate, the crystallizations of which rose like
a forest of gigantic pyramids and obelisks.

But what struck the explorers more than anything was the appearance of
singular newness that pervaded the whole of the region. It all seemed so recent
in its formation that the atmosphere had had no opportunity of producing its
wonted effect in softening the hardness of its lines, in rounding the sharpness of
its angles, or in modifying the color of its surface; its outline was clearly marked
against the sky, and its substance, smooth and polished as though fresh from a
founder's mold, glittered with the metallic brilliancy that is characteristic of
pyrites. It seemed impossible to come to any other conclusion but that the land


before them, continent or island, had been upheaved by subterranean forces
above the surface of the sea, and that it was mainly composed of the same
metallic element as had characterized the dust so frequently uplifted from the
bottom.

The extreme nakedness of the entire tract was likewise very extraordinary.
Elsewhere, in various quarters of the globe, there may be sterile rocks, but there
are none so adamant as to be altogether unfurrowed by the filaments engendered
in the moist residuum of the condensed vapor; elsewhere there may be barren
steeps, but none so rigid as not to afford some hold to vegetation, however low
and elementary may be its type; but here all was bare, and blank, and desolate--
not a symptom of vitality was visible.

Such being the condition of the adjacent land, it could hardly be a matter of
surprise that all the sea-birds, the albatross, the gull, the sea-mew, sought
continual refuge on the schooner; day and night they perched fearlessly upon the
yards, the report of a gun failing to dislodge them, and when food of any sort
was thrown upon the deck, they would dart down and fight with eager voracity
for the prize. Their extreme avidity was recognized as a proof that any land
where they could obtain a sustenance must be far remote.

Onwards thus for several days the Dobryna followed the contour of the
inhospitable coast, of which the features would occasionally change, sometimes
for two or three miles assuming the form of a simple arris, sharply defined as
though cut by a chisel, when suddenly the prismatic lamellae soaring in rugged
confusion would again recur; but all along there was the same absence of beach
or tract of sand to mark its base, neither were there any of those shoals of rock
that are ordinarily found in shallow water. At rare intervals there were some
narrow fissures, but not a creek available for a ship to enter to replenish its
supply of water; and the wide roadsteads were unprotected and exposed to well-
nigh every point of the compass.

But after sailing two hundred and forty miles, the progress of the Dobryna
was suddenly arrested. Lieutenant Procope, who had sedulously inserted the
outline of the newly revealed shore upon the maps, announced that it had ceased
to run east and west, and had taken a turn due north, thus forming a barrier to
their continuing their previous direction. It was, of course, impossible to
conjecture how far this barrier extended; it coincided pretty nearly with the
fourteenth meridian of east longitude; and if it reached, as probably it did,
beyond Sicily to Italy, it was certain that the vast basin of the Mediterranean,
which had washed the shores alike of Europe, Asia, and Africa, must have been
reduced to about half its original area.

It was resolved to proceed upon the same plan as heretofore, following the


boundary of the land at a safe distance. Accordingly, the head of the Dobryna
was pointed north, making straight, as it was presumed, for the south of Europe.
A hundred miles, or somewhat over, in that direction, and it was to be anticipated
she would come in sight of Malta, if only that ancient island, the heritage in
succession of Phoenicians, Carthaginians, Sicilians, Romans, Vandals, Greeks,
Arabians, and the knights of Rhodes, should still be undestroyed.

But Malta, too, was gone; and when, upon the 14th, the sounding-line was
dropped upon its site, it was only with the same result so oftentimes obtained
before.

"The devastation is not limited to Africa," observed the count.

"Assuredly not," assented the lieutenant; adding, "and I confess I am almost
in despair whether we shall ever ascertain its limits. To what quarter of Europe,
if Europe still exists, do you propose that I should now direct your course?"

"To Sicily, Italy, France!" ejaculated Servadac, eagerly,--"anywhere where
we can learn the truth of what has befallen us."

"How if we are the sole survivors?" said the count, gravely.

Hector Servadac was silent; his own secret presentiment so thoroughly
coincided with the doubts expressed by the count, that he refrained from saying
another word.

The coast, without deviation, still tended towards the north. No alternative,
therefore, remained than to take a westerly course and to attempt to reach the
northern shores of the Mediterranean. On the 16th the Dobryna essayed to start
upon her altered way, but it seemed as if the elements had conspired to obstruct
her progress. A furious tempest arose; the wind beat dead in the direction of the
coast, and the danger incurred by a vessel of a tonnage so light was necessarily
very great.

Lieutenant Procope was extremely uneasy. He took in all sail, struck his
topmasts, and resolved to rely entirely on his engine. But the peril seemed only
to increase. Enormous waves caught the schooner and carried her up to their
crests, whence again she was plunged deep into the abysses that they left. The
screw failed to keep its hold upon the water, but continually revolved with
useless speed in the vacant air; and thus, although the steam was forced on to the
extremest limit consistent with safety, the vessel held her way with the utmost
difficulty, and recoiled before the hurricane.

Still, not a single resort for refuge did the inaccessible shore present. Again
and again the lieutenant asked himself what would become of him and his
comrades, even if they should survive the peril of shipwreck, and gain a footing
upon the cliff. What resources could they expect to find upon that scene of
desolation? What hope could they entertain that any portion of the old continent


still existed beyond that dreary barrier?

It was a trying time, but throughout it all the crew behaved with the greatest
courage and composure; confident in the skill of their commander, and in the
stability of their ship, they performed their duties with steadiness and
unquestioning obedience.

But neither skill, nor courage, nor obedience could avail; all was in vain.
Despite the strain put upon her engine, the schooner, bare of canvas (for not even
the smallest stay-sail could have withstood the violence of the storm), was
drifting with terrific speed towards the menacing precipices, which were only a.
few short miles to leeward. Fully alive to the hopelessness of their situation, the
crew were all on deck.

"All over with us, sir!" said Procope to the count. "I have done everything
that man could do; but our case is desperate. Nothing short of a miracle can save
us now. Within an hour we must go to pieces upon yonder rocks."

"Let us, then, commend ourselves to the providence of Him to Whom
nothing is impossible," replied the count, in a calm, clear voice that could be
distinctly heard by all; and as he spoke, he reverently uncovered, an example in
which he was followed by all the rest.

The destruction of the vessel seeming thus inevitable, Lieutenant Procope
took the best measures he could to insure a few days' supply of food for any who
might escape ashore. He ordered several cases of provisions and kegs of water to
be brought on deck, and saw that they were securely lashed to some empty
barrels, to make them float after the ship had gone down.

Less and less grew the distance from the shore, but no creek, no inlet, could
be discerned in the towering wall of cliff, which seemed about to topple over and
involve them in annihilation. Except a change of wind or, as Procope observed, a
supernatural rifting of the rock, nothing could bring deliverance now. But the
wind did not veer, and in a few minutes more the schooner was hardly three
cables' distance from the fatal land. All were aware that their last moment had
arrived. Servadac and the count grasped each other's hands for a long farewell;
and, tossed by the tremendous waves, the schooner was on the very point of
being hurled upon the cliff, when a ringing shout was heard. "Quick, boys,
quick! Hoist the jib, and right the tiller!"

Sudden and startling as the unexpected orders were, they were executed as if
by magic.

The lieutenant, who had shouted from the bow, rushed astern and took the
helm, and before anyone had time to speculate upon the object of his maneuvers,
he shouted again, "Look out! sharp! watch the sheets!"

An involuntary cry broke forth from all on board. But it was no cry of terror.


Right ahead was a narrow opening in the solid rock; it was hardly forty feet
wide. Whether it was a passage or no, it mattered little; it was at least a refuge;
and, driven by wind and wave, the Dobryna, under the dexterous guidance of the
lieutenant, dashed in between its perpendicular walls.

Had she not immured herself in a perpetual prison?


CHAPTER XIII. AROYAL SALUTE

"Then I take your bishop, major," said Colonel Murphy, as he made a move
that he had taken since the previous evening to consider.

"I was afraid you would," replied Major Oliphant, looking intently at the
chess-board.

Such was the way in which a long silence was broken on the morning of the
17th of February by the old calendar.

Another day elapsed before another move was made. It was a protracted
game; it had, in fact, already lasted some months--the players being so
deliberate, and so fearful of taking a step without the most mature consideration,
that even now they were only making the twentieth move.

Both of them, moreover, were rigid disciples of the renowned Philidor, who
pronounces that to play the pawns well is "the soul of chess"; and, accordingly,
not one pawn had been sacrificed without a most vigorous defense.

The men who were thus beguiling their leisure were two officers in the
British army--Colonel Heneage Finch Murphy and Major Sir John Temple
Oliphant. Remarkably similar in personal appearance, they were hardly less so in
personal character. Both of them were about forty years of age; both of them
were tall and fair, with bushy whiskers and mustaches; both of them were
phlegmatic in temperament, and both much addicted to the wearing of their
uniforms. They were proud of their nationality, and exhibited a manifest dislike,
verging upon contempt, of everything foreign. Probably they would have felt no
surprise if they had been told that Anglo-Saxons were fashioned out of some
specific clay, the properties of which surpassed the investigation of chemical
analysis. Without any intentional disparagement they might, in a certain way, be
compared to two scarecrows which, though perfectly harmless in themselves,
inspire some measure of respect, and are excellently adapted to protect the
territory intrusted to their guardianship.

English-like, the two officers had made themselves thoroughly at home in
the station abroad in which it had been their lot to be quartered. The faculty of
colonization seems to be indigenous to the native character; once let an
Englishman plant his national standard on the surface of the moon, and it would


not be long before a colony was established round it.

The officers had a servant, named Kirke, and a company of ten soldiers of
the line. This party of thirteen men were apparently the sole survivors of an
overwhelming catastrophe, which on the ist of January had transformed an
enormous rock, garrisoned with well-nigh two thousand troops, into an
insignificant island far out to sea. But although the transformation had been so
marvelous, it cannot be said that either Colonel Murphy or Major Oliphant had
made much demonstration of astonishment.

"This is all very peculiar, Sir John," observed the colonel.

"Yes, colonel; very peculiar," replied the major.

"England will be sure to send for us," said one officer.

"No doubt she will," answered the other.

Accordingly, they came to the mutual resolution that they would "stick to
their post."

To say the truth, it would have been a difficult matter for the gallant officers
to do otherwise; they had but one small boat; therefore, it was well that they
made a virtue of necessity, and resigned themselves to patient expectation of the
British ship which, in due time, would bring relief.

They had no fear of starvation. Their island was mined with subterranean
stores, more than ample for thirteen men--nay, for thirteen Englishmen--for the
next five years at least. Preserved meat, ale, brandy--all were in abundance;
consequently, as the men expressed it, they were in this respect "all right."

Of course, the physical changes that had taken place had attracted the notice
both of officers and men. But the reversed position of east and west, the
diminution of the force of gravity, the altered rotation of the earth, and her
projection upon a new orbit, were all things that gave them little concern and no
uneasiness; and when the colonel and the major had replaced the pieces on the
board which had been disturbed by the convulsion, any surprise they might have
felt at the chess-men losing some portion of their weight was quite forgotten in
the satisfaction of seeing them retain their equilibrium.

One phenomenon, however, did not fail to make its due impression upon the
men; this was the diminution in the length of day and night. Three days after the
catastrophe, Corporal Pim, on behalf of himself and his comrades, solicited a
formal interview with the officers. The request having been granted, Pim, with
the nine soldiers, all punctiliously wearing the regimental tunic of scarlet and
trousers of invisible green, presented themselves at the door of the colonel's
room, where he and his brother-officer were continuing their game. Raising his
hand respectfully to his cap, which he wore poised jauntily over his right ear, and
scarcely held on by the strap below his under lip, the corporal waited permission


to speak.

After a lingering survey of the chess-board, the colonel slowly lifted his
eyes, and said with official dignity, "Well, men, what is it?"

"First of all, sir," replied the corporal, "we want to speak to you about our
pay, and then we wish to have a word with the major about our rations."

"Say on, then," said Colonel Murphy. "What is it about your pay?"

"Just this, sir; as the days are only half as long as they were, we should like
to know whether our pay is to be diminished in proportion."

The colonel was taken somewhat aback, and did not reply immediately,
though by some significant nods towards the major, he indicated that he thought
the question very reasonable. After a few moments’ reflection, he replied, "It
must, I think, be allowed that your pay was calculated from sunrise to sunrise;
there was no specification of what the interval should be. Your pay will continue
as before. England can afford it."

A buzz of approval burst involuntarily from all the men, but military
discipline and the respect due to their officers kept them in check from any
boisterous demonstration of their satisfaction.

"And now, corporal, what is your business with me?" asked Major Oliphant.

"We want to know whether, as the days are only six hours long, we are to
have but two meals instead of four?"

The officers looked at each other, and by their glances agreed that the
corporal was a man of sound common sense.

"Eccentricities of nature," said the major, "cannot interfere with military
regulations. It is true that there will be but an interval of an hour and a half
between them, but the rule stands good--four meals a day. England is too rich to
grudge her soldiers any of her soldiers' due. Yes; four meals a day."

"Hurrah!" shouted the soldiers, unable this time to keep their delight within
the bounds of military decorum; and, turning to the right-about, they marched
away, leaving the officers to renew the all-absorbing game.

However confident everyone upon the island might profess to be that succor
would be sent them from their native land--for Britain never abandons any of her
sons--it could not be disguised that that succor was somewhat tardy in making its
appearance. Many and various were the conjectures to account for the delay.
Perhaps England was engrossed with domestic matters, or perhaps she was
absorbed in diplomatic difficulties; or perchance, more likely than all, Northern
Europe had received no tidings of the convulsion that had shattered the south.
The whole party throve remarkably well upon the liberal provisions of the
commissariat department, and if the officers failed to show the same tendency to
embonpoint which was fast becoming characteristic of the men, it was only


because they deemed it due to their rank to curtail any indulgences which might
compromise the fit of their uniform.

On the whole, time passed indifferently well. An Englishman rarely suffers
from ennui, and then only in his own country, when required to conform to what
he calls "the humbug of society"; and the two officers, with their similar tastes,
ideas, and dispositions, got on together admirably. It is not to be questioned that
they were deeply affected by a sense of regret for their lost comrades, and
astounded beyond measure at finding themselves the sole survivors of a garrison
of 1,895 men, but with true British pluck and self-control, they had done nothing
more than draw up a report that 1,882 names were missing from the muster-roll.

The island itself, the sole surviving fragment of an enormous pile of rock that
had reared itself some 1,600 feet above the sea, was not, strictly speaking, the
only land that was visible; for about twelve miles to the south there was another
island, apparently the very counterpart of what was now occupied by the
Englishmen. It was only natural that this should awaken some interest even in
the most imperturbable minds, and there was no doubt that the two officers,
during one of the rare intervals when they were not absorbed in their game, had
decided that it would be desirable at least to ascertain whether the island was
deserted, or whether it might not be occupied by some others, like themselves,
survivors from the general catastrophe. Certain it is that one morning, when the
weather was bright and calm, they had embarked alone in the little boat, and
been absent for seven or eight hours. Not even to Corporal Pim did they
communicate the object of their excursion, nor say one syllable as to its result,
and it could only be inferred from their manner that they were quite satisfied
with what they had seen; and very shortly afterwards Major Oliphant was
observed to draw up a lengthy document, which was no sooner finished than it
was formally signed and sealed with the seal of the 33rd Regiment. It was
directed:

To the First Lord of the Admiralty, London,

and kept in readiness for transmission by the first ship that should hail in
sight. But time elapsed, and here was the 18th of February without an
opportunity having been afforded for any communication with the British
Government.

At breakfast that morning, the colonel observed to the major that he was
under the most decided impression that the 18th of February was a royal
anniversary; and he went on to say that, although he had received no definite
instructions on the subject, he did not think that the peculiar circumstances under
which they found themselves should prevent them from giving the day its due
military honors.


The major quite concurred; and it was mutually agreed that the occasion
must be honored by a bumper of port, and by a royal salute. Corporal Pim must
be sent for. The corporal soon made his appearance, smacking his lips, having,
by a ready intuition, found a pretext for a double morning ration of spirits.

"The 18th of February, you know, Pim," said the colonel; "we must have a
salute of twenty-one guns."

"Very good," replied Pim, a man of few words.

"And take care that your fellows don't get their arms and legs blown off,"
added the officer.

"Very good, sir," said the corporal; and he made his salute and withdrew.

Of all the bombs, howitzers, and various species of artillery with which the
fortress had been crowded, one solitary piece remained. This was a cumbrous
muzzle-loader of 9-inch caliber, and, in default of the smaller ordnance generally
employed for the purpose, had to be brought into requisition for the royal salute.

A sufficient number of charges having been provided, the corporal brought
his men to the reduct, whence the gun's mouth projected over a sloping
embrasure. The two officers, in cocked hats and full staff uniform, attended to
take charge of the proceedings. The gun was maneuvered in strict accordance
with the rules of "The Artilleryman's Manual," and the firing commenced.

Not unmindful of the warning he had received, the corporal was most careful
between each discharge to see that every vestige of fire was extinguished, so as
to prevent an untimely explosion while the men were reloading; and accidents,
such as so frequently mar public rejoicings, were all happily avoided.

Much to the chagrin of both Colonel Murphy and Major Oliphant, the effect
of the salute fell altogether short of their anticipations. The weight of the
atmosphere was so reduced that there was comparatively little resistance to the
explosive force of the gases, liberated at the cannon's mouth, and there was
consequently none of the reverberation, like rolling thunder, that ordinarily
follows the discharge of heavy artillery.

Twenty times had the gun been fired, and it was on the point of being loaded
for the last time, when the colonel laid his hand upon the arm of the man who
had the ramrod. "Stop!" he said; "we will have a ball this time. Let us put the
range of the piece to the test."

"A good idea!" replied the major. "Corporal, you hear the orders."

In quick time an artillery-wagon was on the spot, and the men lifted out a
full-sized shot, weighing 200 lbs., which, under ordinary circumstances, the
cannon would carry about four miles. It was proposed, by means of telescopes,
to note the place where the ball first touched the water, and thus to obtain an
approximation sufficiently accurate as to the true range.


Having been duly charged with powder and ball, the gun was raised to an
angle of something under 45 degrees, so as to allow proper development to the
curve that the projectile would make, and, at a signal from the major, the light
was applied to the priming.

"Heavens!" "By all that's good!" exclaimed both officers in one breath, as,
standing open-mouthed, they hardly knew whether they were to believe the
evidence of their own senses. "Is it possible?"

The diminution of the force of attraction at the earth's surface was so
considerable that the ball had sped beyond the horizon.

"Incredible!" ejaculated the colonel.

"Incredible!" echoed the major.

"Six miles at least!" observed the one.

"Ay, more than that!" replied the other.

Awhile, they gazed at the sea and at each other in mute amazement. But in
the midst of their perplexity, what sound was that which startled them? Was it
mere fancy? Was it the reverberation of the cannon still booming in their ears?
Or was it not truly the report of another and a distant gun in answer to their own?
Attentively and eagerly they listened. Twice, thrice did the sound repeat itself. It
was quite distinct. There could be no mistake.

"I told you so," cried the colonel, triumphantly. "I knew our country would
not forsake us; it is an English ship, no doubt."

In half an hour two masts were visible above the horizon. "See! Was I not
right? Our country was sure to send to our relief. Here is the ship."

"Yes," replied the major; "she responded to our gun."

"It is to be hoped," muttered the corporal, "that our ball has done her no
damage."

Before long the hull was full in sight. A long trail of smoke betokened her to
be a steamer; and very soon, by the aid of the glass, it could be ascertained that
she was a schooner-yacht, and making straight for the island. A flag at her mast-
head fluttered in the breeze, and towards this the two officers, with the keenest
attention, respectively adjusted their focus.

Simultaneously the two telescopes were lowered. The colonel and the major
stared at each other in blank astonishment. "Russian!" they gasped.

And true it was that the flag that floated at the head of yonder mast was the
blue cross of Russia.


CHAPTER XIV. SENSITIVE NATIONALITY
When the schooner had approached the island, the Englishmen were able to


make out the name "Dobryna" painted on the aft-board. A sinuous irregularity of
the coast had formed a kind of cove, which, though hardly spacious enough for a
few fishing-smacks, would afford the yacht a temporary anchorage, so long as
the wind did not blow violently from either west or south. Into this cove the
Dobryna was duly signaled, and as soon as she was safely moored, she lowered
her four-oar, and Count Timascheff and Captain Servadac made their way at
once to land.

Colonel Heneage Finch Murphy and Major Sir John Temple Oliphant stood,
grave and prim, formally awaiting the arrival of their visitors. Captain Servadac,
with the uncontrolled vivacity natural to a Frenchman, was the first to speak.

"A joyful sight, gentlemen!" he exclaimed. "It will give us unbounded
pleasure to shake hands again with some of our fellow-creatures. You, no doubt,
have escaped the same disaster as ourselves."

But the English officers, neither by word nor gesture, made the slightest
acknowledgment of this familiar greeting.

"What news can you give us of France, England, or Russia?" continued
Servadac, perfectly unconscious of the stolid rigidity with which his advances
were received. "We are anxious to hear anything you can tell us. Have you had
communications with Europe? Have you--"

"To whom have we the honor of speaking?" at last interposed Colonel
Murphy, in the coldest and most measured tone, and drawing himself up to his
full height.

"Ah! how stupid! I forgot," said Servadac, with the slightest possible shrug
of the shoulders; "we have not been introduced."

Then, with a wave of his hand towards his companion, who meanwhile had
exhibited a reserve hardly less than that of the British officers, he said:

"Allow me to introduce you to Count Wassili Timascheff."

"Major Sir John Temple Oliphant," replied the colonel.

The Russian and the Englishman mutually exchanged the stiffest of bows.

"I have the pleasure of introducing Captain Servadac," said the count in his
turn.

"And this is Colonel Heneage Finch Murphy," was the major's grave
rejoinder.

More bows were interchanged and the ceremony brought to its due
conclusion. It need hardly be said that the conversation had been carried on in
French, a language which is generally known both by Russians and Englishmen-
-a circumstance that is probably in some measure to be accounted for by the
refusal of Frenchmen to learn either Russian or English.

The formal preliminaries of etiquette being thus complete, there was no


longer any obstacle to a freer intercourse. The colonel, signing to his guests to
follow, led the way to the apartment occupied jointly by himself and the major,
which, although only a kind of casemate hollowed in the rock, nevertheless wore
a general air of comfort. Major Oliphant accompanied them, and all four having
taken their seats, the conversation was commenced.

Irritated and disgusted at all the cold formalities, Hector Servadac resolved to
leave all the talking to the count; and he, quite aware that the Englishmen would
adhere to the fiction that they could be supposed to know nothing that had
transpired previous to the introduction felt himself obliged to recapitulate
matters from the very beginning.

"You must be aware, gentlemen,” began the count, "that a most singular
catastrophe occurred on the ist of January last. Its cause, its limits we have
utterly failed to discover, but from the appearance of the island on which we find
you here, you have evidently experienced its devastating consequences."

The Englishmen, in silence, bowed assent.

"Captain Servadac, who accompanies me," continued the count, "has been
most severely tried by the disaster. Engaged as he was in an important mission as
a staff-officer in Algeria--"

"A French colony, I believe," interposed Major Oliphant, half shutting his
eyes with an expression of supreme indifference.

Servadac was on the point of making some cutting retort, but Count
Timascheff, without allowing the interruption to be noticed, calmly continued his
narrative:

"Tt was near the mouth of the Shelif that a portion of Africa, on that eventful
night, was transformed into an island which alone survived; the rest of the vast
continent disappeared as completely as if it had never been."

The announcement seemed by no means startling to the phlegmatic colonel.

"Indeed!" was all he said.

"And where were you?" asked Major Oliphant.

"I was out at sea, cruising in my yacht; hard by; and I look upon it as a
miracle, and nothing less, that I and my crew escaped with our lives."

"I congratulate you on your luck," replied the major.

The count resumed: "It was about a month after the great disruption that I
was Sailing--my engine having sustained some damage in the shock--along the
Algerian coast, and had the pleasure of meeting with my previous acquaintance,
Captain Servadac, who was resident upon the island with his orderly, Ben Zoof."

"Ben who?" inquired the major.

"Zoof! Ben Zoof!" ejaculated Servadac, who could scarcely shout loud
enough to relieve his pent-up feelings.


'


Ignoring this ebullition of the captain's spleen, the count went on to say:
"Captain Servadac was naturally most anxious to get what news he could.
Accordingly, he left his servant on the island in charge of his horses, and came
on board the Dobryna with me. We were quite at a loss to know where we
should steer, but decided to direct our course to what previously had been the
east, in order that we might, if possible, discover the colony of Algeria; but of
Algeria not a trace remained."

The colonel curled his lip, insinuating only too plainly that to him it was by
no means surprising that a French colony should be wanting in the element of
stability. Servadac observed the supercilious look, and half rose to his feet, but,
smothering his resentment, took his seat again without speaking.

"The devastation, gentlemen," said the count, who persistently refused to
recognize the Frenchman's irritation, "everywhere was terrible and complete.
Not only was Algeria lost, but there was no trace of Tunis, except one solitary
rock, which was crowned by an ancient tomb of one of the kings of France--"

"Louis the Ninth, I presume," observed the colonel.

"Saint Louis," blurted out Servadac, savagely.

Colonel Murphy slightly smiled.

Proof against all interruption, Count Timascheff, as if he had not heard it,
went on without pausing. He related how the schooner had pushed her way
onwards to the south, and had reached the Gulf of Cabes; and how she had
ascertained for certain that the Sahara Sea had no longer an existence.

The smile of disdain again crossed the colonel's face; he could not conceal
his opinion that such a destiny for the work of a Frenchman could be no matter
of surprise.

"Our next discovery,” continued the count, "was that a new coast had been
upheaved right along in front of the coast of Tripoli, the geological formation of
which was altogether strange, and which extended to the north as far as the
proper place of Malta."

"And Malta," cried Servadac, unable to control himself any longer; "Malta--
town, forts, soldiers, governor, and all--has vanished just like Algeria."

For a moment a cloud rested upon the colonel's brow, only to give place to an
expression of decided incredulity.

"The statement seems highly incredible," he said.

"Incredible?" repeated Servadac. "Why is it that you doubt my word?"

The captain's rising wrath did not prevent the colonel from replying coolly,
"Because Malta belongs to England."

"I can't help that," answered Servadac, sharply; "it has gone just as utterly as
if it had belonged to China."


Colonel Murphy turned deliberately away from Servadac, and appealed to
the count: "Do you not think you may have made some error, count, in reckoning
the bearings of your yacht?"

"No, colonel, I am quite certain of my reckonings; and not only can I testify
that Malta has disappeared, but I can affirm that a large section of the
Mediterranean has been closed in by a new continent. After the most anxious
investigation, we could discover only one narrow opening in all the coast, and it
is by following that little channel that we have made our way hither. England, I
fear, has suffered grievously by the late catastrophe. Not only has Malta been
entirely lost, but of the Ionian Islands that were under England's protection, there
seems to be but little left."

"Ay, you may depend upon it," said Servadac, breaking in upon the
conversation petulantly, “your grand resident lord high commissioner has not
much to congratulate himself about in the condition of Corfu."

The Englishmen were mystified.

"Corfu, did you say?" asked Major Oliphant.

"Yes, Corfu; I said Corfu," replied Servadac, with a sort of malicious
triumph.

The officers were speechless with astonishment.

The silence of bewilderment was broken at length by Count Timascheff
making inquiry whether nothing had been heard from England, either by
telegraph or by any passing ship.

"No," said the colonel; "not a ship has passed; and the cable is broken."

"But do not the Italian telegraphs assist you?" continued the count.

"Ttalian! I do not comprehend you. You must mean the Spanish, surely."

"How?" demanded Timascheff.

"Confound it!" cried the impatient Servadac. "What matters whether it be
Spanish or Italian? Tell us, have you had no communication at all from Europe?-
-no news of any sort from London?"

"Hitherto, none whatever," replied the colonel; adding with a stately
emphasis, "but we shall be sure to have tidings from England before long."

"Whether England is still in existence or not, I suppose," said Servadac, in a
tone of irony.

The Englishmen started simultaneously to their feet.

"England in existence?" the colonel cried. "England! Ten times more
probable that France--"

"France!" shouted Servadac in a passion. "France is not an island that can be
submerged; France is an integral portion of a solid continent. France, at least, is
safe."


A scene appeared inevitable, and Count Timascheff's efforts to conciliate the
excited parties were of small avail.

"You are at home here," said Servadac, with as much calmness as he could
command; "it will be advisable, I think, for this discussion to be carried on in the
open air." And hurriedly he left the room. Followed immediately by the others,
he led the way to a level piece of ground, which he considered he might fairly
claim as neutral territory.

"Now, gentlemen,” he began haughtily, "permit me to represent that, in spite
of any loss France may have sustained in the fate of Algeria, France is ready to
answer any provocation that affects her honor. Here I am the representative of
my country, and here, on neutral ground--"

"Neutral ground?" objected Colonel Murphy; "I beg your pardon. This,
Captain Servadac, is English territory. Do you not see the English flag?" and, as
he spoke, he pointed with national pride to the British standard floating over the
top of the island.

"Pshaw!" cried Servadac, with a contemptuous sneer; "that flag, you know,
has been hoisted but a few short weeks."

"That flag has floated where it is for ages," asserted the colonel.

"An imposture!" shouted Servadac, as he stamped with rage.

Recovering his composure in a degree, he continued: "Can you suppose that
I am not aware that this island on which we find you is what remains of the
Ionian representative republic, over which you English exercise the right of
protection, but have no claim of government?"

The colonel and the major looked at each other in amazement.

Although Count Timascheff secretly sympathized with Servadac, he had
carefully refrained from taking part in the dispute; but he was on the point of
interfering, when the colonel, in a greatly subdued tone, begged to be allowed to
speak.

"I begin to apprehend," he said, "that you must be laboring under some
strange mistake. There is no room for questioning that the territory here is
England's--England's by right of conquest; ceded to England by the Treaty of
Utrecht. Three times, indeed--in 1727, 1779, and 1792--France and Spain have
disputed our title, but always to no purpose. You are, I assure you, at the present
moment, as much on English soil as if you were in London, in the middle of
Trafalgar Square."

It was now the turn of the captain and the count to look surprised. "Are we
not, then, in Corfu?" they asked.

"You are at Gibraltar," replied the colonel.

Gibraltar! The word fell like a thunderclap upon their ears. Gibraltar! the


western extremity of the Mediterranean! Why, had they not been sailing
persistently to the east? Could they be wrong in imagining that they had reached
the Ionian Islands? What new mystery was this?

Count Timascheff was about to proceed with a more rigorous investigation,
when the attention of all was arrested by a loud outcry. Tuming round, they saw
that the crew of the Dobryna was in hot dispute with the English soldiers. A
general altercation had arisen from a disagreement between the sailor Panofka
and Corporal Pim. It had transpired that the cannon-ball fired in experiment from
the island had not only damaged one of the spars of the schooner, but had broken
Panofka's pipe, and, moreover, had just grazed his nose, which, for a Russian's,
was unusually long. The discussion over this mishap led to mutual
recriminations, till the sailors had almost come to blows with the garrison.

Servadac was just in the mood to take Panofka's part, which drew from
Major Oliphant the remark that England could not be held responsible for any
accidental injury done by her cannon, and if the Russian's long nose came in the
way of the ball, the Russian must submit to the mischance.

This was too much for Count Timascheff, and having poured out a torrent of
angry invective against the English officers, he ordered his crew to embark
immediately.

"We shall meet again,” said Servadac, as they pushed off from shore.

"Whenever you please," was the cool reply.

The geographical mystery haunted the minds of both the count and the
captain, and they felt they could never rest till they had ascertained what had
become of their respective countries. They were glad to be on board again, that
they might résumé their voyage of investigation, and in two hours were out of
sight of the sole remaining fragment of Gibraltar.


CHAPTER XV. AN ENIGMA FROM THE SEA

Lieutenant Procope had been left on board in charge of the Dobryna, and on
resuming the voyage it was a task of some difficulty to make him understand the
fact that had just come to light. Some hours were spent in discussion and in
attempting to penetrate the mysteries of the situation.

There were certain things of which they were perfectly certain. They could
be under no misapprehension as to the distance they had positively sailed from
Gourbi Island towards the east before their further progress was arrested by the
unknown shore; as nearly as possible that was fifteen degrees; the length of the
narrow strait by which they had made their way across that land to regain the
open sea was about three miles and a half; thence onward to the island, which


they had been assured, on evidence that they could not disbelieve, to be upon the
site of Gibraltar, was four degrees; while from Gibraltar to Gourbi Island was
seven degrees or but little more. What was it altogether? Was it not less than
thirty degrees? In that latitude, the degree of longitude represents eight and forty
miles. What, then, did it all amount to? Indubitably, to less than 1,400 miles. So
brief a voyage would bring the Dobryna once again to her starting-point, or, in
other words, would enable her to complete the circumnavigation of the globe.
How changed the condition of things! Previously, to sail from Malta to Gibraltar
by an eastward course would have involved the passage of the Suez Canal, the
Red Sea, the Indian Ocean, the Pacific, the Atlantic; but what had happened
now? Why, Gibraltar had been reached as if it had been just at Corfu, and some
three hundred and thirty degrees of the earth's circuit had vanished utterly.

After allowing for a certain margin of miscalculation, the main fact remained
undeniable; and the necessary inference that Lieutenant Procope drew from the
round of the earth being completed in 1,400 miles, was that the earth's diameter
had been reduced by about fifteen sixteenths of its length.

"If that be so," observed the count, "it accounts for some of the strange
phenomena we witness. If our world has become so insignificant a spheroid, not
only has its gravity diminished, but its rotary speed has been accelerated; and
this affords an adequate explanation of our days and nights being thus curtailed.
But how about the new orbit in which we are moving?"

He paused and pondered, and then looked at Procope as though awaiting
from him some further elucidation of the difficulty. The lieutenant hesitated.
When, in a few moments, he began to speak, Servadac smiled intelligently,
anticipating the answer he was about to hear.

"My conjecture is," said Procope, "that a fragment of considerable magnitude
has been detached from the earth; that it has carried with it an envelope of the
earth's atmosphere, and that it is now traveling through the solar system in an
orbit that does not correspond at all with the proper orbit of the earth."

The hypothesis was plausible; but what a multitude of bewildering
speculations it entailed! If, in truth, a certain mass had been broken off from the
terrestrial sphere, whither would it wend its way? What would be the measure of
the eccentricity of its path? What would be its period round the sun? Might it
not, like a comet, be carried away into the vast infinity of space? or, on the other
hand, might it not be attracted to the great central source of light and heat, and be
absorbed in it? Did its orbit correspond with the orbit of the ecliptic? and was
there no chance of its ever uniting again with the globe, from which it had been
torn off by so sudden and violent a disruption?

A thoughtful silence fell upon them all, which Servadac was the first to


break. "Lieutenant," he said, "your explanation is ingenious, and accounts for
many appearances; but it seems to me that in one point it fails."

"How so?" replied Procope. "To my mind the theory meets all objections."

"T think not," Servadac answered. "In one point, at least, it appears to me to
break down completely."

"What is that?" asked the lieutenant.

"Stop a moment," said the captain. "Let us see that we understand each other
right. Unless I mistake you, your hypothesis is that a fragment of the earth,
comprising the Mediterranean and its shores from Gibraltar to Malta, has been
developed into a new asteroid, which is started on an independent orbit in the
solar regions. Is not that your meaning?"

"Precisely so," the lieutenant acquiesced.


"Well, then," continued Servadac, "it seems to me to be at fault in this
respect: it fails, and fails completely, to account for the geological character of
the land that we have found now encompassing this sea. Why, if the new land is
a fragment of the old--why does it not retain its old formation? What has become
of the granite and the calcareous deposits? How is it that these should all be
changed into a mineral concrete with which we have no acquaintance?"

No doubt, it was a serious objection; for, however likely it might be that a
mass of the earth on being detached would be eccentric in its movements, there
was no probable reason to be alleged why the material of its substance should
undergo so complete a change. There was nothing to account for the fertile
shores, rich in vegetation, being transformed into rocks arid and barren beyond
precedent.

The lieutenant felt the difficulty, and owned himself unprepared to give at
once an adequate solution; nevertheless, he declined to renounce his theory. He
asserted that the arguments in favor of it carried conviction to his mind, and that
he entertained no doubt but that, in the course of time, all apparently antagonistic
circumstances would be explained so as to become consistent with the view he
took. He was careful, however, to make it understood that with respect to the
original cause of the disruption he had no theory to offer; and although he knew
what expansion might be the result of subterranean forces, he did not venture to
say that he considered it sufficient to produce so tremendous an effect. The
origin of the catastrophe was a problem still to be solved.

"Ah! well," said Servadac, "I don't know that it matters much where our new
little planet comes from, or what it is made of, if only it carries France along
with it."

"And Russia," added the count.

"And Russia, of course," said Servadac, with a polite bow.

There was, however, not much room for this sanguine expectation, for if a
new asteroid had thus been brought into existence, it must be a sphere of
extremely limited dimensions, and there could be little chance that it embraced
more than the merest fraction of either France or Russia. As to England, the total
cessation of all telegraphic communication between her shores and Gibraltar was
a Virtual proof that England was beyond its compass.

And what was the true measurement of the new little world? At Gourbi
Island the days and nights were of equal length, and this seemed to indicate that
it was situated on the equator; hence the distance by which the two poles stood
apart would be half what had been reckoned would be the distance completed by
the Dobryna in her circuit. That distance had been already estimated to be
something under 1,400 miles, so that the Arctic Pole of their recently fashioned


world must be about 350 miles to the north, and the Antarctic about 350 miles to
the south of the island. Compare these calculations with the map, and it is at
once apparent that the northernmost limit barely touched the coast of Provence,
while the southernmost reached to about lat. 20 degrees N., and fell in the heart
of the desert. The practical test of these conclusions would be made by future
investigation, but meanwhile the fact appeared very much to strengthen the
presumption that, if Lieutenant Procope had not arrived at the whole truth, he
had made a considerable advance towards it.

The weather, ever since the storm that had driven the Dobryna into the creek,
had been magnificent. The wind continued favorable, and now under both steam
and canvas, she made a rapid progress towards the north, a direction in which
she was free to go in consequence of the total disappearance of the Spanish
coast, from Gibraltar right away to Alicante. Malaga, Almeria, Cape Gata,
Carthagena. Cape Palos--all were gone. The sea was rolling over the southern
extent of the peninsula, so that the yacht advanced to the latitude of Seville
before it sighted any land at all, and then, not shores such as the shores of
Andalusia, but a bluff and precipitous cliff, in its geological features resembling
exactly the stern and barren rock that she had coasted beyond the site of Malta.
Here the sea made a decided indentation on the coast; it ran up in an acute-
angled triangle till its apex coincided with the very spot upon which Madrid had
stood. But as hitherto the sea had encroached upon the land, the land in its turn
now encroached upon the sea; for a frowning headland stood out far into the
basin of the Mediterranean, and formed a promontory stretching out beyond the
proper places of the Balearic Isles. Curiosity was all alive. There was the
intensest interest awakened to determine whether no vestige could be traced of
Majorca, Minorca, or any of the group, and it was during a deviation from the
direct course for the purpose of a more thorough scrutiny, that one of the sailors
raised a thrill of general excitement by shouting, "A bottle in the sea!"

Here, then, at length was a communication from the outer world. Surely now
they would find a document which would throw some light upon all the
mysteries that had happened? Had not the day now dawned that should set their
speculations all at rest?

It was the moming of the 21st of February. The count, the captain, the
lieutenant, everybody hurried to the forecastle; the schooner was dexterously put
about, and all was eager impatience until the supposed bottle was hauled on
deck.

It was not, however, a bottle; it proved to be a round leather telescope-case,
about a foot long, and the first thing to do before investigating its contents was to
make a careful examination of its exterior. The lid was fastened on by wax, and


so securely that it would take a long immersion before any water could
penetrate; there was no maker's name to be deciphered; but impressed very
plainly with a seal on the wax were the two initials "P. R."

When the scrutiny of the outside was finished, the wax was removed and the
cover opened, and the lieutenant drew out a slip of ruled paper, evidently torn
from a common note-book. The paper had an inscription written in four lines,
which were remarkable for the profusion of notes of admiration and
interrogation with which they were interspersed:

"Gallia??? Ab sole, au 15 fev. 59,000,000 1.! Chemin parcouru de janv. a fev.
82,000,000 1.!! Va bene! All right!! Parfait!!!"

There was a general sigh of disappointment. They turned the paper over and
over, and handed it from one to another. "What does it all mean?" exclaimed the
count.

"Something mysterious here!" said Servadac. "But yet," he continued, after a
pause, "one thing is tolerably certain: on the 15th, six days ago, someone was
alive to write it."

"Yes; I presume there is no reason to doubt the accuracy of the date,"
assented the count.

To this strange conglomeration of French, English, Italian, and Latin, there
was no signature attached; nor was there anything to give a clue as to the locality
in which it had been committed to the waves. A telescope-case would probably
be the property of some one on board a ship; and the figures obviously referred
to the astronomical wonders that had been experienced.

To these general observations Captain Servadac objected that he thought it
unlikely that any one on board a ship would use a telescope-case for this
purpose, but would be sure to use a bottle as being more secure; and,
accordingly, he should rather be inclined to believe that the message had been set
afloat by some savant left alone, perchance, upon some isolated coast.

"But, however interesting it might be," observed the count, "to know the
author of the lines, to us it is of far greater moment to ascertain their meaning."

And taking up the paper again, he said, "Perhaps we might analyze it word
by word, and from its detached parts gather some clue to its sense as a whole."

"What can be the meaning of all that cluster of interrogations after Gallia?"
asked Servadac.

Lieutenant Procope, who had hitherto not spoken, now broke his silence by
saying, "I beg, gentlemen, to submit my opinion that this document goes very far
to confirm my hypothesis that a fragment of the earth has been precipitated into
space."

Captain Servadac hesitated, and then replied, "Even if it does, I do not see


how it accounts in the least for the geological character of the new asteroid."

"But will you allow me for one minute to take my supposition for granted?"
said Procope. "If a new little planet has been formed, as I imagine, by
disintegration from the old, I should conjecture that Gallia is the name assigned
to it by the writer of this paper. The very notes of interrogation are significant
that he was in doubt what he should write."

"You would presume that he was a Frenchman?" asked the count.

"T should think so," replied the lieutenant.

"Not much doubt about that," said Servadac; "it is all in French, except a few
scattered words of English, Latin, and Italian, inserted to attract attention. He
could not tell into whose hands the message would fall first."

"Well, then," said Count Timascheff, "we seem to have found a name for the
new world we occupy."

"But what I was going especially to observe," continued the lieutenant, "is
that the distance, 59,000,000 leagues, represents precisely the distance we
ourselves were from the sun on the 15th. It was on that day we crossed the orbit
of Mars."

"Yes, true," assented the others.

"And the next line," said the lieutenant, after reading it aloud, "apparently
registers the distance traversed by Gallia, the new little planet, in her own orbit.
Her speed, of course, we know by Kepler's laws, would vary according to her
distance from the sun, and if she were--as I conjecture from the temperature at
that date--on the 15th of January at her perihelion, she would be traveling twice
as fast as the earth, which moves at the rate of between 50,000 and 60,000 miles
an hour."

"You think, then," said Servadac, with a smile, "you have determined the
perihelion of our orbit; but how about the aphelion? Can you form a judgment as
to what distance we are likely to be carried?"

"You are asking too much," remonstrated the count.

"I confess," said the lieutenant, "that just at present I am not able to clear
away the uncertainty of the future; but I feel confident that by careful
observation at various points we shall arrive at conclusions which not only will
determine our path, but perhaps may clear up the mystery about our geological
structure."

"Allow me to ask," said Count Timascheff, "whether such a new asteroid
would not be subject to ordinary mechanical laws, and whether, once started, it
would not have an orbit that must be immutable?"

"Decidedly it would, so long as it was undisturbed by the attraction of some
considerable body; but we must recollect that, compared to the great planets,


Gallia must be almost infinitesimally small, and so might be attracted by a force
that is irresistible."

"Altogether, then," said Servadac, "we seem to have settled it to our entire
satisfaction that we must be the population of a young little world called Gallia.
Perhaps some day we may have the honor of being registered among the minor
planets."

"No chance of that," quickly rejoined Lieutenant Procope. "Those minor
planets all are known to rotate in a narrow zone between the orbits of Mars and
Jupiter; in their perihelia they cannot approximate the sun as we have done; we
shall not be classed with them."

"Our lack of instruments," said the count, "is much to be deplored; it baffles
our investigations in every way."

"Ah, never mind! Keep up your courage, count!" said Servadac, cheerily.

And Lieutenant Procope renewed his assurances that he entertained good
hopes that every perplexity would soon be solved.

"I suppose," remarked the count, "that we cannot attribute much importance
to the last line: 'Va bene! All right!! Parfait!!!"

The captain answered, "At least, it shows that whoever wrote it had no
murmuring or complaint to make, but was quite content with the new order of
things.”


CHAPTER XVI. THE RESIDUUM OF A CONTINENT

Almost unconsciously, the voyagers in the Dobryna fell into the habit of
using Gallia as the name of the new world in which they became aware they
must be making an extraordinary excursion through the realms of space.
Nothing, however, was allowed to divert them from their ostensible object of
making a survey of the coast of the Mediterranean, and accordingly they
persevered in following that singular boundary which had revealed itself to their
extreme astonishment.

Having rounded the great promontory that had barred her farther progress to
the north, the schooner skirted its upper edge. A few more leagues and they
ought to be abreast of the shores of France. Yes, of France.

But who shall describe the feelings of Hector Servadac when, instead of the
charming outline of his native land, he beheld nothing but a solid boundary of
savage rock? Who shall paint the look of consternation with which he gazed
upon the stony rampart--rising perpendicularly for a thousand feet--that had
replaced the shores of the smiling south? Who shall reveal the burning anxiety
with which he throbbed to see beyond that cruel wall?


But there seemed no hope. Onwards and onwards the yacht made her way,
and still no sign of France. It might have been supposed that Servadac's previous
experiences would have prepared him for the discovery that the catastrophe
which had overwhelmed other sites had brought destruction to his own country
as well. But he had failed to realize how it might extend to France; and when
now he was obliged with his own eyes to witness the waves of ocean rolling
over what once had been the lovely shores of Provence, he was well-nigh frantic
with desperation.

"Am I to believe that Gourbi Island, that little shred of Algeria, constitutes
all that is left of our glorious France? No, no; it cannot be. Not yet have we
reached the pole of our new world. There is--there must be--something more
behind that frowning rock. Oh, that for a moment we could scale its towering
height and look beyond! By Heaven, I adjure you, let us disembark, and mount
the summit and explore! France lies beyond."

Disembarkation, however, was an utter impossibility. There was no
semblance of a creek in which the Dobryna could find an anchorage. There was
no outlying ridge on which a footing could be gained. The precipice was
perpendicular as a wall, its topmost height crowned with the same conglomerate
of crystallized lamellae that had all along been so pronounced a feature.

With her steam at high pressure, the yacht made rapid progress towards the
east. The weather remained perfectly fine, the temperature became gradually
cooler, so that there was little prospect of vapors accumulating in the
atmosphere; and nothing more than a few cirri, almost transparent, veiled here
and there the clear azure of the sky. Throughout the day the pale rays of the sun,
apparently lessened in its magnitude, cast only faint and somewhat uncertain
shadows; but at night the stars shone with surpassing brilliancy. Of the planets,
some, it was observed, seemed to be fading away in remote distance. This was
the case with Mars, Venus, and that unknown orb which was moving in the orbit
of the minor planets; but Jupiter, on the other hand, had assumed splendid
proportions; Saturn was superb in its luster, and Uranus, which hitherto had been
imperceptible without a telescope was pointed out by Lieutenant Procope,
plainly visible to the naked eye. The inference was irresistible that Gallia was
receding from the sun, and traveling far away across the planetary regions.

On the 24th of February, after following the sinuous course of what before
the date of the convulsion had been the coast line of the department of Var, and
after a fruitless search for Hyeres, the peninsula of St. Tropez, the Lerius Islands,
and the gulfs of Cannes and Jouar, the Dobryna arrived upon the site of the Cape
of Antibes.

Here, quite unexpectedly, the explorers made the discovery that the massive


wall of cliff had been rent from the top to the bottom by a narrow rift, like the
dry bed of a mountain torrent, and at the base of the opening, level with the sea,
was a little strand upon which there was just space enough for their boat to be
hauled up.

"Joy! joy!" shouted Servadac, half beside himself with ecstasy; "we can land
at last!"

Count Timascheff and the lieutenant were scarcely less impatient than the
captain, and little needed his urgent and repeated solicitations: "Come on!
Quick! Come on! no time to lose!"

It was half-past seven in the morning, when they set their foot upon this
untried land. The bit of strand was only a few square yards in area, quite a
narrow strip. Upon it might have been recognized some fragments of that
agglutination of yellow limestone which is characteristic of the coast of
Provence. But the whole party was far too eager to wait and examine these
remnants of the ancient shore; they hurried on to scale the heights.

The narrow ravine was not only perfectly dry, but manifestly had never been
the bed of any mountain torrent. The rocks that rested at the bottom--just as
those which formed its sides--were of the same lamellous formation as the entire
coast, and had not hitherto been subject to the disaggregation which the lapse of
time never fails to work. A skilled geologist would probably have been able to
assign them their proper scientific classification, but neither Servadac,
Timascheff, nor the lieutenant could pretend to any acquaintance with their
specific character.

Although, however, the bottom of the chasm had never as yet been the
channel of a stream, indications were not wanting that at some future time it
would be the natural outlet of accumulated waters; for already, in many places,
thin layers of snow were glittering upon the surface of the fractured rocks, and
the higher the elevation that was gained, the more these layers were found to
increase in area and in depth.

"Here is a trace of fresh water, the first that Gallia has exhibited," said the
count to his companions, as they toiled up the precipitous path.

"And probably," replied the lieutenant, "as we ascend we shall find not only
snow but ice. We must suppose this Gallia of ours to be a sphere, and if it is so,
we must now be very close to her Arctic regions; it is true that her axis is not so
much inclined as to prolong day and night as at the poles of the earth, but the
rays of the sun must reach us here only very obliquely, and the cold, in all
likelihood, will be intense."

"So cold, do you think," asked Servadac, "that animal life must be extinct?"

"I do not say that, captain," answered the lieutenant; "for, however far our


little world may be removed from the sun, I do not see why its temperature
should fall below what prevails in those outlying regions beyond our system
where sky and air are not." "And what temperature may that be?" inquired the
captain with a shudder.

"Fourier estimates that even in those vast unfathomable tracts, the
temperature never descends lower than 60 degrees," said Procope.

"Sixty! Sixty degrees below zero!" cried the count. "Why, there's not a
Russian could endure it!"

"I beg your pardon, count. It is placed on record that the English have
survived it, or something quite approximate, upon their Arctic expeditions.
When Captain Parry was on Melville Island, he knew the thermometer to fall to
56 degrees," said Procope.

As the explorers advanced, they seemed glad to pause from time to time, that
they might recover their breath; for the air, becoming more and more rarefied,
made respiration somewhat difficult and the ascent fatiguing. Before they had
reached an altitude of 600 feet they noticed a sensible diminution of the
temperature; but neither cold nor fatigue deterred them, and they were resolved
to persevere. Fortunately, the deep striae or furrows in the surface of the rocks
that made the bottom of the ravine in some degree facilitated their progress, but
it was not until they had been toiling up for two hours more that they succeeded
in reaching the summit of the cliff.

Eagerly and anxiously did they look around. To the south there was nothing
but the sea they had traversed; to the north, nothing but one drear, inhospitable
stretch.

Servadac could not suppress a cry of dismay. Where was his beloved France?
Had he gained this arduous height only to behold the rocks carpeted with ice and
snow, and reaching interminably to the far-off horizon? His heart sank within
him.

The whole region appeared to consist of nothing but the same strange,
uniform mineral conglomerate, crystallized into regular hexagonal prisms. But
whatever was its geological character, it was only too evident that it had entirely
replaced the former soil, so that not a vestige of the old continent of Europe
could be discerned. The lovely scenery of Provence, with the grace of its rich
and undulating landscape; its gardens of citrons and oranges rising tier upon tier
from the deep red soil--all, all had vanished. Of the vegetable kingdom, there
was not a single representative; the most meager of Arctic plants, the most
insignificant of lichens, could obtain no hold upon that stony waste. Nor did the
animal world assert the feeblest sway. The mineral kingdom reigned supreme.

Captain Servadac's deep dejection was in strange contrast to his general


hilarity. Silent and tearful, he stood upon an ice-bound rock, straining his eyes
across the boundless vista of the mysterious territory. "It cannot be!" he
exclaimed. "We must somehow have mistaken our bearings. True, we have
encountered this barrier; but France is there beyond! Yes, France is there! Come,
count, come! By all that's pitiful, I entreat you, come and explore the farthest
verge of the ice-bound track!"

He pushed onwards along the rugged surface of the rock, but had not
proceeded far before he came to a sudden pause. His foot had come in contact
with something hard beneath the snow, and, stooping down, he picked up a little
block of stony substance, which the first glance revealed to be of a geological
character altogether alien to the universal rocks around. It proved to be a
fragment of dis-colored marble, on which several letters were inscribed, of
which the only part at all decipherable was the syllable "Vil."

"Vil--Villa!" he cried out, in his excitement dropping the marble, which was
broken into atoms by the fall.

What else could this fragment be but the sole surviving remnant of some
sumptuous mansion that once had stood on this unrivaled site? Was it not the
residue of some edifice that had crowned the luxuriant headland of Antibes,
overlooking Nice, and commanding the gorgeous panorama that embraced the
Maritime Alps and reached beyond Monaco and Mentone to the Italian height of
Bordighera? And did it not give in its sad and too convincing testimony that
Antibes itself had been involved in the great destruction? Servadac gazed upon
the shattered marble, pensive and disheartened.

Count Timascheff laid his hand kindly on the captain's shoulder, and said,
"My friend, do you not remember the motto of the old Hope family?"

He shook his head mournfully.

"Orbe fracto, spes illoesa," continued the count--"Though the world be
shattered, hope is unimpaired."

Servadac smiled faintly, and replied that he felt rather compelled to take up
the despairing cry of Dante, "All hope abandon, ye who enter here."

"Nay, not so," answered the count; "for the present at least, let our maxim be
Nil desperandum!"


CHAPTER XVII. ASECOND ENIGMA

Upon re-embarking, the bewildered explorers began to discuss the question
whether it would not now be desirable to make their way back to Gourbi Island,
which was apparently the only spot in their new world from which they could
hope to derive their future sustenance. Captain Servadac tried to console himself


with the reflection that Gourbi Island was, after all, a fragment of a French
colony, and as such almost like a bit of his dear France; and the plan of returning
thither was on the point of being adopted, when Lieutenant Procope remarked
that they ought to remember that they had not hitherto made an entire circuit of
the new shores of the sea on which they were sailing.

"We have," he said, "neither investigated the northern shore from the site of
Cape Antibes to the strait that brought us to Gibraltar, nor have we followed the
southern shore that stretches from the strait to the Gulf of Cabes. It is the old
coast, and not the new, that we have been tracing; as yet, we cannot say
positively that there is no outlet to the south; as yet, we cannot assert that no
oasis of the African desert has escaped the catastrophe. Perhaps, even here in the
north, we may find that Italy and Sicily and the larger islands of the
Mediterranean may still maintain their existence."

"IT entirely concur with you," said Count Timascheff. "I quite think we ought
to make our survey of the confines of this new basin as complete as possible
before we withdraw."

Servadac, although he acknowledged the justness of these observations,
could not help pleading that the explorations might be deferred until after a visit
had been paid to Gourbi Island.

"Depend upon it, captain, you are mistaken," replied the lieutenant; "the right
thing to do is to use the Dobryna while she is available."

"Available! What do you mean?" asked the count, somewhat taken by
surprise.

"IT mean," said Procope, "that the farther this Gallia of ours recedes from the
sun, the lower the temperature will fall. It is likely enough, I think, that before
long the sea will be frozen over, and navigation will be impossible. Already you
have learned something of the difficulties of traversing a field of ice, and I am
sure, therefore, you will acquiesce in my wish to continue our explorations while
the water is still open."

"No doubt you are right, lieutenant," said the count. "We will continue our
search while we can for some remaining fragment of Europe. Who shall tell
whether we may not meet with some more survivors from the catastrophe, to
whom it might be in our power to afford assistance, before we go into our winter
quarters?"

Generous and altogether unselfish as this sentiment really was, it was
obviously to the general interest that they should become acquainted, and if
possible establish friendly relations, with any human inhabitant who might be
sharing their own strange destiny in being rolled away upon a new planet into
the infinitude of space. All difference of race, all distinction of nationality, must


be merged into the one thought that, few as they were, they were the sole
surviving representatives of a world which it seemed exceedingly improbable
that they would ever see again; and common sense dictated that they were bound
to direct all their energies to insure that their asteroid should at least have a
united and sympathizing population.

It was on the 25th of February that the yacht left the little creek in which she
had taken refuge, and setting off at full steam eastwards, she continued her way
along the northern shore. A brisk breeze tended to increase the keenness of the
temperature, the thermometer being, on an average, about two degrees below
zero. Salt water freezes only at a lower temperature than fresh; the course of the
Dobryna was therefore unimpeded by ice, but it could not be concealed that
there was the greatest necessity to maintain the utmost possible speed.

The nights continued lovely; the chilled condition of the atmosphere
prevented the formation of clouds; the constellations gleamed forth with
unsullied luster; and, much as Lieutenant Procope, from nautical considerations,
might regret the absence of the moon, he could not do otherwise than own that
the magnificent nights of Gallia were such as must awaken the enthusiasm of an
astronomer. And, as if to compensate for the loss of the moonlight, the heavens
were illuminated by a superb shower of falling stars, far exceeding, both in
number and in brilliancy, the phenomena which are commonly distinguished as
the August and November meteors; in fact, Gallia was passing through that
meteoric ring which is known to lie exterior to the earth's orbit, but almost
concentric with it. The rocky coast, its metallic surface reflecting the glow of the
dazzling luminaries, appeared literally stippled with light, whilst the sea, as
though spattered with burning hailstones, shone with a phosphorescence that was
perfectly splendid. So great, however, was the speed at which Gallia was
receding from the sun, that this meteoric storm lasted scarcely more than four
and twenty hours.

Next day the direct progress of the Dobryna was arrested by a long
projection of land, which obliged her to turn southwards, until she reached what
formerly would have been the southern extremity of Corsica. Of this, however,
there was now no trace; the Strait of Bonifacio had been replaced by a vast
expanse of water, which had at first all the appearance of being utterly desert;
but on the following morning the explorers unexpectedly sighted a little island,
which, unless it should prove, as was only too likely, to be of recent origin they
concluded, from its situation, must be a portion of the northernmost territory of
Sardinia.

The Dobryna approached the land as nearly as was prudent, the boat was
lowered, and in a few minutes the count and Servadac had landed upon the islet,


which was a mere plot of meadow land, not much more than two acres in extent,
dotted here and there with a few myrtle-bushes and lentisks, interspersed with
some ancient olives. Having ascertained, as they imagined, that the spot was
devoid of living creature, they were on the point of returning to their boat, when
their attention was arrested by a faint bleating, and immediately afterwards a
solitary she-goat came bounding towards the shore. The creature had dark,
almost black hair, and small curved horns, and was a specimen of that domestic
breed which, with considerable justice, has gained for itself the title of "the poor
man's cow." So far from being alarmed at the presence of strangers, the goat ran
nimbly towards them, and then, by its movements and plaintive cries, seemed to
be enticing them to follow it.

"Come," said Servadac; "let us see where it will lead us; it is more than
probable it is not alone."

The count agreed; and the animal, as if comprehending what was said, trotted
on gently for about a hundred paces, and stopped in front of a kind of cave or
burrow that was half concealed by a grove of lentisks. Here a little girl, seven or
eight years of age, with rich brown hair and lustrous dark eyes, beautiful as one
of Murillo's angels, was peeping shyly through the branches. Apparently
discovering nothing in the aspect of the strangers to excite her apprehensions,
the child suddenly gained confidence, darted forwards with outstretched hands,
and in a voice, soft and melodious as the language which she spoke, said in
Italian:

"I like you; you will not hurt me, will you?"

"Hurt you, my child?" answered Servadac. "No, indeed; we will be your
friends; we will take care of you."

And after a few moments' scrutiny of the pretty maiden, he added:

"Tell us your name, little one."

"Nina!" was the child's reply.

"Well, then, Nina, can you tell us where we are?"

"At Madalena, I think,” said the little girl; "at least, 1 know I was there when
that dreadful shock came and altered everything."

The count knew that Madalena was close to Caprera, to the north of Sardinia,
which had entirely disappeared in the disaster. By dint of a series of questions,
he gained from the child a very intelligent account of her experiences. She told
him that she had no parents, and had been employed in taking care of a flock of
goats belonging to one of the landowners, when one day, all of a sudden,
everything around her, except this little piece of land, had been swallowed up,
and that she and Marzy, her pet goat, had been left quite alone. She went on to
say that at first she had been very frightened; but when she found that the earth


did not shake any more, she had thanked the great God, and had soon made
herself very happy living with Marzy. She had enough food, she said, and had
been waiting for a boat to fetch her, and now a boat had come and she was quite
ready to go away; only they must let her goat go with her: they would both like
so much to get back to the old farm.

"Here, at least, is one nice little inhabitant of Gallia," said Captain Servadac,
as he caressed the child and conducted her to the boat.

Half an hour later, both Nina and Marzy were safely quartered on board the
yacht. It is needless to say that they received the heartiest of welcomes. The
Russian sailors, ever superstitious, seemed almost to regard the coming of the
child as the appearance of an angel; and, incredible as it may seem, more than
one of them wondered whether she had wings, and amongst themselves they
commonly referred to her as "the little Madonna."

Soon out of sight of Madalena, the Dobryna for some hours held a
southeasterly course along the shore, which here was fifty leagues in advance of
the former coastline of Italy, demonstrating that a new continent must have been
formed, substituted as it were for the old peninsula, of which not a vestige could
be identified. At a latitude corresponding with the latitude of Rome, the sea took
the form of a deep gulf, extending back far beyond the site of the Eternal City;
the coast making a wide sweep round to the former position of Calabria, and
jutting far beyond the outline of "the boot," which Italy resembles. But the
beacon of Messina was not to be discerned; no trace, indeed, survived of any
portion of Sicily; the very peak of Etna, 11,000 feet as it had reared itself above
the level of the sea, had vanished utterly.

Another sixty leagues to the south, and the Dobryna sighted the entrance of
the strait which had afforded her so providential a refuge from the tempest, and
had conducted her to the fragmentary relic of Gibraltar. Hence to the Gulf of
Cabes had been already explored, and as it was universally allowed that it was
unnecessary to renew the search in that direction, the lieutenant started off in a
transverse course, towards a point hitherto uninvestigated. That point was
reached on the 3rd of March, and thence the coast was continuously followed, as
it led through what had been Tunis, across the province of Constantine, away to
the oasis of Ziban; where, taking a sharp turn, it first reached a latitude of 32
degrees, and then returned again, thus forming a sort of irregular gulf, enclosed
by the same unvarying border of mineral concrete. This colossal boundary then
stretched away for nearly 150 leagues over the Sahara desert, and, extending to
the south of Gourbi Island, occupied what, if Morocco had still existed, would
have been its natural frontier.

Adapting her course to these deviations of the coastline, the Dobryna was


steering northwards, and had barely reached the limit of the bay, when the
attention of all on board was arrested by the phenomenon of a volcano, at least
3,000 feet high, its crater crowned with smoke, which occasionally was streaked
by tongues of flame.

"A burning mountain!" they exclaimed.

"Gallia, then, has some internal heat," said Servadac.

"And why not, captain?" rejoined the lieutenant. "If our asteroid has carried
with it a portion of the old earth's atmosphere, why should it not likewise retain
something of its central fire?"

"Ah, well!" said the captain, shrugging his shoulders, "I dare say there is
caloric enough in our little world to supply the wants of its population."

Count Timascheff interrupted the silence that followed this conversation by
saying, "And now, gentlemen, as our course has brought us on our way once
more towards Gibraltar, what do you say to our renewing our acquaintance with
the Englishmen? They will be interested in the result of our voyage."

"For my part," said Servadac, "I have no desire that way. They know where
to find Gourbi Island; they can betake themselves thither just when they please.
They have plenty of provisions. If the water freezes, 120 leagues is no very great
distance. The reception they gave us was not so cordial that we need put
ourselves out of the way to repeat our visit."

"What you say is too true," replied the count. "I hope we shall show them
better manners when they condescend to visit us."

"Ay," said Servadac, "we must remember that we are all one people now; no
longer Russian, French, or English. Nationality is extinct."

"I am sadly afraid, however," continued the count, "that an Englishman will
be an Englishman ever."

"Yes," said the captain, "that is always their failing."

And thus all further thought of making their way again to the little garrison
of Gibraltar was abandoned.

But even if their spirit of courtesy had disposed them to renew their
acquaintance with the British officers, there were two circumstances that just
then would have rendered such a proposal very unadvisable. In the first place,
Lieutenant Procope was convinced that it could not be much longer now before
the sea would be entirely frozen; and, besides this, the consumption of their coal,
through the speed they had maintained, had been so great that there was only too
much reason to fear that fuel would fail them. Anyhow, the strictest economy
was necessary, and it was accordingly resolved that the voyage should not be
much prolonged. Beyond the volcanic peak, moreover, the waters seemed to
expand into a boundless ocean, and it might be a thing full of risk to be frozen up


while the yacht was so inadequately provisioned. Taking all these things into
account, it was agreed that further investigations should be deferred to a more
favorable season, and that, without delay, the Dobryna should return to Gourbi
Island.

This decision was especially welcome to Hector Servadac, who, throughout
the whole of the last five weeks, had been agitated by much anxious thought on
account of the faithful servant he had left behind.

The transit from the volcano to the island was not long, and was marked by
only one noticeable incident. This was the finding of a second mysterious
document, in character precisely similar to what they had found before. The
writer of it was evidently engaged upon a calculation, probably continued from
day to day, as to the motions of the planet Gallia upon its orbit, and committing
the results of his reckonings to the waves as the channel of communication.

Instead of being enclosed in a telescope-case, it was this time secured in a
preserved-meat tin, hermetically sealed, and stamped with the same initials on
the wax that fastened it. The greatest care was used in opening it, and it was
found to contain the following message:

"Gallia Ab sole, au 1 mars, dist. 78,000,000 |.! Chemin parcouru de fev. a
mars: 59,000,000 1.! Va bene! All right! Nil desperandum!

"Enchante!"

"Another enigma!" exclaimed Servadac; "and still no intelligible signature,
and no address. No clearing up of the mystery!"

"I have no doubt, in my own mind," said the count, "that it is one of a series.
It seems to me probable that they are being sent broadcast upon the sea."

"IT wonder where the hare-brained savant that writes them can be living?"
observed Servadac.

"Very likely he may have met with the fate of AEsop's abstracted astronomer,
who found himself at the bottom of a well."

"Ay; but where is that well?" demanded the captain.

This was a question which the count was incapable of settling; and they
could only speculate afresh as to whether the author of the riddles was dwelling
upon some solitary island, or, like themselves, was navigating the waters of the
new Mediterranean. But they could detect nothing to guide them to a definite
decision.

After thoughtfully regarding the document for some time. Lieutenant
Procope proceeded to observe that he believed the paper might be considered as
genuine, and accordingly, taking its statements as reliable, he deduced two
important conclusions: first, that whereas, in the month of January, the distance
traveled by the planet (hypothetically called Gallia) had been recorded as


82,000,000 leagues, the distance traveled in February was only 59,000,000
leagues--a difference of 23,000,000 leagues in one month; secondly, that the
distance of the planet from the sun, which on the 15th of February had been
59,000,000 leagues, was on the 1st of March 78,000,000 leagues--an increase of
19,000,000 leagues in a fortnight. Thus, in proportion as Gallia receded from the
sun, so did the rate of speed diminish by which she traveled along her orbit; facts
to be observed in perfect conformity with the known laws of celestial
mechanism.

"And your inference?" asked the count.

"My inference," replied the lieutenant, "is a confirmation of my surmise that
we are following an orbit decidedly elliptical, although we have not yet the
material to determine its eccentricity."

"As the writer adheres to the appellation of Gallia, do you not think," asked
the count, "that we might call these new waters the Gallian Sea?"

"There can be no reason to the contrary, count," replied the lieutenant; "and
as such I will insert it upon my new chart."

"Our friend," said Servadac, "seems to be more and more gratified with the
condition of things; not only has he adopted our motto, 'Nil desperandum!' but
see how enthusiastically he has wound up with his 'Enchante!""

The conversation dropped.

A few hours later the man on watch announced that Gourbi Island was in
sight.


CHAPTER XVIII. AN UNEXPECTED POPULATION

The Dobryna was now back again at the island. Her cruise had lasted from
the 31st of January to the 5th of March, a period of thirty-five days (for it was
leap year), corresponding to seventy days as accomplished by the new little
world.

Many a time during his absence Hector Servadac had wondered how his
present vicissitudes would end, and he had felt some misgivings as to whether he
should ever again set foot upon the island, and see his faithful orderly, so that it
was not without emotion that he had approached the coast of the sole remaining
fragment of Algerian soil. But his apprehensions were groundless; Gourbi Island
was just as he had left it, with nothing unusual in its aspect, except that a very
peculiar cloud was hovering over it, at an altitude of little more than a hundred
feet. As the yacht approached the shore, this cloud appeared to rise and fall as if
acted upon by some invisible agency, and the captain, after watching it carefully,
perceived that it was not an accumulation of vapors at all, but a dense mass of


birds packed as closely together as a swarm of herrings, and uttering deafening
and discordant cries, amidst which from time to time the noise of the report of a
gun could be plainly distinguished.

The Dobryna signalized her arrival by firing her cannon, and dropped anchor
in the little port of the Shelif. Almost within a minute Ben Zoof was seen
running, gun in hand, towards the shore; he cleared the last ridge of rocks at a
single bound, and then suddenly halted. For a few seconds he stood motionless,
his eyes fixed, as if obeying the instructions of a drill sergeant, on a point some
fifteen yards distant, his whole attitude indicating submission and respect; but
the sight of the captain, who was landing, was too much for his equanimity, and
darting forward, he seized his master's hand and covered it with kisses. Instead,
however, of uttering any expressions of welcome or rejoicing at the captain's
return, Ben Zoof broke out into the most vehement ejaculations.

"Thieves, captain! beastly thieves! Bedouins! pirates! devils!"

"Why, Ben Zoof, what's the matter?" said Servadac soothingly.

"They are thieves! downright, desperate thieves! those infernal birds! That's
what's the matter. It is a good thing you have come. Here have I for a whole
month been spending my powder and shot upon them, and the more [ kill them,
the worse they get; and yet, if I were to leave them alone, we should not have a
grain of corn upon the island."

It was soon evident that the orderly had only too much cause for alarm. The
crops had ripened rapidly during the excessive heat of January, when the orbit of
Gallia was being traversed at its perihelion, and were now exposed to the
depredations of many thousands of birds; and although a goodly number of
stacks attested the industry of Ben Zoof during the time of the Dobryna's
voyage, it was only too apparent that the portion of the harvest that remained
ungathered was liable to the most imminent risk of being utterly devoured. It
was, perhaps, only natural that this clustered mass of birds, as representing the
whole of the feathered tribe upon the surface of Gallia, should resort to Gourbi
Island, of which the meadows seemed to be the only spot from which they could
get sustenance at all; but as this sustenance would be obtained at the expense,
and probably to the serious detriment, of the human population, it was absolutely
necessary that every possible resistance should be made to the devastation that
was threatened.

Once satisfied that Servadac and his friends would cooperate with him in the
raid upon "the thieves," Ben Zoof became calm and content, and began to make
various inquiries. "And what has become," he said, "of all our old comrades in
Africa?"

"As far as I can tell you," answered the captain, "they are all in Africa still;


only Africa isn't by any means where we expected to find it."

"And France? Montmartre?" continued Ben Zoof eagerly. Here was the cry
of the poor fellow's heart.

As briefly as he could, Servadac endeavored to explain the true condition of
things; he tried to communicate the fact that Paris, France, Europe, nay, the
whole world was more than eighty millions of leagues away from Gourbi Island;
as gently and cautiously as he could he expressed his fear that they might never
see Europe, France, Paris, Montmartre again.

"No, no, sir!" protested Ben Zoof emphatically; "that is all nonsense. It is
altogether out of the question to suppose that we are not to see Montmartre
again." And the orderly shook his head resolutely, with the air of a man
determined, in spite of argument, to adhere to his own opinion.

"Very good, my brave fellow," replied Servadac, "hope on, hope while you
may. The message has come to us over the sea, 'Never despair’; but one thing,
nevertheless, is certain; we must forthwith commence arrangements for making
this island our permanent home."

Captain Servadac now led the way to the gourbi, which, by his servant's
exertions, had been entirely rebuilt; and here he did the honors of his modest
establishment to his two guests, the count and the lieutenant, and gave a
welcome, too, to little Nina, who had accompanied them on shore, and between
whom and Ben Zoof the most friendly relations had already been established.

The adjacent building continued in good preservation, and Captain
Servadac's satisfaction was very great in finding the two horses, Zephyr and
Galette, comfortably housed there and in good condition.

After the enjoyment of some refreshment, the party proceeded to a general
consultation as to what steps must be taken for their future welfare. The most
pressing matter that came before them was the consideration of the means to be
adopted to enable the inhabitants of Gallia to survive the terrible cold, which, in
their ignorance of the true eccentricity of their orbit, might, for aught they knew,
last for an almost indefinite period. Fuel was far from abundant; of coal there
was none; trees and shrubs were few in number, and to cut them down in
prospect of the cold seemed a very questionable policy; but there was no doubt
some expedient must be devised to prevent disaster, and that without delay.

The victualing of the little colony offered no immediate difficulty. Water was
abundant, and the cisterns could hardly fail to be replenished by the numerous
streams that meandered along the plains; moreover, the Gallian Sea would ere
long be frozen over, and the melted ice (water in its congealed state being
divested of every particle of salt) would afford a supply of drink that could not
be exhausted. The crops that were now ready for the harvest, and the flocks and


herds scattered over the island, would form an ample reserve. There was little
doubt that throughout the winter the soil would remain unproductive, and no
fresh fodder for domestic animals could then be obtained; it would therefore be
necessary, if the exact duration of Gallia's year should ever be calculated, to
proportion the number of animals to be reserved to the real length of the winter.

The next thing requisite was to arrive at a true estimate of the number of the
population. Without including the thirteen Englishmen at Gibraltar, about whom
he was not particularly disposed to give himself much concern at present,
Servadac put down the names of the eight Russians, the two Frenchman, and the
little Italian girl, eleven in all, as the entire list of the inhabitants of Gourbi
Island.

"Oh, pardon me," interposed Ben Zoof, "you are mistaking the state of the
case altogether. You will be surprised to learn that the total of people on the
island is double that. It is twenty-two."

"Twenty-two!" exclaimed the captain; "twenty-two people on this island?
What do you mean?"

"The opportunity has not occurred," answered Ben Zoof, "for me to tell you
before, but I have had company."

"Explain yourself, Ben Zoof," said Servadac. "What company have you
had?"

"You could not suppose," replied the orderly, "that my own unassisted hands
could have accomplished all that harvest work that you see has been done."

"I confess," said Lieutenant Procope, "we do not seem to have noticed that."

"Well, then," said Ben Zoof, "if you will be good enough to come with me
for about a mile, I shall be able to show you my companions. But we must take
our guns."

"Why take our guns?" asked Servadac. "I hope we are not going to fight."

"No, not with men," said Ben Zoof; "but it does not answer to throw a
chance away for giving battle to those thieves of birds."

Leaving little Nina and her goat in the gourbi, Servadac, Count Timascheff,
and the lieutenant, greatly mystified, took up their guns and followed the orderly.
All along their way they made unsparing slaughter of the birds that hovered over
and around them. Nearly every species of the feathered tribe seemed to have its
representative in that living cloud. There were wild ducks in thousands; snipe,
larks, rooks, and swallows; a countless variety of sea-birds--widgeons, gulls, and
seamews; beside a quantity of game--quails, partridges, and woodcocks. The
sportsmen did their best; every shot told; and the depredators fell by dozens on
either hand.

Instead of following the northern shore of the island, Ben Zoof cut obliquely


across the plain. Making their progress with the unwonted rapidity which was
attributable to their specific lightness, Servadac and his companions soon found
themselves near a grove of sycamores and eucalyptus massed in picturesque
confusion at the base of a little hill. Here they halted.

"Ah! the vagabonds! the rascals! the thieves!" suddenly exclaimed Ben Zoof,
stamping his foot with rage.

"How now? Are your friends the birds at their pranks again?" asked the
captain.

"No, I don't mean the birds: I mean those lazy beggars that are shirking their
work. Look here; look there!" And as Ben Zoof spoke, he pointed to some
scythes, and sickles, and other implements of husbandry that had been left upon
the ground.

"What is it you mean?" asked Servadac, getting somewhat impatient.

"Hush, hush! listen!" was all Ben Zoof's reply; and he raised his finger as if
in warning.

Listening attentively, Servadac and his associates could distinctly recognize a
human voice, accompanied by the notes of a guitar and by the measured click of
castanets.

"Spaniards!" said Servadac.

"No mistake about that, sir," replied Ben Zoof; "a Spaniard would rattle his
castanets at the cannon's mouth."

"But what is the meaning of it all?" asked the captain, more puzzled than
before.

"Hark!" said Ben Zoof; "it is the old man's turn."

And then a voice, at once gruff and harsh, was heard vociferating, "My
money! my money! when will you pay me my money? Pay me what you owe
me, you miserable majos."

Meanwhile the song continued:

"Tu sandunga y cigarro, Y una cana de Jerez, Mi jamelgo y un trabuco, Que
mas gloria puede haver ?"

Servadac's knowledge of Gascon enabled him partially to comprehend the
rollicking tenor of the Spanish patriotic air, but his attention was again arrested
by the voice of the old man growling savagely, "Pay me you shall; yes, by the
God of Abraham, you shall pay me."

"A Jew!" exclaimed Servadac.

"Ay, sir, a German Jew," said Ben Zoof.

The party was on the point of entering the thicket, when a singular spectacle
made them pause. A group of Spaniards had just begun dancing their national
fandango, and the extraordinary lightness which had become the physical


property of every object in the new planet made the dancers bound to a height of
thirty feet or more into the air, considerably above the tops of the trees. What
followed was irresistibly comic. Four sturdy majos had dragged along with them
an old man incapable of resistance, and compelled him, nolens volens, to join in
the dance; and as they all kept appearing and disappearing above the bank of
foliage, their grotesque attitudes, combined with the pitiable countenance of their
helpless victim, could not do otherwise than recall most forcibly the story of
Sancho Panza tossed in a blanket by the merry drapers of Segovia.

Servadac, the count, Procope, and Ben Zoof now proceeded to make their
way through the thicket until they came to a little glade, where two men were
stretched idly on the grass, one of them playing the guitar, and the other a pair of
castanets; both were exploding with laughter, as they urged the performers to
greater and yet greater exertions in the dance. At the sight of strangers they
paused in their music, and simultaneously the dancers, with their victim, alighted
gently on the sward.

Breathless and half exhausted as was the Jew, he rushed with an effort
towards Servadac, and exclaimed in French, marked by a strong Teutonic accent,
"Oh, my lord governor, help me, help! These rascals defraud me of my rights;
they rob me; but, in the name of the God of Israel, I ask you to see justice done!"

The captain glanced inquiringly towards Ben Zoof, and the orderly, by a
significant nod, made his master understand that he was to play the part that was
implied by the title. He took the cue, and promptly ordered the Jew to hold his
tongue at once. The man bowed his head in servile submission, and folded his
hands upon his breast.

Servadac surveyed him leisurely. He was a man of about fifty, but from his
appearance might well have been taken for at least ten years older. Small and
skinny, with eyes bright and cunning, a hooked nose, a short yellow beard,
unkempt hair, huge feet, and long bony hands, he presented all the typical
characteristics of the German Jew, the heartless, wily usurer, the hardened miser
and skinflint. As iron is attracted by the magnet, so was this Shylock attracted by
the sight of gold, nor would he have hesitated to draw the life-blood of his
creditors, if by such means he could secure his claims.

His name was Isaac Hakkabut, and he was a native of Cologne. Nearly the
whole of his time, however, he informed Captain Servadac, had been spent upon
the sea, his real business being that of a merchant trading at all the ports of the
Mediterranean. A tartan, a small vessel of two hundred tons burden, conveyed
his entire stock of merchandise, and, to say the truth, was a sort of floating
emporium, conveying nearly every possible article of commerce, from a lucifer
match to the radiant fabrics of Frankfort and Epinal. Without wife or children,


and having no settled home, Isaac Hakkabut lived almost entirely on board the
Hansa, as he had named his tartan; and engaging a mate, with a crew of three
men, as being adequate to work so light a craft, he cruised along the coasts of
Algeria, Tunis, Egypt, Turkey, and Greece, visiting, moreover, most of the
harbors of the Levant. Careful to be always well supplied with the products in
most general demand--coffee, sugar, rice, tobacco, cotton stuffs, and gunpowder-
-and being at all times ready to barter, and prepared to deal in secondhand wares,
he had contrived to amass considerable wealth.

On the eventful night of the 1st of January the Hansa had been at Ceuta, the
point on the coast of Morocco exactly opposite Gibraltar. The mate and three
sailors had all gone on shore, and, in common with many of their fellow-
creatures, had entirely disappeared; but the most projecting rock of Ceuta had
been undisturbed by the general catastrophe, and half a score of Spaniards, who
had happened to be upon it, had escaped with their lives. They were all
Andalusian majos, agricultural laborers, and naturally as careless and apathetic
as men of their class usually are, but they could not help being very considerably
embarrassed when they discovered that they were left in solitude upon a
detached and isolated rock. They took what mutual counsel they could, but
became only more and more perplexed. One of them was named Negrete, and
he, as having traveled somewhat more than the rest, was tacitly recognized as a
sort of leader; but although he was by far the most enlightened of them all, he
was quite incapable of forming the least conception of the nature of what had
occurred. The one thing upon which they could not fail to be conscious was that
they had no prospect of obtaining provisions, and consequently their first
business was to devise a scheme for getting away from their present abode. The
Hansa was lying off shore. The Spaniards would not have had the slightest
hesitation in summarily taking possession of her, but their utter ignorance of
seamanship made them reluctantly come to the conclusion that the more prudent
policy was to make terms with the owner.

And now came a singular part of the story. Negrete and his companions had
meanwhile received a visit from two English officers from Gibraltar. What
passed between them the Jew did not know; he only knew that, immediately
after the conclusion of the interview, Negrete came to him and ordered him to set
sail at once for the nearest point of Morocco. The Jew, afraid to disobey, but with
his eye ever upon the main chance, stipulated that at the end of their voyage the
Spaniards should pay for their passage--terms to which, as they would to any
other, they did not demur, knowing that they had not the slightest intention of
giving him a single real.

The Hansa had weighed anchor on the 3rd of February. The wind blew from


the west, and consequently the working of the tartan was easy enough. The
unpracticed sailors had only to hoist their sails and, though they were quite
unconscious of the fact, the breeze carried them to the only spot upon the little
world they occupied which could afford them a refuge.

Thus it fell out that one morning Ben Zoof, from his lookout on Gourbi
Island, saw a ship, not the Dobryna, appear upon the horizon, and make quietly
down towards what had formerly been the right bank of the Shelif.

Such was Ben Zoof's version of what had occurred, as he had gathered it
from the new-comers. He wound up his recital by remarking that the cargo of the
Hansa would be of immense service to them; he expected, indeed, that Isaac
Hakkabut would be difficult to manage, but considered there could be no harm
in appropriating the goods for the common welfare, since there could be no
opportunity now for selling them.

Ben Zoof added, "And as to the difficulties between the Jew and his
passengers, I told him that the governor general was absent on a tour of
inspection, and that he would see everything equitably settled."

Smiling at his orderly's tactics, Servadac turned to Hakkabut, and told him
that he would take care that his claims should be duly investigated and all proper
demands should be paid. The man appeared satisfied, and, for the time at least,
desisted from his complaints and importunities.

When the Jew had retired, Count Timascheff asked, "But how in the world
can you ever make those fellows pay anything?"

"They have lots of money," said Ben Zoof.

"Not likely," replied the count; "when did you ever know Spaniards like
them to have lots of money?"

"But I have seen it myself," said Ben Zoof; "and it is English money."

"English money!" echoed Servadac; and his mind again reverted to the
excursion made by the colonel and the major from Gibraltar, about which they
had been so reticent. "We must inquire more about this," he said.

Then, addressing Count Timascheff, he added, "Altogether, I think the
countries of Europe are fairly represented by the population of Gallia."

"True, Captain,” answered the count; "we have only a fragment of a world,
but it contains natives of France, Russia, Italy, Spain, and England. Even
Germany may be said to have a representative in the person of this miserable
Jew."

"And even in him," said Servadac, "perhaps we shall not find so indifferent a
representative as we at present imagine."


CHAPTER XIX. GALLIA'S GOVERNOR GENERAL

The Spaniards who had arrived on board the Hansa consisted of nine men
and a lad of twelve years of age, named Pablo. They all received Captain
Servadac, whom Ben Zoof introduced as the governor general, with due respect,
and returned quickly to their separate tasks. The captain and his friends,
followed at some distance by the eager Jew, soon left the glade and directed their
steps towards the coast where the Hansa was moored.

As they went they discussed their situation. As far as they had ascertained,
except Gourbi Island, the sole surviving fragments of the Old World were four
small islands: the bit of Gibraltar occupied by the Englishmen; Ceuta, which had
just been left by the Spaniards; Madalena, where they had picked up the little
Italian girl; and the site of the tomb of Saint Louis on the coast of Tunis. Around
these there was stretched out the full extent of the Gallian Sea, which apparently
comprised about one-half of the Mediterranean, the whole being encompassed
by a barrier like a framework of precipitous cliffs, of an origin and a substance
alike unknown.

Of all these spots only two were known to be inhabited: Gibraltar, where the
thirteen Englishmen were amply provisioned for some years to come, and their
own Gourbi Island. Here there was a population of twenty-two, who would all
have to subsist upon the natural products of the soil. It was indeed not to be
forgotten that, perchance, upon some remote and undiscovered isle there might
be the solitary writer of the mysterious papers which they had found, and if so,
that would raise the census of their new asteroid to an aggregate of thirty-six.

Even upon the supposition that at some future date the whole population
should be compelled to unite and find a residence upon Gourbi Island, there did
not appear any reason to question but that eight hundred acres of rich soil, under
good management, would yield them all an ample sustenance. The only critical
matter was how long the cold season would last; every hope depended upon the
land again becoming productive; at present, it seemed impossible to determine,
even if Gallia's orbit were really elliptic, when she would reach her aphelion, and
it was consequently necessary that the Gallians for the time being should reckon
on nothing beyond their actual and present resources.

These resources were, first, the provisions of the Dobryna, consisting of
preserved meat, sugar, wine, brandy, and other stores sufficient for about two
months; secondly, the valuable cargo of the Hansa, which, sooner or later, the
owner, whether he would or not, must be compelled to surrender for the common
benefit; and lastly, the produce of the island, animal and vegetable, which with
proper economy might be made to last for a considerable period.

In the course of the conversation, Count Timascheff took an opportunity of


saying that, as Captain Servadac had already been presented to the Spaniards as
governor of the island, he thought it advisable that he should really assume that
position.

"Every body of men," he observed, "must have a head, and you, as a
Frenchman, should, I think, take the command of this fragment of a French
colony. My men, I can answer for it, are quite prepared to recognize you as their
superior officer."

"Most unhesitatingly," replied Servadac, "I accept the post with all its
responsibilities. We understand each other so well that I feel sure we shall try
and work together for the common good; and even if it be our fate never again to
behold our fellow creatures, I have no misgivings but that we shall be able to
cope with whatever difficulties may be before us."

As he spoke, he held out his hand. The count took it, at the same time
making a slight bow. It was the first time since their meeting that the two men
had shaken hands; on the other hand, not a single word about their former rivalry
had ever escaped their lips; perhaps that was all forgotten now.

The silence of a few moments was broken by Servadac saying, "Do you not
think we ought to explain our situation to the Spaniards?"

"No, no, your Excellency," burst in Ben Zoof, emphatically; "the fellows are
chicken-hearted enough already; only tell them what has happened, and in sheer
despondency they will not do another stroke of work."

"Besides," said Lieutenant Procope, who took very much the same view as
the orderly, "they are so miserably ignorant they would be sure to misunderstand
you."

"Understand or misunderstand," replied Servadac, "I do not think it matters.
They would not care. They are all fatalists. Only give them a guitar and their
castanets, and they will soon forget all care and anxiety. For my own part, I must
adhere to my belief that it will be advisable to tell them everything. Have you
any opinion to offer, count?"

"My own opinion, captain, coincides entirely with yours. I have followed the
plan of explaining all I could to my men on board the Dobryna, and no
inconvenience has arisen."

"Well, then, so let it be," said the captain; adding, "It is not likely that these
Spaniards are so ignorant as not to have noticed the change in the length of the
days; neither can they be unaware of the physical changes that have transpired.
They shall certainly be told that we are being carried away into unknown regions
of space, and that this island is nearly all that remains of the Old World."

"Ha! ha!" laughed Ben Zoof, aloud; "it will be fine sport to watch the old
Jew's face, when he is made to comprehend that he is flying away millions and


millions of leagues from all his debtors."

Isaac Hakkabut was about fifty yards behind, and was consequently unable
to overhear the conversation. He went shambling along, half whimpering and not
unfrequently invoking the God of Israel; but every now and then a cunning light
gleamed from his eyes, and his lips became compressed with a grim
significance.

None of the recent phenomena had escaped his notice, and more than once
he had attempted to entice Ben Zoof into conversation upon the subject; but the
orderly made no secret of his antipathy to him, and generally replied to his
advances either by satire or by banter. He told him that he had everything to gain
under the new system of nights and days, for, instead of living the Jew's ordinary
life of a century, he would reach to the age of two centuries; and he
congratulated him upon the circumstance of things having become so light,
because it would prevent him feeling the burden of his years. At another time he
would declare that, to an old usurer like him, it could not matter in the least what
had become of the moon, as he could not possibly have advanced any money
upon her. And when Isaac, undaunted by his jeers, persevered in besetting him
with questions, he tried to silence him by saying, "Only wait till the governor
general comes; he is a shrewd fellow, and will tell you all about it."

"But will he protect my property?" poor Isaac would ask tremulously.

"To be sure he will! He would confiscate it all rather than that you should be
robbed of it."

With this Job's comfort the Jew had been obliged to content himself as best
he could, and to await the promised arrival of the governor.

When Servadac and his companions reached the shore, they found that the
Hansa had anchored in an exposed bay, protected but barely by a few projecting
rocks, and in such a position that a gale rising from the west would inevitably
drive her on to the land, where she must be dashed in pieces. It would be the
height of folly to leave her in her present moorings; without loss of time she
must be brought round to the mouth of the Shelif, in immediate proximity to the
Russian yacht.

The consciousness that his tartan was the subject of discussion made the Jew
give way to such vehement ejaculations of anxiety, that Servadac turned round
and peremptorily ordered him to desist from his clamor. Leaving the old man
under the surveillance of the count and Ben Zoof, the captain and the lieutenant
stepped into a small boat and were soon alongside the floating emporium.

A very short inspection sufficed to make them aware that both the tartan and
her cargo were in a perfect state of preservation. In the hold were sugar-loaves
by hundreds, chests of tea, bags of coffee, hogsheads of tobacco, pipes of wine,


casks of brandy, barrels of dried herrings, bales of cotton, clothing of every kind,
shoes of all sizes, caps of various shape, tools, household utensils, china and
earthenware, reams of paper, bottles of ink, boxes of lucifer matches, blocks of
salt, bags of pepper and spices, a stock of huge Dutch cheeses, and a collection
of almanacs and miscellaneous literature. At a rough guess the value could not
be much under pounds 5,000 sterling. A new cargo had been taken in only a few
days before the catastrophe, and it had been Isaac Hakkabut's intention to cruise
from Ceuta to Tripoli, calling wherever he had reason to believe there was likely
to be a market for any of his commodities.

"A fine haul, lieutenant," said the captain.

"Yes, indeed," said the lieutenant; "but what if the owner refuses to part with
ibe

"No fear; no fear," replied the captain. "As soon as ever the old rascal finds
that there are no more Arabs or Algerians for him to fleece, he will be ready
enough to transact a little business with us. We will pay him by bills of
acceptance on some of his old friends in the Old World."

"But why should he want any payment?" inquired the lieutenant. "Under the
circumstances, he must know that you have a right to make a requisition of his
goods."

"No, no," quickly rejoined Servadac; "we will not do that. Just because the
fellow is a German we shall not be justified in treating him in German fashion.
We will transact our business in a business way. Only let him once realize that he
is on a new globe, with no prospect of getting back to the old one, and he will be
ready enough to come to terms with us."

"Perhaps you are right," replied the lieutenant; "I hope you are. But anyhow,
it will not do to leave the tartan here; not only would she be in danger in the
event of a storm, but it is very questionable whether she could resist the pressure
of the ice, if the water were to freeze."

"Quite true, Procope; and accordingly I give you the commission to see that
your crew bring her round to the Shelif as soon as may be."

"To-morrow morning it shall be done," answered the lieutenant, promptly.

Upon returning to the shore, it was arranged that the whole of the little
colony should forthwith assemble at the gourbi. The Spaniards were summoned
and Isaac, although he could only with reluctance take his wistful gaze from his
tartan, obeyed the governor's orders to follow.

An hour later and the entire population of twenty-two had met in the
chamber adjoining the gourbi. Young Pablo made his first acquaintance with
little Nina, and the child seemed highly delighted to find a companion so nearly
of her own age. Leaving the children to entertain each other, Captain Servadac


began his address.

Before entering upon further explanation, he said that he counted upon the
cordial cooperation of them all for the common welfare.

Negrete interrupted him by declaring that no promises or pledges could be
given until he and his countrymen knew how soon they could be sent back to
Spain.

"To Spain, do you say?" asked Servadac.

"To Spain!" echoed Isaac Hakkabut, with a hideous yell. "Do they expect to
go back to Spain till they have paid their debts? Your Excellency, they owe me
twenty reals apiece for their passage here; they owe me two hundred reals. Are
they to be allowed...2?"

"Silence, Mordecai, you fool!" shouted Ben Zoof, who was accustomed to
call the Jew by any Hebrew name that came uppermost to his memory.
"Silence!"

Servadac was disposed to appease the old man's anxiety by promising to see
that justice was ultimately done; but, in a fever of frantic excitement, he went on
to implore that he might have the loan of a few sailors to carry his ship to
Algiers.

"I will pay you honestly; I will pay you well," he cried; but his ingrained
propensity for making a good bargain prompted him to add, "provided you do
not overcharge me."

Ben Zoof was about again to interpose some angry exclamation; but
Servadac checked him, and continued in Spanish: "Listen to me, my friends.
Something very strange has happened. A most wonderful event has cut us off
from Spain, from France, from Italy, from every country of Europe. In fact, we
have left the Old World entirely. Of the whole earth, nothing remains except this
island on which you are now taking refuge. The old globe is far, far away. Our
present abode is but an insignificant fragment that is left. I dare not tell you that
there is any chance of your ever again seeing your country or your homes."

He paused. The Spaniards evidently had no conception of his meaning.

Negrete begged him to tell them all again. He repeated all that he had said,
and by introducing some illustrations from familiar things, he succeeded to a
certain extent in conveying some faint idea of the convulsion that had happened.
The event was precisely what he had foretold. The communication was received
by all alike with the most supreme indifference.

Hakkabut did not say a word. He had listened with manifest attention, his
lips twitching now and then as if suppressing a smile. Servadac turned to him,
and asked whether he was still disposed to put out to sea and make for Algiers.

The Jew gave a broad grin, which, however, he was careful to conceal from


the Spaniards. "Your Excellency jests," he said in French; and turning to Count
Timascheff, he added in Russian: "The governor has made up a wonderful tale."

The count turned his back in disgust, while the Jew sidled up to little Nina
and muttered in Italian. "A lot of lies, pretty one; a lot of lies!"

"Confound the knave!" exclaimed Ben Zoof; "he gabbles every tongue under
the sun!"

"Yes," said Servadac; "but whether he speaks French, Russian, Spanish,
German, or Italian, he is neither more nor less than a Jew."


CHAPTER XX. A LIGHT ON THE HORIZON

On the following day, without giving himself any further concern about the
Jew's incredulity, the captain gave orders for the Hansa to be shifted round to the
harbor of the Shelif. Hakkabut raised no objection, not only because he was
aware that the move insured the immediate safety of his tartan, but because he
was secretly entertaining the hope that he might entice away two or three of the
Dobryna's crew and make his escape to Algiers or some other port.

Operations now commenced for preparing proper winter quarters. Spaniards
and Russians alike joined heartily in the work, the diminution of atmospheric
pressure and of the force of attraction contributing such an increase to their
muscular force as materially facilitated all their labors.

The first business was to accommodate the building adjacent to the gourbi to
the wants of the little colony. Here for the present the Spaniards were lodged, the
Russians retaining their berths upon the yacht, while the Jew was permitted to
pass his nights upon the Hansa. This arrangement, however, could be only
temporary. The time could not be far distant when ships' sides and ordinary walls
would fail to give an adequate protection from the severity of the cold that must
be expected; the stock of fuel was too limited to keep up a permanent supply of
heat in their present quarters, and consequently they must be driven to seek some
other refuge, the internal temperature of which would at least be bearable.

The plan that seemed to commend itself most to their consideration was, that
they should dig out for themselves some subterraneous pits similar to "silos,"
such as are used as receptacles for grain. They presumed that when the surface
of Gallia should be covered by a thick layer of ice, which is a bad conductor of
heat, a sufficient amount of warmth for animal vitality might still be retained in
excavations of this kind. After a long consultation they failed to devise any
better expedient, and were forced to resign themselves to this species of
troglodyte existence.

In one respect they congratulated themselves that they should be better off


than many of the whalers in the polar seas, for as it is impossible to get below
the surface of a frozen ocean, these adventurers have to seek refuge in huts of
wood and snow erected on their ships, which at best can give but slight
protection from extreme cold; but here, with a solid subsoil, the Gallians might
hope to dig down a hundred feet or so and secure for themselves a shelter that
would enable them to brave the hardest severity of climate.

The order, then, was at once given. The work was commenced. A stock of
shovels, mattocks, and pick-axes was brought from the gourbi, and with Ben
Zoof as overseer, both Spanish majos and Russian sailors set to work with a will.

It was not long, however, before a discovery, more unexpected than
agreeable, suddenly arrested their labors. The spot chosen for the excavation was
a little to the right of the gourbi, on a slight elevation of the soil. For the first day
everything went on prosperously enough; but at a depth of eight feet below the
surface, the navvies came in contact with a hard surface, upon which all their
tools failed to make the slightest impression. Servadac and the count were at
once apprised of the fact, and had little difficulty in recognizing the substance
that had revealed itself as the very same which composed the shores as well as
the subsoil of the Gallian sea. It evidently formed the universal substructure of
the new asteroid. Means for hollowing it failed them utterly. Harder and more
resisting than granite, it could not be blasted by ordinary powder; dynamite
alone could suffice to rend it.

The disappointment was very great. Unless some means of protection were
speedily devised, death seemed to be staring them in the face. Were the figures
in the mysterious documents correct? If so, Gallia must now be a hundred
millions of leagues from the sun, nearly three times the distance of the earth at
the remotest section of her orbit. The intensity of the solar light and heat, too,
was very seriously diminishing, although Gourbi Island (being on the equator of
an orb which had its axes always perpendicular to the plane in which it revolved)
enjoyed a position that gave it a permanent summer. But no advantage of this
kind could compensate for the remoteness of the sun. The temperature fell
steadily; already, to the discomfiture of the little Italian girl, nurtured in
sunshine, ice was beginning to form in the crevices of the rocks, and manifestly
the time was impending when the sea itself would freeze.

Some shelter must be found before the temperature should fall to 60 degrees
below zero. Otherwise death was inevitable. Hitherto, for the last few days, the
thermometer had been registering an average of about 6 degrees below zero, and
it had become matter of experience that the stove, although replenished with all
the wood that was available, was altogether inadequate to effect any sensible
mitigation of the severity of the cold. Nor could any amount of fuel be enough. It


was certain that ere long the very mercury and spirit in the thermometers would
be congealed. Some other resort must assuredly be soon found, or they must
perish. That was clear.

The idea of betaking themselves to the Dobryna and Hansa could not for a
moment be seriously entertained; not only did the structure of the vessels make
them utterly insufficient to give substantial shelter, but they were totally unfitted
to be trusted as to their stability when exposed to the enormous pressure of the
accumulated ice.

Neither Servadac, nor the count, nor Lieutenant Procope were men to be
easily disheartened, but it could not be concealed that they felt themselves in
circumstances by which they were equally harassed and perplexed. The sole
expedient that their united counsel could suggest was to obtain a refuge below
ground, and that was denied them by the strange and impenetrable substratum of
the soil; yet hour by hour the sun's disc was lessening in its dimensions, and
although at midday some faint radiance and glow were to be distinguished,
during the night the painfulness of the cold was becoming almost intolerable.

Mounted upon Zephyr and Galette, the captain and the count scoured the
island in search of some available retreat. Scarcely a yard of ground was left
unexplored, the horses clearing every obstacle as if they were, like Pegasus,
furnished with wings. But all in vain. Soundings were made again and again, but
invariably with the same result; the rock, hard as adamant, never failed to reveal
itself within a few feet of the surface of the ground.

The excavation of any silo being thus manifestly hopeless, there seemed
nothing to be done except to try and render the buildings alongside the gourbi
impervious to frost. To contribute to the supply of fuel, orders were given to
collect every scrap of wood, dry or green, that the island produced; and this
involved the necessity of felling the numerous trees that were scattered over the
plain. But toil as they might at the accumulation of firewood, Captain Servadac
and his companions could not resist the conviction that the consumption of a
very short period would exhaust the total stock. And what would happen then?

Studious if possible to conceal his real misgivings, and anxious that the rest
of the party should be affected as little as might be by his own uneasiness,
Servadac would wander alone about the island, racking his brain for an idea that
would point the way out of the serious difficulty. But still all in vain.

One day he suddenly came upon Ben Zoof, and asked him whether he had no
plan to propose. The orderly shook his head, but after a few moments' pondering,
said: "Ah! master, if only we were at Montmartre, we would get shelter in the
charming stone-quartries."

"Idiot!" replied the captain, angrily, "if we were at Montmartre, you don't


suppose that we should need to live in stone-quarries?"

But the means of preservation which human ingenuity had failed to secure
were at hand from the felicitous provision of Nature herself. It was on the 10th
of March that the captain and Lieutenant Procope started off once more to
investigate the northwest corner of the island; on their way their conversation
naturally was engrossed by the subject of the dire necessities which only too
manifestly were awaiting them. A discussion more than usually animated arose
between them, for the two men were not altogether of the same mind as to the
measures that ought to be adopted in order to open the fairest chance of avoiding
a fatal climax to their exposure; the captain persisted that an entirely new abode
must be sought, while the lieutenant was equally bent upon devising a method of
some sort by which their present quarters might be rendered sufficiently warm.
All at once, in the very heat of his argument, Procope paused; he passed his hand
across his eyes, as if to dispel a mist, and stood, with a fixed gaze centered on a
point towards the south. "What is that?" he said, with a kind of hesitation. "No, I
am not mistaken," he added; "it is a light on the horizon."

"A light!" exclaimed Servadac; "show me where.”

"Look there!" answered the lieutenant, and he kept pointing steadily in its
direction, until Servadac also distinctly saw the bright speck in the distance.

It increased in clearness in the gathering shades of evening. "Can it be a
ship?" asked the captain.

"If so, it must be in flames; otherwise we should not be able to see it so far
off," replied Procope.

"It does not move," said Servadac; "and unless I am greatly deceived, I can
hear a kind of reverberation in the air."

For some seconds the two men stood straining eyes and ears in rapt attention.
Suddenly an idea struck Servadac's mind. "The volcano!" he cried; "may it not
be the volcano that we saw, whilst we were on board the Dobryna?"

The lieutenant agreed that it was very probable.

"Heaven be praised!" ejaculated the captain, and he went on in the tones of a
keen excitement: "Nature has provided us with our winter quarters; the stream of
burning lava that is flowing there is the gift of a bounteous Providence; it will
provide us all the warmth we need. No time to lose! To-morrow, my dear
Procope, to-morrow we will explore it all; no doubt the life, the heat we want is
reserved for us in the heart and bowels of our own Gallia!"

Whilst the captain was indulging in his expressions of enthusiasm, Procope
was endeavoring to collect his thoughts. Distinctly he remembered the long
promontory which had barred the Dobryna's progress while coasting the
southern confines of the sea, and which had obliged her to ascend northwards as


far as the former latitude of Oran; he remembered also that at the extremity of
the promontory there was a rocky headland crowned with smoke; and now he
was convinced that he was right in identifying the position, and in believing that
the smoke had given place to an eruption of flame.

When Servadac gave him a chance of speaking, he said, "The more I
consider it, captain, the more I am satisfied that your conjecture is correct.
Beyond a doubt, what we see is the volcano, and to-morrow we will not fail to
visit it."

On returning to the gourbi, they communicated their discovery to Count
Timascheff only, deeming any further publication of it to be premature. The
count at once placed his yacht at their disposal, and expressed his intention of
accompanying them.

"The yacht, I think," said Procope, "had better remain where she is; the
weather is beautifully calm, and the steam-launch will answer our purpose
better; at any rate, it will convey us much closer to shore than the schooner."

The count replied that the lieutenant was by all means to use his own
discretion, and they all retired for the night.

Like many other modern pleasure-yachts, the Dobryna, in addition to her
four-oar, was fitted with a fast-going little steam-launch, its screw being
propelled, on the Oriolle system, by means of a boiler, small but very effective.
Early next morning, this handy little craft was sufficiently freighted with coal (of
which there was still about ten tons on board the Dobryna), and manned by
nobody except the captain, the count, and the lieutenant, left the harbor of the
Shelif, much to the bewilderment of Ben Zoof, who had not yet been admitted
into the secret. The orderly, however, consoled himself with the reflection that he
had been temporarily invested with the full powers of governor general, an office
of which he was not a little proud.

The eighteen miles between the island and the headland were made in
something less than three hours. The volcanic eruption was manifestly very
considerable, the entire summit of the promontory being enveloped in flames. To
produce so large a combustion either the oxygen of Gallia's atmosphere had been
brought into contact with the explosive gases contained beneath her soil, or
perhaps, still more probable, the volcano, like those in the moon, was fed by an
internal supply of oxygen of her own.

It took more than half an hour to settle on a suitable landing-place. At length,
a small semi-circular creek was discovered among the rocks, which appeared
advantageous, because, if circumstances should so require, it would form a safe
anchorage for both the Dobryna and the Hansa.

The launch securely moored, the passengers landed on the side of the


promontory opposite to that on which a torrent of burning lava was descending
to the sea. With much satisfaction they experienced, as they approached the
mountain, a sensible difference in the temperature, and their spirits could not do
otherwise than rise at the prospect of having their hopes confirmed, that a
deliverance from the threatened calamity had so opportunely been found. On
they went, up the steep acclivity, scrambling over its rugged projections, scaling
the irregularities of its gigantic strata, bounding from point to point with the
agility of chamois, but never alighting on anything except on the accumulation
of the same hexagonal prisms with which they had now become so familiar.

Their exertions were happily rewarded. Behind a huge pyramidal rock they
found a hole in the mountain-side, like the mouth of a great tunnel. Climbing up
to this orifice, which was more than sixty feet above the level of the sea, they
ascertained that it opened into a long dark gallery. They entered and groped their
way cautiously along the sides. A continuous rumbling, that increased as they
advanced, made them aware that they must be approaching the central funnel of
the volcano; their only fear was lest some insuperable wall of rock should
suddenly bar their further progress.

Servadac was some distance ahead.

"Come on!" he cried cheerily, his voice ringing through the darkness, "come
on! Our fire is lighted! no stint of fuel! Nature provides that! Let us make haste
and warm ourselves!"

Inspired by his confidence, the count and the lieutenant advanced bravely
along the unseen and winding path. The temperature was now at least fifteen
degrees above zero, and the walls of the gallery were beginning to feel quite
warm to the touch, an indication, not to be overlooked, that the substance of
which the rock was composed was metallic in its nature, and capable of
conducting heat.

"Follow me!" shouted Servadac again; "we shall soon find a regular stove!"

Onwards they made their way, until at last a sharp turn brought them into a
sudden flood of light. The tunnel had opened into a vast cavern, and the gloom
was exchanged for an illumination that was perfectly dazzling. Although the
temperature was high, it was not in any way intolerable.

One glance was sufficient to satisfy the explorers that the grateful light and
heat of this huge excavation were to be attributed to a torrent of lava that was
rolling downwards to the sea, completely subtending the aperture of the cave.
Not inaptly might the scene be compared to the celebrated Grotto of the Winds at
the rear of the central fall of Niagara, only with the exception that here, instead
of a curtain of rushing water, it was a curtain of roaring flame that hung before
the cavern's mouth.


"Heaven be praised!" cried Servadac, with glad emotion; "here is all that we
hoped for, and more besides!"


CHAPTER XXI. WINTER QUARTERS

The habitation that had now revealed itself, well lighted and thoroughly
warm, was indeed marvelous. Not only would it afford ample accommodation
for Hector Servadac and "his subjects," as Ben Zoof delighted to call them, but it
would provide shelter for the two horses, and for a considerable number of
domestic animals.

This enormous cavern was neither more or less than the common junction of
nearly twenty tunnels (similar to that which had been traversed by the explorers),
forming ramifications in the solid rock, and the pores, as it were, by which the
internal heat exuded from the heart of the mountain. Here, as long as the volcano
retained its activity, every living creature on the new asteroid might brave the
most rigorous of climates; and as Count Timascheff justly remarked, since it was
the only burning mountain they had sighted, it was most probably the sole outlet
for Gallia's subterranean fires, and consequently the eruption might continue
unchanged for ages to come.

But not a day, not an hour, was to be lost now. The steam-launch returned to
Gourbi Island, and preparations were forthwith taken in hand for conveying man
and beast, corn and fodder, across to the volcanic headland. Loud and hearty
were the acclamations of the little colony, especially of the Spaniards, and great
was the relief of Nina, when Servadac announced to them the discovery of their
future domicile; and with requickened energies they labored hard at packing,
anxious to reach their genial winter quarters without delay.

For three successive days the Dobryna, laden to her very gunwale, made a
transit to and fro. Ben Zoof was left upon the island to superintend the stowage
of the freight, whilst Servadac found abundant occupation in overlooking its
disposal within the recesses of the mountain. First of all, the large store of corn
and fodder, the produce of the recent harvest, was landed and deposited in one of
the vaults; then, on the 15th, about fifty head of live cattle--bullocks, cows,
sheep, and pigs--were conveyed to their rocky stalls. These were saved for the
sake of preserving the several breeds, the bulk of the island cattle being
slaughtered, as the extreme severity of the climate insured all meat remaining
fresh for almost an indefinite period. The winter which they were expecting
would probably be of unprecedented length; it was quite likely that it would
exceed the six months’ duration by which many arctic explorers have been tried;
but the population of Gallia had no anxiety in the matter of provisions--their


stock was far more than adequate; while as for drink, as long as they were
satisfied with pure water, a frozen sea would afford them an inexhaustible
reservoir.

The need for haste in forwarding their preparations became more and more
manifest; the sea threatened to be un-navigable very soon, as ice was already
forming which the noonday sun was unable to melt. And if haste were necessary,
so also were care, ingenuity, and forethought. It was indispensable that the space
at their command should be properly utilized, and yet that the several portions of
the store should all be readily accessible.

On further investigation an unexpected number of galleries was discovered,
so that, in fact, the interior of the mountain was like a vast bee-hive perforated
with innumerable cells; and in compliment to the little Italian it was
unanimously voted by the colony that their new home should be called "Nina's
Hive."

The first care of Captain Servadac was to ascertain how he could make the
best possible use of the heat which nature had provided for them so opportunely
and with so lavish a hand. By opening fresh vents in the solid rock (which by the
action of the heat was here capable of fissure) the stream of burning lava was
diverted into several new channels, where it could be available for daily use; and
thus Mochel, the Dobryna's cook, was furnished with an admirable kitchen,
provided with a permanent stove, where he was duly installed with all his
culinary apparatus.

"What a saving of expense it would be," exclaimed Ben Zoof, "if every
household could be furnished with its own private volcano!"

The large cavern at the general junction of the galleries was fitted up as a
drawing-room, and arranged with all the best furniture both of the gourbi and of
the cabin of the Dobryna. Hither was also brought the schooner's library,
containing a good variety of French and Russian books; lamps were suspended
over the different tables; and the walls of the apartment were tapestried with the
sails and adorned with the flags belonging to the yacht. The curtain of fire
extending over the opening of the cavern provided it, as already stated, with light
and heat.

The torrent of lava fell into a small rock-bound basin that had no apparent
communication with the sea, and was evidently the aperture of a deep abyss, of
which the waters, heated by the descent of the eruptive matter, would no doubt
retain their liquid condition long after the Gallian Sea had become a sheet of ice.

A small excavation to the left of the common hall was allotted for the special
use of Servadac and the count; another on the right was appropriated to the
lieutenant and Ben Zoof; whilst a third recess, immediately at the back, made a


convenient little chamber for Nina. The Spaniards and the Russian sailors took
up their sleeping-quarters in the adjacent galleries, and found the temperature
quite comfortable.

Such were the internal arrangements of Nina's Hive, the refuge where the
little colony were full of hope that they would be able to brave the rigors of the
stern winter-time that lay before them--a winter-time during which Gallia might
possibly be projected even to the orbit of Jupiter, where the temperature would
not exceed one twenty-fifth of the normal winter temperature of the earth.

The only discontented spirit was Isaac Hakkabut. Throughout all the
preparations which roused even the Spaniards to activity, the Jew, still
incredulous and deaf to every representation of the true state of things, insisted
upon remaining in the creek at Gourbi Island; nothing could induce him to leave
his tartan, where, like a miser, he would keep guard over his precious cargo, ever
grumbling and growling, but with his weather-eye open in the hope of catching
sight of some passing sail. It must be owned that the whole party were far from
sorry to be relieved of his presence; his uncomely figure and repulsive
countenance was a perpetual bugbear. He had given out in plain terms that he did
not intend to part with any of his property, except for current money, and
Servadac, equally resolute, had strictly forbidden any purchases to be made,
hoping to wear out the rascal's obstinacy.

Hakkabut persistently refused to credit the real situation; he could not
absolutely deny that some portions of the terrestrial globe had undergone a
certain degree of modification, but nothing could bring him to believe that he
was not, sooner or later, to résumé his old line of business in the Mediterranean.
With his wonted distrust of all with whom he came in contact, he regarded every
argument that was urged upon him only as evidence of a plot that had been
devised to deprive him of his goods. Repudiating, as he did utterly, the
hypothesis that a fragment had become detached from the earth, he scanned the
horizon for hours together with an old telescope, the case of which had been
patched up till it looked like a rusty stove-pipe, hoping to descry the passing
trader with which he might effect some bartering upon advantageous terms.

At first he professed to regard the proposed removal into winter-quarters as
an attempt to impose upon his credulity; but the frequent voyages made by the
Dobryna to the south, and the repeated consignments of corn and cattle, soon
served to make him aware that Captain Servadac and his companions were really
contemplating a departure from Gourbi Island.

The movement set him thinking. What, he began to ask himself--what if all
that was told him was true? What if this sea was no longer the Mediterranean?
What if he should never again behold his German fatherland? What if his marts


for business were gone for ever? A vague idea of ruin began to take possession
of his mind: he must yield to necessity; he must do the best he could. As the
result of his cogitations, he occasionally left his tartan and made a visit to the
shore. At length he endeavored to mingle with the busy group, who were
hurrying on their preparations; but his advances were only met by jeers and
scorn, and, ridiculed by all the rest, he was fain to turn his attention to Ben Zoof,
to whom he offered a few pinches of tobacco.

"No, old Zebulon," said Ben Zoof, steadily refusing the gift, "it is against
orders to take anything from you. Keep your cargo to yourself; eat and drink it
all if you can; we are not to touch it."

Finding the subordinates incorruptible, Isaac determined to go to the
fountain-head. He addressed himself to Servadac, and begged him to tell him the
whole truth, piteously adding that surely it was unworthy of a French officer to
deceive a poor old man like himself.

"Tell you the truth, man!" cried Servadac. "Confound it, I have told you the
truth twenty times. Once for all, I tell you now, you have left yourself barely
time enough to make your escape to yonder mountain."

"God and Mahomet have mercy on me!" muttered the Jew, whose creed
frequently assumed a very ambiguous character.

"IT will tell you what," continued the captain--"you shall have a few men to
work the Hansa across, if you like."

"But I want to go to Algiers," whimpered Hakkabut.

"How often am I to tell you that Algiers is no longer in existence? Only say
yes or no--are you coming with us into winter-quarters?"

"God of Israel! what is to become of all my property?"

"But, mind you," continued the captain, not heeding the interruption, "if you
do not choose voluntarily to come with us, I shall have the Hansa, by my orders,
removed to a place of safety. I am not going to let your cursed obstinacy incur
the risk of losing your cargo altogether."

"Merciful Heaven! I shall be ruined!" moaned Isaac, in despair.

"You are going the right way to ruin yourself, and it would serve you right to
leave you to your own devices. But be off! I have no more to say."

And, turning contemptuously on his heel, Servadac left the old man
vociferating bitterly, and with uplifted hands protesting vehemently against the
rapacity of the Gentiles.

By the 20th all preliminary arrangements were complete, and everything
ready for a final departure from the island. The thermometer stood on an average
at 8 degrees below zero, and the water in the cistern was completely frozen. It
was determined, therefore, for the colony to embark on the following day, and


take up their residence in Nina's Hive.

A final consultation was held about the Hansa. Lieutenant Procope
pronounced his decided conviction that it would be impossible for the tartan to
resist the pressure of the ice in the harbor of the Shelif, and that there would be
far more safety in the proximity of the volcano. It was agreed on all hands that
the vessel must be shifted; and accordingly orders were given, four Russian
sailors were sent on board, and only a few minutes elapsed after the Dobryna
had weighed anchor, before the great lateen sail of the tartan was unfurled, and
the "shop-ship," as Ben Zoof delighted to call it, was also on her way to the
southward.

Long and loud were the lamentations of the Jew. He kept exclaiming that he
had given no orders, that he was being moved against his will, that he had asked
for no assistance, and needed none; but it required no very keen discrimination
to observe that all along there was a lurking gleam of satisfaction in his little
gray eyes, and when, a few hours later, he found himself securely anchored, and
his property in a place of safety, he quite chuckled with glee.

"God of Israel!" he said in an undertone, "they have made no charge; the
idiots have piloted me here for nothing."

For nothing! His whole nature exulted in the consciousness that he was
enjoying a service that had been rendered gratuitously.

Destitute of human inhabitants, Gourbi Island was now left to the tenancy of
such birds and beasts as had escaped the recent promiscuous slaughter. Birds,
indeed, that had migrated in search of warmer shores, had returned, proving that
this fragment of the French colony was the only shred of land that could yield
them any sustenance; but their life must necessarily be short. It was utterly
impossible that they could survive the cold that would soon ensue.

The colony took possession of their new abode with but few formalities.
Everyone, however, approved of all the internal arrangements of Nina's Hive,
and were profuse in their expressions of satisfaction at finding themselves
located in such comfortable quarters. The only malcontent was Hakkabut; he had
no share in the general enthusiasm, refused even to enter or inspect any of the
galleries, and insisted on remaining on board his tartan.

"He is afraid," said Ben Zoof, "that he will have to pay for his lodgings. But
wait a bit; we shall see how he stands the cold out there; the frost, no doubt, will
drive the old fox out of his hole."

Towards evening the pots were set boiling, and a bountiful supper, to which
all were invited, was spread in the central hall. The stores of the Dobryna
contained some excellent wine, some of which was broached to do honor to the
occasion. The health of the governor general was drunk, as well as the toast


"Success to his council," to which Ben Zoof was called upon to return thanks.
The entertainment passed off merrily. The Spaniards were in the best of spirits;
one of them played the guitar, another the castanets, and the rest joined in a
ringing chorus. Ben Zoof contributed the famous Zouave refrain, well known
throughout the French army, but rarely performed in finer style than by this
virtuoso:

"Misti goth dar dar tire lyre! Flic! floc! flac! lirette, lira! Far la rira, Tour
tala rire, Tour la Ribaud, Ricandeau, Sans repos, repit, repit, repos, ris pot,
ripette! Si vous attrapez mon refrain, Fameux vous etes."

The concert was succeeded by a ball, unquestionably the first that had ever
taken place in Gallia. The Russian sailors exhibited some of their national
dances, which gained considerable applause, even although they followed upon
the marvelous fandangos of the Spaniards. Ben Zoof, in his turn, danced a pas
seul (often performed in the Elysee Montmartre) with an elegance and vigor that
earned many compliments from Negrete.

It was nine o'clock before the festivities came to an end, and by that time the
company, heated by the high temperature of the hall, and by their own exertions,
felt the want of a little fresh air. Accordingly the greater portion of the party,
escorted by Ben Zoof, made their way into one of the adjacent galleries that led
to the shore. Servadac, with the count and lieutenant, did not follow
immediately; but shortly afterwards they proceeded to join them, when on their
way they were startled by loud cries from those in advance.

Their first impression was that they were cries of distress, and they were
greatly relieved to find that they were shouts of delight, which the dryness and
purity of the atmosphere caused to re-echo like a volley of musketry.

Reaching the mouth of the gallery, they found the entire group pointing with
eager interest to the sky.

"Well, Ben Zoof," asked the captain, "what's the matter now?"

"Oh, your Excellency," ejaculated the orderly, "look there! look there! The
moon! the moon's come back!"

And, sure enough, what was apparently the moon was rising above the mists
of evening.


CHAPTER XXII. AFROZEN OCEAN

The moon! She had disappeared for weeks; was she now returning? Had she
been faithless to the earth? and had she now approached to be a satellite of the
new-born world?

"Impossible!" said Lieutenant Procope; "the earth is millions and millions of


leagues away, and it is not probable that the moon has ceased to revolve about
her."

"Why not?" remonstrated Servadac. "It would not be more strange than the
other phenomena which we have lately witnessed. Why should not the moon
have fallen within the limits of Gallia's attraction, and become her satellite?"

"Upon that supposition,” put in the count, "I should think that it would be
altogether unlikely that three months would elapse without our seeing her."

"Quite incredible!" continued Procope. "And there is another thing which
totally disproves the captain's hypothesis; the magnitude of Gallia is far too
insignificant for her power of attraction to carry off the moon."

"But," persisted Servadac, "why should not the same convulsion that tore us
away from the earth have torn away the moon as well? After wandering about as
she would for a while in the solar regions, I do not see why she should not have
attached herself to us."

The lieutenant repeated his conviction that it was not likely.

"But why not?” again asked Servadac impetuously.

"Because, I tell you, the mass of Gallia is so inferior to that of the moon, that
Gallia would become the moon's satellite; the moon could not possibly become
hers."

"Assuming, however," continued Servadac, "such to be the case--"

"IT am afraid," said the lieutenant, interrupting him, "that I cannot assume
anything of the sort even for a moment."

Servadac smiled good-humoredly.

"I confess you seem to have the best of the argument, and if Gallia had
become a satellite of the moon, it would not have taken three months to catch
sight of her. I suppose you are right."

While this discussion had been going on, the satellite, or whatever it might
be, had been rising steadily above the horizon, and had reached a position
favorable for observation. Telescopes were brought, and it was very soon
ascertained, beyond a question, that the new luminary was not the well-known
Phoebe of terrestrial nights; it had no feature in common with the moon.
Although it was apparently much nearer to Gallia than the moon to the earth, its
superficies was hardly one-tenth as large, and so feebly did it reflect the light of
the remote sun, that it scarcely emitted radiance enough to extinguish the dim
luster of stars of the eighth magnitude. Like the sun, it had risen in the west, and
was now at its full. To mistake its identity with the moon was absolutely
impossible; not even Servadac could discover a trace of the seas, chasms,
craters, and mountains which have been so minutely delineated in lunar charts,
and it could not be denied that any transient hope that had been excited as to


their once again being about to enjoy the peaceful smiles of "the queen of night"
must all be resigned.

Count Timascheff finally suggested, though somewhat doubtfully, the
question of the probability that Gallia, in her course across the zone of the minor
planets, had carried off one of them; but whether it was one of the 169 asteroids
already included in the astronomical catalogues, or one previously unknown, he
did not presume to determine. The idea to a certain extent was plausible,
inasmuch as it has been ascertained that several of the telescopic planets are of
such small dimensions that a good walker might make a circuit of them in four
and twenty hours; consequently Gallia, being of superior volume, might be
supposed capable of exercising a power of attraction upon any of these miniature
microcosms.

The first night in Nina's Hive passed without special incident; and next
morning a regular scheme of life was definitely laid down. "My lord governor,"
as Ben Zoof until he was peremptorily forbidden delighted to call Servadac, had
a wholesome dread of idleness and its consequences, and insisted upon each
member of the party undertaking some special duty to fulfill. There was plenty
to do. The domestic animals required a great deal of attention; a supply of food
had to be secured and preserved; fishing had to be carried on while the condition
of the sea would allow it; and in several places the galleries had to be further
excavated to render them more available for use. Occupation, then, need never
be wanting, and the daily round of labor could go on in orderly routine.

A perfect concord ruled the little colony. The Russians and Spaniards
amalgamated well, and both did their best to pick up various scraps of French,
which was considered the official language of the place. Servadac himself
undertook the tuition of Pablo and Nina, Ben Zoof being their companion in
play-hours, when he entertained them with enchanting stories in the best Parisian
French, about "a lovely city at the foot of a mountain," where he always
promised one day to take them.

The end of March came, but the cold was not intense to such a degree as to
confine any of the party to the interior of their resort; several excursions were
made along the shore, and for a radius of three or four miles the adjacent district
was carefully explored. Investigation, however, always ended in the same result;
turn their course in whatever direction they would, they found that the country
retained everywhere its desert character, rocky, barren, and without a trace of
vegetation. Here and there a slight layer of snow, or a thin coating of ice arising
from atmospheric condensation indicated the existence of superficial moisture,
but it would require a period indefinitely long, exceeding human reckoning,
before that moisture could collect into a stream and roll downwards over the


stony strata to the sea. It seemed at present out of their power to determine
whether the land upon which they were so happily settled was an island or a
continent, and till the cold was abated they feared to undertake any lengthened
expedition to ascertain the actual extent of the strange concrete of metallic
crystallization.

By ascending one day to the summit of the volcano, Captain Servadac and
the count succeeded in getting a general idea of the aspect of the country. The
mountain itself was an enormous block rising symmetrically to a height of nearly
3,000 feet above the level of the sea, in the form of a truncated cone, of which
the topmost section was crowned by a wreath of smoke issuing continuously
from the mouth of a narrow crater.

Under the old condition of terrestrial things, the ascent of this steep acclivity
would have been attended with much fatigue, but as the effect of the altered
condition of the law of gravity, the travelers performed perpetual prodigies in the
way of agility, and in little over an hour reached the edge of the crater, without
more sense of exertion than if they had traversed a couple of miles on level
ground. Gallia had its drawbacks, but it had some compensating advantages.

Telescopes in hand, the explorers from the summit scanned the surrounding
view. Their anticipations had already realized what they saw. Just as they
expected, on the north, east, and west lay the Gallian Sea, smooth and
motionless as a sheet of glass, the cold having, as it were, congealed the
atmosphere so that there was not a breath of wind. Towards the south there
seemed no limit to the land, and the volcano formed the apex of a triangle, of
which the base was beyond the reach of vision. Viewed even from this height,
whence distance would do much to soften the general asperity, the surface
nevertheless seemed to be bristling with its myriads of hexagonal lamellae, and
to present difficulties which, to an ordinary pedestrian, would be
insurmountable.

"Oh for some wings, or else a balloon!" cried Servadac, as he gazed around
him; and then, looking down to the rock upon which they were standing, he
added, "We seem to have been transplanted to a soil strange enough in its
chemical character to bewilder the savants at a museum."

"And do you observe, captain,” asked the count, "how the convexity of our
little world curtails our view? See, how circumscribed is the horizon!"

Servadac replied that he had noticed the same circumstance from the top of
the cliffs of Gourbi Island.

"Yes," said the count; "it becomes more and more obvious that ours is a very
tiny world, and that Gourbi Island is the sole productive spot upon its surface.
We have had a short summer, and who knows whether we are not entering upon


a winter that may last for years, perhaps for centuries?"

"But we must not mind, count," said Servadac, smiling. "We have agreed,
you know, that, come what may, we are to be philosophers."

"Ay, true, my friend," rejoined the count; "we must be philosophers and
something more; we must be grateful to the good Protector who has hitherto
befriended us, and we must trust His mercy to the end."

For a few moments they both stood in silence, and contemplated land and
sea; then, having given a last glance over the dreary panorama, they prepared to
wend their way down the mountain. Before, however, they commenced their
descent, they resolved to make a closer examination of the crater. They were
particularly struck by what seemed to them almost the mysterious calmness with
which the eruption was effected. There was none of the wild disorder and
deafening tumult that usually accompany the discharge of volcanic matter, but
the heated lava, rising with a uniform gentleness, quietly overran the limits of
the crater, like the flow of water from the bosom of a peaceful lake. Instead of a
boiler exposed to the action of an angry fire, the crater rather resembled a
brimming basin, of which the contents were noiselessly escaping. Nor were there
any igneous stones or red-hot cinders mingled with the smoke that crowned the
summit; a circumstance that quite accorded with the absence of the pumice-
stones, obsidians, and other minerals of volcanic origin with which the base of a
burmming mountain is generally strewn.

Captain Servadac was of opinion that this peculiarity augured favorably for
the continuance of the eruption. Extreme violence in physical, as well as in
moral nature, is never of long duration. The most terrible storms, like the most
violent fits of passion, are not lasting; but here the calm flow of the liquid fire
appeared to be supplied from a source that was inexhaustible, in the same way as
the waters of Niagara, gliding on steadily to their final plunge, would defy all
effort to arrest their course.

Before the evening of this day closed in, a most important change was
effected in the condition of the Gallian Sea by the intervention of human agency.
Notwithstanding the increasing cold, the sea, unruffled as it was by a breath of
wind, still retained its liquid state. It is an established fact that water, under this
condition of absolute stillness, will remain uncongealed at a temperature several
degrees below zero, whilst experiment, at the same time, shows that a very slight
shock will often be sufficient to convert it into solid ice. It had occurred to
Servadac that if some communication could be opened with Gourbi Island, there
would be a fine scope for hunting expeditions. Having this ultimate object in
view, he assembled his little colony upon a projecting rock at the extremity of
the promontory, and having called Nina and Pablo out to him in front, he said:


"Now, Nina, do you think you could throw something into the sea?"

"T think I could," replied the child, "but I am sure that Pablo would throw it a
great deal further than I can."

"Never mind, you shall try first."

Putting a fragment of ice into Nina's hand, he addressed himself to Pablo:

"Look out, Pablo; you shall see what a nice little fairy Nina is! Throw, Nina,
throw, as hard as you can."

Nina balanced the piece of ice two or three times in her hand, and threw it
forward with all her strength.

A sudden thrill seemed to vibrate across the motionless waters to the distant
horizon, and the Gallian Sea had become a solid sheet of ice!


CHAPTER XXIII. ACARRIER-PIGEON

When, three hours after sunset, on the 23d of March, the Gallian moon rose
upon the western horizon, it was observed that she had entered upon her last
quarter. She had taken only four days to pass from syzygy to quadrature, and it
was consequently evident that she would be visible for little more than a week at
a time, and that her lunation would be accomplished within sixteen days. The
lunar months, like the solar days, had been diminished by one-half. Three days
later the moon was in conjunction with the sun, and was consequently lost to
view; Ben Zoof, as the first observer of the satellite, was extremely interested in
its movements, and wondered whether it would ever reappear.

On the 26th, under an atmosphere perfectly clear and dry, the thermometer
fell to 12 degrees F. below zero. Of the present distance of Gallia from the sun,
and the number of leagues she had traversed since the receipt of the last
mysterious document, there were no means of judging; the extent of diminution
in the apparent disc of the sun did not afford sufficient basis even for an
approximate calculation; and Captain Servadac was perpetually regretting that
they could receive no further tidings from the anonymous correspondent, whom
he persisted in regarding as a fellow-countryman.

The solidity of the ice was perfect; the utter stillness of the air at the time
when the final congelation of the waters had taken place had resulted in the
formation of a surface that for smoothness would rival a skating-rink; without a
crack or flaw it extended far beyond the range of vision.

The contrast to the ordinary aspect of polar seas was very remarkable. There,
the ice-fields are an agglomeration of hummocks and icebergs, massed in wild
confusion, often towering higher than the masts of the largest whalers, and from
the instability of their foundations liable to an instantaneous loss of equilibrium;


a breath of wind, a slight modification of the temperature, not unfrequently
serving to bring about a series of changes outrivaling the most elaborate
transformation scenes of a pantomime. Here, on the contrary, the vast white plain
was level as the desert of Sahara or the Russian steppes; the waters of the
Gallian Sea were imprisoned beneath the solid sheet, which became continually
stouter in the increasing cold.

Accustomed to the uneven crystallizations of their own frozen seas, the
Russians could not be otherwise than delighted with the polished surface that
afforded them such excellent opportunity for enjoying their favorite pastime of
skating. A supply of skates, found hidden away amongst the Dobryna's stores,
was speedily brought into use. The Russians undertook the instruction of the
Spaniards, and at the end of a few days, during which the temperature was only
endurable through the absence of wind, there was not a Gallian who could not
skate tolerably well, while many of them could describe figures involving the
most complicated curves. Nina and Pablo earned loud applause by their rapid
proficiency; Captain Servadac, an adept in athletics, almost outvied his
instructor, the count; and Ben Zoof, who had upon some rare occasions skated
upon the Lake of Montmartre (in his eyes, of course, a sea), performed prodigies
in the art.

This exercise was not only healthful in itself, but it was acknowledged that,
in case of necessity, it might become a very useful means of locomotion. As
Captain Servadac remarked, it was almost a substitute for railways, and as if to
illustrate this proposition, Lieutenant Procope, perhaps the greatest expert in the
party, accomplished the twenty miles to Gourbi Island and back in considerably
less than four hours.

The temperature, meanwhile, continued to decrease, and the average reading
of the thermometer was about 16 degrees F. below zero; the light also
diminished in proportion, and all objects appeared to be enveloped in a half-
defined shadow, as though the sun were undergoing a perpetual eclipse. It was
not surprising that the effect of this continuously overhanging gloom should be
to induce a frequent depression of spirits amongst the majority of the little
population, exiles as they were from their mother earth, and not unlikely, as it
seemed, to be swept far away into the regions of another planetary sphere.
Probably Count Timascheff, Captain Servadac, and Lieutenant Procope were the
only members of the community who could bring any scientific judgment to bear
upon the uncertainty that was before them, but a general sense of the strangeness
of their situation could not fail at times to weigh heavily upon the minds of all.
Under these circumstances it was very necessary to counteract the tendency to
despond by continual diversion; and the recreation of skating thus opportunely


provided, seemed just the thing to arouse the flagging spirits, and to restore a
wholesome excitement.

With dogged obstinacy, Isaac Hakkabut refused to take any share either in
the labors or the amusements of the colony. In spite of the cold, he had not been
seen since the day of his arrival from Gourbi Island. Captain Servadac had
strictly forbidden any communication with him; and the smoke that rose from
the cabin chimney of the Hansa was the sole indication of the proprietor being
still on board. There was nothing to prevent him, if he chose, from partaking
gratuitously of the volcanic light and heat which were being enjoyed by all
besides; but rather than abandon his close and personal oversight of his precious
cargo, he preferred to sacrifice his own slender stock of fuel.

Both the schooner and the tartan had been carefully moored in the way that
seemed to promise best for withstanding the rigor of the winter. After seeing the
vessels made secure in the frozen creek. Lieutenant Procope, following the
example of many Arctic explorers, had the precaution to have the ice beveled
away from the keels, so that there should be no risk of the ships' sides being
crushed by the increasing pressure; he hoped that they would follow any rise in
the level of the ice-field, and when the thaw should come, that they would easily
regain their proper water-line.

On his last visit to Gourbi Island, the lieutenant had ascertained that north,
east, and west, far as the eye could reach, the Gallian Sea had become one
uniform sheet of ice. One spot alone refused to freeze; this was the pool
immediately below the central cavern, the receptacle for the stream of burning
lava. It was entirely enclosed by rocks, and if ever a few icicles were formed
there by the action of the cold, they were very soon melted by the fiery shower.
Hissing and spluttering as the hot lava came in contact with it, the water was ina
continual state of ebullition, and the fish that abounded in its depths defied the
angler's craft; they were, as Ben Zoof remarked, "too much boiled to bite."

At the beginning of April the weather changed. The sky became overcast, but
there was no rise in the temperature. Unlike the polar winters of the earth, which
ordinarily are affected by atmospheric influence, and liable to slight
intermissions of their severity at various shiftings of the wind, Gallia's winter
was caused by her immense distance from the source of all light and heat, and
the cold was consequently destined to go on steadily increasing until it reached
the limit ascertained by Fourier to be the normal temperature of the realms of
space.

With the over-clouding of the heavens there arose a violent tempest; but
although the wind raged with an almost inconceivable fury, it was
unaccompanied by either snow or rain. Its effect upon the burning curtain that


covered the aperture of the central hall was very remarkable. So far from there
being any likelihood of the fire being extinguished by the vehemence of the
current of air, the hurricane seemed rather to act as a ventilator, which fanned the
flame into greater activity, and the utmost care was necessary to avoid being
burnt by the fragments of lava that were drifted into the interior of the grotto.
More than once the curtain itself was rifted entirely asunder, but only to close up
again immediately after allowing a momentary draught of cold air to penetrate
the hall in a way that was refreshing and rather advantageous than otherwise.

On the 4th of April, after an absence of about four days, the new satellite, to
Ben Zoof's great satisfaction, made its reappearance in a crescent form, a
circumstance that seemed to justify the anticipation that henceforward it would
continue to make a periodic revolution every fortnight.

The crust of ice and snow was far too stout for the beaks of the strongest
birds to penetrate, and accordingly large swarms had left the island, and,
following the human population, had taken refuge on the volcanic promontory;
not that there the barren shore had anything in the way of nourishment to offer
them, but their instinct impelled them to haunt now the very habitations which
formerly they would have shunned. Scraps of food were thrown to them from the
galleries; these were speedily devoured, but were altogether inadequate in
quantity to meet the demand. At length, emboldened by hunger, several hundred
birds ventured through the tunnel, and took up their quarters actually in Nina's
Hive. Congregating in the large hall, the half-famished creatures did not hesitate
to snatch bread, meat, or food of any description from the hands of the residents
as they sat at table, and soon became such an intolerable nuisance that it formed
one of the daily diversions to hunt them down; but although they were
vigorously attacked by stones and sticks, and even occasionally by shot, it was
with some difficulty that their number could be sensibly reduced.

By a systematic course of warfare the bulk of the birds were all expelled,
with the exception of about a hundred, which began to build in the crevices of
the rocks. These were left in quiet possession of their quarters, as not only was it
deemed advisable to perpetuate the various breeds, but it was found that these
birds acted as a kind of police, never failing either to chase away or to kill any
others of their species who infringed upon what they appeared to regard as their
own special privilege in intruding within the limits of their domain.

On the 15th loud cries were suddenly heard issuing from the mouth of the
principal gallery.

"Help, help! I shall be killed!"

Pablo in a moment recognized the voice as Nina's. Outrunning even Ben
Zoof he hurried to the assistance of his little playmate, and discovered that she


was being attacked by half a dozen great sea-gulls, and only after receiving some
severe blows from their beaks could he succeed by means of a stout cudgel in
driving them away.

"Tell me, Nina, what is this?" he asked as soon as the tumult had subsided.

The child pointed to a bird which she was caressing tenderly in her bosom.

"A pigeon!" exclaimed Ben Zoof, who had reached the scene of commotion,
adding:

"A carrier-pigeon! And by all the saints of Montmartre, there is a little bag
attached to its neck!"

He took the bird, and rushing into the hall placed it in Servadac's hands.

"Another message, no doubt," cried the captain, "from our unknown friend.
Let us hope that this time he has given us his name and address."

All crowded round, eager to hear the news. In the struggle with the gulls the
bag had been partially torn open, but still contained the following dispatch:

"Gallia!

Chemin parcouru du ler Mars au ler Avril: 39,000,000 1.!

Distance du soleil: 110,000,000 1.!

Capte Nerina en passant.

Vivres vont manquer et..."

The rest of the document had been so damaged by the beaks of the gulls that
it was illegible. Servadac was wild with vexation. He felt more and more
convinced that the writer was a Frenchman, and that the last line indicated that
he was in distress from scarcity of food. The very thought of a fellow-
countryman in peril of starvation drove him well-nigh to distraction, and it was
in vain that search was made everywhere near the scene of conflict in hopes of
finding the missing scrap that might bear a signature or address.

Suddenly little Nina, who had again taken possession of the pigeon, and was
hugging it to her breast, said:

"Look here, Ben Zoof!"

And as she spoke she pointed to the left wing of the bird. The wing bore the
faint impress of a postage-stamp, and the one word: "FORMENTERA."


CHAPTER XXIV. A SLEDGE-RIDE

Formentera was at once recognized by Servadac and the count as the name
of one of the smallest of the Balearic Islands. It was more than probable that the
unknown writer had thence sent out the mysterious documents, and from the
message just come to hand by the carrier-pigeon, it appeared all but certain that
at the beginning of April, a fortnight back, he had still been there. In one


important particular the present communication differed from those that had
preceded it: it was written entirely in French, and exhibited none of the ecstatic
exclamations in other languages that had been remarkable in the two former
papers. The concluding line, with its intimation of failing provisions, amounted
almost to an appeal for help. Captain Servadac briefly drew attention to these
points, and concluded by saying, "My friends, we must, without delay, hasten to
the assistance of this unfortunate man."

"For my part,” said the count, "I am quite ready to accompany you; it is not
unlikely that he is not alone in his distress."

Lieutenant Procope expressed much surprise. "We must have passed close to
Formentera," he said, "when we explored the site of the Balearic Isles; this
fragment must be very small; it must be smaller than the remaining splinter of
Gibraltar or Ceuta; otherwise, surely it would never have escaped our
observation."

"However small it may be," replied Servadac, "we must find it. How far off
do you suppose it is?"

"It must be a hundred and twenty leagues away," said the lieutenant,
thoughtfully; "and I do not quite understand how you would propose to get
there."

"Why, on skates of course; no difficulty in that, I should imagine," answered
Servadac, and he appealed to the count for confirmation of his opinion.

The count assented, but Procope looked doubtful.

"Your enterprise is generous,” he said, "and I should be most unwilling to
throw any unnecessary obstacle in the way of its execution; but, pardon me, if I
submit to you a few considerations which to my mind are very important. First
of all, the thermometer is already down to 22 degrees below zero, and the keen
wind from the south is making the temperature absolutely unendurable; in the
second place, supposing you travel at the rate of twenty leagues a day, you
would be exposed for at least six consecutive days; and thirdly, your expedition
will be of small avail unless you convey provisions not only for yourselves, but
for those whom you hope to relieve."

"We can carry our own provisions on our backs in knapsacks," interposed
Servadac, quickly, unwilling to recognize any difficulty in the way.

"Granted that you can," answered the lieutenant, quietly; "but where, on this
level ice-field, will you find shelter in your periods of rest? You must perish with
cold; you will not have the chance of digging out ice-huts like the Esquimaux."

"As to rest," said Servadac, "we shall take none; we shall keep on our way
continuously; by traveling day and night without intermission, we shall not be
more than three days in reaching Formentera."


"Believe me," persisted the lieutenant, calmly, "your enthusiasm is carrying
you too far; the feat you propose is impossible; but even conceding the
possibility of your success in reaching your destination, what service do you
imagine that you, half-starved and half-frozen yourself, could render to those
who are already perishing by want and exposure? you would only bring them
away to die."

The obvious and dispassionate reasoning of the lieutenant could not fail to
impress the minds of those who listened to him; the impracticability of the
journey became more and more apparent; unprotected on that drear expanse, any
traveler must assuredly succumb to the snow-drifts that were continually being
whirled across it. But Hector Servadac, animated by the generous desire of
rescuing a suffering fellow-creature, could scarcely be brought within the bounds
of common sense. Against his better judgment he was still bent upon the
expedition, and Ben Zoof declared himself ready to accompany his master in the
event of Count Timascheff hesitating to encounter the peril which the
undertaking involved. But the count entirely repudiated all idea of shrinking
from what, quite as much as the captain, he regarded as a sacred duty, and
turning to Lieutenant Procope, told him that unless some better plan could be
devised, he was prepared to start off at once and make the attempt to skate across
to Formentera. The lieutenant, who was lost in thought, made no immediate
reply.

"I wish we had a sledge," said Ben Zoof.

"I dare say that a sledge of some sort could be contrived," said the count;
"but then we should have no dogs or reindeers to draw it."

"Why not rough-shoe the two horses?"

"They would never be able to endure the cold," objected the count.

"Never mind," said Servadac, "let us get our sledge and put them to the test.
Something must be done!"

"I think," said Lieutenant Procope, breaking his thoughtful silence, "that I
can tell you of a sledge already provided for your hand, and I can suggest a
motive power surer and swifter than horses."

"What do you mean?" was the eager inquiry.

"I mean the Dobryna's yawl," answered the lieutenant; "and I have no doubt
that the wind would carry her rapidly along the ice."

The idea seemed admirable. Lieutenant Procope was well aware to what
marvelous perfection the Americans had brought their sail-sledges, and had
heard how in the vast prairies of the United States they had been known to
outvie the speed of an express train, occasionally attaining a rate of more than a
hundred miles an hour. The wind was still blowing hard from the south, and


assuming that the yawl could be propelled with a velocity of about fifteen or at
least twelve leagues an hour, he reckoned that it was quite possible to reach
Formentera within twelve hours, that is to say, in a single day between the
intervals of sunrise and sunrise.

The yawl was about twelve feet long, and capable of holding five or six
people. The addition of a couple of iron runners would be all that was requisite
to convert it into an excellent sledge, which, if a sail were hoisted, might be
deemed certain to make a rapid progress over the smooth surface of the ice. For
the protection of the passengers it was proposed to erect a kind of wooden roof
lined with strong cloth; beneath this could be packed a supply of provisions,
some warm furs, some cordials, and a portable stove to be heated by spirits of
wine.

For the outward journey the wind was as favorable as could be desired; but it
was to be apprehended that, unless the direction of the wind should change, the
return would be a matter of some difficulty; a system of tacking might be carried
out to a certain degree, but it was not likely that the yawl would answer her helm
in any way corresponding to what would occur in the open sea. Captain
Servadac, however, would not listen to any representation of probable
difficulties; the future, he said, must provide for itself.

The engineer and several of the sailors set vigorously to work, and before the
close of the day the yawl was furnished with a pair of stout iron runners, curved
upwards in front, and fitted with a metal scull designed to assist in maintaining
the directness of her course; the roof was put on, and beneath it were stored the
provisions, the wraps, and the cooking utensils.

A strong desire was expressed by Lieutenant Procope that he should be
allowed to accompany Captain Servadac instead of Count Timascheff. It was
unadvisable for all three of them to go, as, in case of there being several persons
to be rescued, the space at their command would be quite inadequate. The
lieutenant urged that he was the most experienced seaman, and as such was best
qualified to take command of the sledge and the management of the sails; and as
it was not to be expected that Servadac would resign his intention of going in
person to relieve his fellow-countryman, Procope submitted his own wishes to
the count. The count was himself very anxious to have his share in the
philanthropic enterprise, and demurred considerably to the proposal; he yielded,
however, after a time, to Servadac's representations that in the event of the
expedition proving disastrous, the little colony would need his services alike as
governor and protector, and overcoming his reluctance to be left out of the
perilous adventure, was prevailed upon to remain behind for the general good of
the community at Nina's Hive.


At sunrise on the following morning, the 16th of April, Captain Servadac and
the lieutenant took their places in the yawl. The thermometer was more than 20
degrees below zero, and it was with deep emotion that their companions beheld
them thus embarking upon the vast white plain. Ben Zoof's heart was too full for
words; Count Timascheff could not forbear pressing his two brave friends to his
bosom; the Spaniards and the Russian sailors crowded round for a farewell shake
of the hand, and little Nina, her great eyes flooded with tears, held up her face
for a parting kiss. The sad scene was not permitted to be long. The sail was
quickly hoisted, and the sledge, just as if it had expanded a huge white wing, was
in a little while carried far away beyond the horizon.

Light and unimpeded, the yawl scudded on with incredible speed. Two sails,
a brigantine and a jib, were arranged to catch the wind to the greatest advantage,
and the travelers estimated that their progress would be little under the rate of
twelve leagues an hour. The motion of their novel vehicle was singularly gentle,
the oscillation being less than that of an ordinary railway-carriage, while the
diminished force of gravity contributed to the swiftness. Except that the clouds
of ice-dust raised by the metal runners were an evidence that they had not
actually left the level surface of the ice, the captain and lieutenant might again
and again have imagined that they were being conveyed through the air in a
balloon.

Lieutenant Procope, with his head all muffled up for fear of frost-bite, took
an occasional peep through an aperture that had been intentionally left in the
roof, and by the help of a compass, maintained a proper and straight course for
Formentera. Nothing could be more dejected than the aspect of that frozen sea;
not a single living creature relieved the solitude; both the travelers, Procope from
a scientific point of view, Servadac from an aesthetic, were alike impressed by
the solemnity of the scene, and where the lengthened shadow of the sail cast
upon the ice by the oblique rays of the setting sun had disappeared, and day had
given place to night, the two men, drawn together as by an involuntary impulse,
mutually held each other's hands in silence.

There had been a new moon on the previous evening; but, in the absence of
moonlight, the constellations shone with remarkable brilliancy. The new pole-
star close upon the horizon was resplendent, and even had Lieutenant Procope
been destitute of a compass, he would have had no difficulty in holding his
course by the guidance of that alone. However great was the distance that
separated Gallia from the sun, it was after all manifestly insignificant in
comparison with the remoteness of the nearest of the fixed stars.

Observing that Servadac was completely absorbed in his own thoughts,
Lieutenant Procope had leisure to contemplate some of the present perplexing


problems, and to ponder over the true astronomical position. The last of the three
mysterious documents had represented that Gallia, in conformity with Kepler's
second law, had traveled along her orbit during the month of March twenty
millions of leagues less than she had done in the previous month; yet, in the
same time, her distance from the sun had nevertheless been increased by thirty-
two millions of leagues. She was now, therefore, in the center of the zone of
telescopic planets that revolve between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter, and had
captured for herself a satellite which, according to the document, was Nerina,
one of the asteroids most recently identified. If thus, then, it was within the
power of the unknown writer to estimate with such apparent certainty Gallia's
exact position, was it not likely that his mathematical calculations would enable
him to arrive at some definite conclusion as to the date at which she would begin
again to approach the sun? Nay, was it not to be expected that he had already
estimated, with sufficient approximation to truth, what was to be the true length
of the Gallian year?

So intently had they each separately been following their own train of
thought, that daylight reappeared almost before the travelers were aware of it.
On consulting their instruments, they found that they must have traveled close
upon a hundred leagues since they started, and they resolved to slacken their
speed. The sails were accordingly taken in a little, and in spite of the intensity of
the cold, the explorers ventured out of their shelter, in order that they might
reconnoiter the plain, which was apparently as boundless as ever. It was
completely desert; not so much as a single point of rock relieved the bare
uniformity of its surface.

"Are we not considerably to the west of Formentera?" asked Servadac, after
examining the chart.

"Most likely," replied Procope. "I have taken the same course as I should
have done at sea, and I have kept some distance to windward of the island; we
can bear straight down upon it whenever we like."

"Bear down then, now; and as quickly as you can."

The yawl was at once put with her head to the northeast and Captain
Servadac, in defiance of the icy blast, remained standing at the bow, his gaze
fixed on the horizon.

All at once his eye brightened.

"Look! look!" he exclaimed, pointing to a faint outline that broke the
monotony of the circle that divided the plain from the sky.

In an instant the lieutenant had seized his telescope.

"I see what you mean," said he; "it is a pylone that has been used for some
geodesic survey."


The next moment the sail was filled, and the yawl was bearing down upon
the object with inconceivable swiftness, both Captain Servadac and the
lieutenant too excited to utter a word. Mile after mile the distance rapidly grew
less, and as they drew nearer the pylone they could see that it was erected on a
low mass of rocks that was the sole interruption to the dull level of the field of
ice. No wreath of smoke rose above the little island; it was manifestly
impossible, they conceived, that any human being could there have survived the
cold; the sad presentiment forced itself upon their minds that it was a mere cairn
to which they had been hurrying.

Ten minutes later, and they were so near the rock that the lieutenant took in
his sail, convinced that the impetus already attained would be sufficient to carry
him to the land. Servadac's heart bounded as he caught sight of a fragment of
blue canvas fluttering in the wind from the top of the pylone: it was all that now
remained of the French national standard. At the foot of the pylone stood a
miserable shed, its shutters tightly closed. No other habitation was to be seen;
the entire island was less than a quarter of a mile in circumference; and the
conclusion was irresistible that it was the sole surviving remnant of Formentera,
once a member of the Balearic Archipelago.

To leap on shore, to clamber over the slippery stones, and to reach the cabin
was but the work of a few moments. The worm-eaten door was bolted on the
inside. Servadac began to knock with all his might. No answer. Neither shouting
nor knocking could draw forth a reply.

"Let us force it open, Procope!" he said.

The two men put their shoulders to the door, which soon yielded to their
vigorous efforts, and they found themselves inside the shed, and in almost total
darkness. By opening a shutter they admitted what daylight they could. At first
sight the wretched place seemed to be deserted; the little grate contained the
ashes of a fire long since extinguished; all looked black and desolate. Another
instant's investigation, however, revealed a bed in the extreme corner, and
extended on the bed a human form.

"Dead!" sighed Servadac; "dead of cold and hunger!"

Lieutenant Procope bent down and anxiously contemplated the body.

"No; he is alive!" he said, and drawing a small flask from his pocket he
poured a few drops of brandy between the lips of the senseless man.

There was a faint sigh, followed by a feeble voice, which uttered the one
word, "Gallia?"

"Yes, yes! Gallia!" echoed Servadac, eagerly.


"My comet, my comet!" said the voice, so low as to be almost inaudible, and
the unfortunate man relapsed again into unconsciousness.

"Where have I seen this man?" thought Servadac to himself; "his face is
strangely familiar to me."

But it was no time for deliberation. Not a moment was to be lost in getting
the unconscious astronomer away from his desolate quarters. He was soon
conveyed to the yawl; his books, his scanty wardrobe, his papers, his
instruments, and the blackboard which had served for his calculations, were
quickly collected; the wind, by a fortuitous Providence, had shifted into a
favorable quarter; they set their sail with all speed, and ere long were on their
journey back from Formentera.

Thirty-six hours later, the brave travelers were greeted by the acclamations of
their fellow-colonists, who had been most anxiously awaiting their reappearance,
and the still senseless savant, who had neither opened his eyes nor spoken a
word throughout the journey, was safely deposited in the warmth and security of
the great hall of Nina's Hive.


END OF FIRST BOOK


BOOK II.

CHAPTER I. THE ASTRONOMER

By the return of the expedition, conveying its contribution from Formentera,
the known population of Gallia was raised to a total of thirty-six.

On learning the details of his friends' discoveries, Count Timascheff did not
hesitate in believing that the exhausted individual who was lying before him was
the author alike of the two unsigned documents picked up at sea, and of the third
statement so recently brought to hand by the carrier-pigeon. Manifestly, he had
arrived at some knowledge of Gallia's movements: he had estimated her distance
from the sun; he had calculated the diminution of her tangential speed; but there
was nothing to show that he had arrived at the conclusions which were of the
most paramount interest to them all. Had he ascertained the true character of her
orbit? had he established any data from which it would be possible to reckon
what time must elapse before she would again approach the earth?

The only intelligible words which the astronomer had uttered had been, "My
comet!"

To what could the exclamation refer? Was it to be conjectured that a
fragment of the earth had been chipped off by the collision of a comet? and if so,
was it implied that the name of the comet itself was Gallia, and were they
mistaken in supposing that such was the name given by the savant to the little
world that had been so suddenly launched into space? Again and again they
discussed these questions; but no satisfactory answer could be found. The only
man who was able to throw any light upon the subject was lying amongst them
in an unconscious and half-dying condition.

Apart from motives of humanity, motives of self-interest made it a matter of
the deepest concern to restore animation to that senseless form. Ben Zoof, after
making the encouraging remark that savants have as many lives as a Cat,
proceeded, with Negrete's assistance, to give the body such a vigorous rubbing
as would have threatened serious injury to any ordinary mortal, whilst they
administered cordials and restoratives from the Dobryna's medical stores
powerful enough, one might think, to rouse the very dead.

Meanwhile the captain was racking his brain in his exertions to recall what
were the circumstances of his previous acquaintance with the Frenchman upon
whose features he was gazing; he only grew more and more convinced that he
had once been familiar with them. Perhaps it was not altogether surprising that
he had almost forgotten him; he had never seen him since the days of his youth,


that time of life which, with a certain show of justice, has been termed the age of
ingratitude; for, in point of fact, the astronomer was none other than Professor
Palmyrin Rosette, Servadac's old science-master at the Lycee Charlemagne.

After completing his year of elementary studies, Hector Servadac had
entered the school at Saint Cyr, and from that time he and his former tutor had
never met, so that naturally they would well-nigh pass from each other's
recollection. One thing, however, on the other hand, might conduce to a mutual
and permanent impression on their memories; during the year at the Lycee,
young Servadac, never of a very studious turn of mind, had contrived, as the
ringleader of a set of like caliber as himself, to lead the poor professor a life of
perpetual torment. On the discovery of each delinquency he would fume and
rage in a manner that was a source of unbounded delight to his audience.

Two years after Servadac left the Lycee, Professor Rosette had thrown up all
educational employment in order that he might devote himself entirely to the
study of astronomy. He endeavored to obtain a post at the Observatory, but his
ungenial character was so well known in scientific circles that he failed in his
application; however, having some small private means, he determined on his
Own account to carry on his researches without any official salary. He had really
considerable genius for the science that he had adopted; besides discovering
three of the latest of the telescopic planets, he had worked out the elements of
the three hundred and twenty-fifth comet in the catalogue; but his chief delight
was to criticize the publications of other astronomers, and he was never better
pleased than when he detected a flaw in their reckonings.

When Ben Zoof and Negrete had extricated their patient from the envelope
of furs in which he had been wrapped by Servadac and the lieutenant, they found
themselves face to face with a shrivelled little man, about five feet two inches
high, with a round bald head, smooth and shiny as an ostrich's egg, no beard
unless the unshorn growth of a week could be so described, and a long hooked
nose that supported a huge pair of spectacles such as with many near-sighted
people seems to have become a part of their individuality. His nervous system
was remarkably developed, and his body might not inaptly be compared to one
of the Rhumkorff's bobbins of which the thread, several hundred yards in length,
is permeated throughout by electric fluid. But whatever he was, his life, if
possible, must be preserved. When he had been partially divested of his clothing,
his heart was found to be still beating, though very feebly. Asserting that while
there was life there was hope, Ben Zoof recommenced his friction with more
vigor than ever.

When the rubbing had been continued without a moment's intermission for
the best part of half an hour, the astronomer heaved a faint sigh, which ere long


was followed by another and another. He half opened his eyes, closed them
again, then opened them completely, but without exhibiting any consciousness
whatever of his situation. A few words seemed to escape his lips, but they were
quite unintelligible. Presently he raised his right hand to his forehead as though
instinctively feeling for something that was missing; then, all of a sudden, his
features became contracted, his face flushed with apparent irritation, and he
exclaimed fretfully, "My spectacles!--where are my spectacles?"

In order to facilitate his operations, Ben Zoof had removed the spectacles in
spite of the tenacity with which they seemed to adhere to the temples of his
patient; but he now rapidly brought them back and readjusted them as best he
could to what seemed to be their natural position on the aquiline nose. The
professor heaved a long sigh of relief, and once more closed his eyes.

Before long the astronomer roused himself a little more, and glanced
inquiringly about him, but soon relapsed into his comatose condition. When next
he opened his eyes, Captain Servadac happened to be bending down closely over
him, examining his features with curious scrutiny. The old man darted an angry
look at him through the spectacles, and said sharply, "Servadac, five hundred
lines to-morrow!"

It was an echo of days of old. The words were few, but they were enough to
recall the identity which Servadac was trying to make out.

"Is it possible?" he exclaimed. "Here is my old tutor, Mr. Rosette, in very
flesh and blood."

"Can't say much for the flesh," muttered Ben Zoof.

The old man had again fallen back into a torpid slumber. Ben Zoof
continued, "His sleep is getting more composed. Let him alone; he will come
round yet. Haven't I heard of men more dried up than he is, being brought all the
way from Egypt in cases covered with pictures?"

"You idiot!--those were mummies; they had been dead for ages."

Ben Zoof did not answer a word. He went on preparing a warm bed, into
which he managed to remove his patient, who soon fell into a calm and natural
sleep.

Too impatient to await the awakening of the astronomer and to hear what
representations he had to make, Servadac, the count, and the lieutenant,
constituting themselves what might be designated "the Academy of Sciences" of
the colony, spent the whole of the remainder of the day in starting and discussing
the wildest conjectures about their situation. The hypothesis, to which they had
now accustomed themselves for so long, that a new asteroid had been formed by
a fracture of the earth's surface, seemed to fall to the ground when they found
that Professor Palmyrin Rosette had associated the name of Gallia, not with their


present home, but with what he called "my comet"; and that theory being
abandoned, they were driven to make the most improbable speculations to
replace it.

Alluding to Rosette, Servadac took care to inform his companions that,
although the professor was always eccentric, and at times very irascible, yet he
was really exceedingly good-hearted; his bark was worse than his bite; and if
suffered to take their course without observation, his outbreaks of ill-temper
seldom lasted long.

"We will certainly do our best to get on with him," said the count. "He is no
doubt the author of the papers, and we must hope that he will be able to give us
some valuable information."

"Beyond a question the documents have originated with him," assented the
lieutenant. "Gallia was the word written at the top of every one of them, and
Gallia was the first word uttered by him in our hearing."

The astronomer slept on. Meanwhile, the three together had no hesitation in
examining his papers, and scrutinizing the figures on his extemporized
blackboard. The handwriting corresponded with that of the papers already
received; the blackboard was covered with algebraical symbols traced in chalk,
which they were careful not to obliterate; and the papers, which consisted for the
most part of detached scraps, presented a perfect wilderness of geometrical
figures, conic sections of every variety being repeated in countless profusion.

Lieutenant Procope pointed out that these curves evidently had reference to
the orbits of comets, which are variously parabolic, hyperbolic, or elliptic. If
either of the first two, the comet, after once appearing within the range of
terrestrial vision, would vanish forever in the outlying regions of space; if the
last, it would be sure, sooner or later, after some periodic interval, to return.

From the prima facie appearance of his papers, then, it seemed probable that
the astronomer, during his sojourn at Formentera, had been devoting himself to
the study of cometary orbits; and as calculations of this kind are ordinarily based
upon the assumption that the orbit is a parabola, it was not unlikely that he had
been endeavoring to trace the path of some particular comet.

"I wonder whether these calculations were made before or after the 1st of
January; it makes all the difference," said Lieutenant Procope.

"We must bide our time and hear," replied the count.

Servadac paced restlessly up and down. "I would give a month of my life,"
he cried, impetuously, "for every hour that the old fellow goes sleeping on."

"You might be making a bad bargain," said Procope, smiling. "Perhaps after
all the comet has had nothing to do with the convulsion that we have
experienced."


"Nonsense!" exclaimed the captain; "I know better than that, and so do you.
Is it not as clear as daylight that the earth and this comet have been in collision,
and the result has been that our little world has been split off and sent flying far
into space?"

Count Timascheff and the lieutenant looked at each other in silence. "I do not
deny your theory," said Procope after a while. "If it be correct, I suppose we
must conclude that the enormous disc we observed on the night of the
catastrophe was the comet itself; and the velocity with which it was traveling
must have been so great that it was hardly arrested at all by the attraction of the
earth."

"Plausible enough," answered Count Timascheff; "and it is to this comet that
our scientific friend here has given the name of Gallia."

It still remained a puzzle to them all why the astronomer should apparently
be interested in the comet so much more than in the new little world in which
their strange lot was cast.

"Can you explain this?" asked the count.

"There is no accounting for the freaks of philosophers, you know," said
Servadac; "and have I not told you that this philosopher in particular is one of
the most eccentric beings in creation?"

"Besides," added the lieutenant, "it is exceedingly likely that his observations
had been going on for some considerable period before the convulsion
happened."

Thus, the general conclusion arrived at by the Gallian Academy of Science
was this: That on the night of the 31st of December, a comet, crossing the
ecliptic, had come into collision with the earth, and that the violence of the shock
had separated a huge fragment from the globe, which fragment from that date
had been traversing the remote interplanetary regions. Palmyrin Rosette would
doubtless confirm their solution of the phenomenon.


CHAPTER I. A REVELATION

To the general population of the colony the arrival of the stranger was a
matter of small interest. The Spaniards were naturally too indolent to be affected
in any way by an incident that concerned themselves so remotely; while the
Russians felt themselves simply reliant on their master, and as long as they were
with him were careless as to where or how they spent their days. Everything
went on with them in an accustomed routine; and they lay down night after
night, and awoke to their avocations morning after morning, just as if nothing
extraordinary had occurred.


All night long Ben Zoof would not leave the professor's bedside. He had
constituted himself sick nurse, and considered his reputation at stake if he failed
to set his patient on his feet again. He watched every movement, listened to
every breath, and never failed to administer the strongest cordials upon the
slightest pretext. Even in his sleep Rosette's irritable nature revealed itself. Ever
and again, sometimes in a tone of uneasiness, and sometimes with the expression
of positive anger, the name of Gallia escaped his lips, as though he were
dreaming that his claim to the discovery of the comet was being contested or
denied; but although his attendant was on the alert to gather all he could, he was
able to catch nothing in the incoherent sentences that served to throw any real
light upon the problem that they were all eager to solve.

When the sun reappeared on the western horizon the professor was still
sound asleep; and Ben Zoof, who was especially anxious that the repose which
promised to be so beneficial should not be disturbed, felt considerable
annoyance at hearing a loud knocking, evidently of some blunt heavy instrument
against a door that had been placed at the entrance of the gallery, more for the
purpose of retaining internal warmth than for guarding against intrusion from
without.

"Confound it!" said Ben Zoof. "I must put a stop to this;" and he made his
way towards the door.

"Who's there?" he cried, in no very amiable tone.

"I." replied the quavering voice.

"Who are you?"

"Isaac Hakkabut. Let me in; do, please, let me in."

"Oh, it is you, old Ashtaroth, is it? What do you want? Can't you get
anybody to buy your stuffs?"

"Nobody will pay me a proper price.”

"Well, old Shimei, you won't find a customer here. You had better be off."

"No; but do, please--do, please, let me in," supplicated the Jew. "I want to
speak to his Excellency, the governor."

"The governor is in bed, and asleep."

"T can wait until he awakes."

"Then wait where you are."

And with this inhospitable rejoinder the orderly was about to return to his
place at the side of his patient, when Servadac, who had been roused by the
sound of voices, called out, "What's the matter, Ben Zoof?"

"Oh, nothing, sir; only that hound of a Hakkabut says he wants to speak to
you."

"Let him in, then."


Ben Zoof hesitated.

"Let him in, I say," repeated the captain, peremptorily.

However reluctantly, Ben Zoof obeyed. The door was unfastened, and Isaac
Hakkabut, enveloped in an old overcoat, shuffled into the gallery. In a few
moments Servadac approached, and the Jew began to overwhelm him with the
most obsequious epithets. Without vouchsafing any reply, the captain beckoned
to the old man to follow him, and leading the way to the central hall, stopped,
and turning so as to look him steadily in the face, said, "Now is your opportunity.
Tell me what you want."

"Oh, my lord, my lord," whined Isaac, "you must have some news to tell
me."

"News? What do you mean?"

"From my little tartan yonder, I saw the yawl go out from the rock here on a
journey, and I saw it come back, and it brought a stranger; and I thought--I
thought--I thought--"

"Well, you thought--what did you think?"

"Why, that perhaps the stranger had come from the northern shores of the
Mediterranean, and that I might ask him--"

He paused again, and gave a glance at the captain.

"Ask him what? Speak out, man?"

"Ask him if he brings any tidings of Europe," Hakkabut blurted out at last.

Servadac shrugged his shoulders in contempt and turned away. Here was a
man who had been resident three months in Gallia, a living witness of all the
abnormal phenomena that had occurred, and yet refusing to believe that his hope
of making good bargains with European traders was at an end. Surely nothing,
thought the captain, will convince the old rascal now; and he moved off in
disgust. The orderly, however, who had listened with much amusement, was by
no means disinclined for the conversation to be continued. "Are you satisfied,
old Ezekiel?" he asked.

"Isn't it so? Am I not right? Didn't a stranger arrive here last night?" inquired
the Jew.

"Yes, quite true."

"Where from?"

"From the Balearic Isles."

"The Balearic Isles?" echoed Isaac.

"Yes."

"Fine quarters for trade! Hardly twenty leagues from Spain! He must have
brought news from Europe!"

"Well, old Manasseh, what if he has?"


"IT should like to see him."

"Can't be."

The Jew sidled close up to Ben Zoof, and laying his hand on his arm, said in
a low and insinuating tone, "I am poor, you know; but I would give you a few
reals if you would let me talk to this stranger."

But as if he thought he was making too liberal an offer, he added, "Only it
must be at once."

"He is too tired; he is worn out; he is fast asleep," answered Ben Zoof.

"But I would pay you to wake him."

The captain had overheard the tenor of the conversation, and interposed
sternly, "Hakkabut! if you make the least attempt to disturb our visitor, I shall
have you turned outside that door immediately."

"No offense, my lord, I hope," stammered out the Jew. "I only meant--"

"Silence!" shouted Servadac. The old man hung his head, abashed.

"T will tell you what," said Servadac after a brief interval; "I will give you
leave to hear what this stranger has to tell as soon as he is able to tell us
anything; at present we have not heard a word from his lips."

The Jew looked perplexed.

"Yes," said Servadac; "when we hear his story, you shall hear it too."

"And I hope it will be to your liking, old Ezekiel!" added Ben Zoof in a voice
of irony.

They had none of them long to wait, for within a few minutes Rosette's
peevish voice was heard calling, "Joseph! Joseph!"

The professor did not open his eyes, and appeared to be slumbering on, but
very shortly afterwards called out again, "Joseph! Confound the fellow! where is
he?" It was evident that he was half dreaming about a former servant now far
away on the ancient globe. "Where's my blackboard, Joseph?"

"Quite safe, sir," answered Ben Zoof, quickly.

Rosette unclosed his eyes and fixed them full upon the orderly's face. "Are
you Joseph?" he asked.

"At your service, sir," replied Ben Zoof with imperturbable gravity.

"Then get me my coffee, and be quick about it."

Ben Zoof left to go into the kitchen, and Servadac approached the professor
in order to assist him in rising to a sitting posture.

"Do you recognize your quondam pupil, professor?" he asked.

"Ah, yes, yes; you are Servadac," replied Rosette. "It is twelve years or more
since I saw you; I hope you have improved."

"Quite a reformed character, sir, I assure you," said Servadac, smiling.

"Well, that's as it should be; that's right," said the astronomer with fussy


importance. "But let me have my coffee," he added impatiently; "I cannot collect
my thoughts without my coffee."

Fortunately, Ben Zoof appeared with a great cup, hot and strong. After
draining it with much apparent relish, the professor got out of bed, walked into
the common hall, round which he glanced with a pre-occupied air, and
proceeded to seat himself in an armchair, the most comfortable which the cabin
of the Dobryna had supplied. Then, in a voice full of satisfaction, and that
involuntarily recalled the exclamations of delight that had wound up the two first
of the mysterious documents that had been received, he burst out, "Well,
gentlemen, what do you think of Gallia?"

There was no time for anyone to make a reply before Isaac Hakkabut had
darted forward.

"By the God--"

"Who is that?" asked the startled professor; and he frowned, and made a
gesture of repugnance.

Regardless of the efforts that were made to silence him, the Jew continued,
"By the God of Abraham, I beseech you, give me some tidings of Europe!"

"Europe?" shouted the professor, springing from his seat as if he were
electrified; "what does the man want with Europe?"

"I want to get there!" screeched the Jew; and in spite of every exertion to get
him away, he clung most tenaciously to the professor's chair, and again and again
implored for news of Europe.

Rosette made no immediate reply. After a moment or two's reflection, he
turned to Servadac and asked him whether it was not the middle of April.

"Tt is the twentieth," answered the captain.

"Then to-day," said the astronomer, speaking with the greatest deliberation--
"to-day we are just three millions of leagues away from Europe."

The Jew was utterly crestfallen.

"You seem here," continued the professor, "to be very ignorant of the state of
things."

"How far we are ignorant," rejoined Servadac, "I cannot tell. But I will tell
you all that we do know, and all that we have surmised." And as briefly as he
could, he related all that had happened since the memorable night of the thirty-
first of December; how they had experienced the shock; how the Dobryna had
made her voyage; how they had discovered nothing except the fragments of the
old continent at Tunis, Sardinia, Gibraltar, and now at Formentera; how at
intervals the three anonymous documents had been received; and, finally, how
the settlement at Gourbi Island had been abandoned for their present quarters at
Nina's Hive.


The astronomer had hardly patience to hear him to the end. "And what do
you say is your surmise as to your present position?" he asked.

"Our supposition," the captain replied, "is this. We imagine that we are on a
considerable fragment of the terrestrial globe that has been detached by collision
with a planet to which you appear to have given the name of Gallia."

"Better than that!" cried Rosette, starting to his feet with excitement.

"How? Why? What do you mean?" cried the voices of the listeners.

"You are correct to a certain degree," continued the professor. "It is quite true
that at 47' 35.6" after two o'clock on the morning of the first of January there was
a collision; my comet grazed the earth; and the bits of the earth which you have
named were carried clean away."

They were all fairly bewildered.

"Where, then," cried Servadac eagerly, "where are we?"

"You are on my comet, on Gallia itself!"

And the professor gazed around him with a perfect air of triumph.


CHAPTER II. THE PROFESSOR'S EXPERIENCES

"Yes, my comet!" repeated the professor, and from time to time he knitted his
brows, and looked around him with a defiant air, as though he could not get rid
of the impression that someone was laying an unwarranted claim to its
proprietorship, or that the individuals before him were intruders upon his own
proper domain.

But for a considerable while, Servadac, the count, and the lieutenant
remained silent and sunk in thought. Here then, at last, was the unriddling of the
enigma they had been so long endeavoring to solve; both the hypotheses they
had formed in succession had now to give way before the announcement of the
real truth. The first supposition, that the rotatory axis of the earth had been
subject to some accidental modification, and the conjecture that replaced it,
namely, that a certain portion of the terrestrial sphere had been splintered off and
carried into space, had both now to yield to the representation that the earth had
been grazed by an unknown comet, which had caught up some scattered
fragments from its surface, and was bearing them far away into sidereal regions.
Unfolded lay the past and the present before them; but this only served to
awaken a keener interest about the future. Could the professor throw any light
upon that? they longed to inquire, but did not yet venture to ask him.

Meanwhile Rosette assumed a pompous professional air, and appeared to be
waiting for the entire party to be ceremoniously introduced to him. Nothing
unwilling to humor the vanity of the eccentric little man, Servadac proceeded to


go through the expected formalities.

"Allow me to present to you my excellent friend, the Count Timascheff," he
said.

"You are very welcome," said Rosette, bowing to the count with a smile of
condescension.

"Although I am not precisely a voluntary resident on your comet, Mr.
Professor, I beg to acknowledge your courteous reception," gravely responded
Timascheff.

Servadac could not quite conceal his amusement at the count's irony, but
continued, "This is Lieutenant Procope, the officer in command of the Dobryna."

The professor bowed again in frigid dignity.

"His yacht has conveyed us right round Gallia," added the captain.

"Round Gallia?" eagerly exclaimed the professor.

"Yes, entirely round it," answered Servadac, and without allowing time for
reply, proceeded, "And this is my orderly, Ben Zoof."

"Aide-de-camp to his Excellency the Governor of Gallia," interposed Ben
Zoof himself, anxious to maintain his master's honor as well as his own.

Rosette scarcely bent his head.

The rest of the population of the Hive were all presented in succession: the
Russian sailors, the Spaniards, young Pablo, and little Nina, on whom the
professor, evidently no lover of children, glared fiercely through his formidable
spectacles. Isaac Hakkabut, after his introduction, begged to be allowed to ask
one question.

"How soon may we hope to get back?" he inquired.

"Get back!" rejoined Rosette, sharply; "who talks of getting back? We have
hardly started yet."

Seeing that the professor was inclined to get angry, Captain Servadac
adroitly gave a new turn to the conversation by asking him whether he would
gratify them by relating his own recent experiences. The astronomer seemed
pleased with the proposal, and at once commenced a verbose and somewhat
circumlocutory address, of which the following summary presents the main
features.

The French Government, being desirous of verifying the measurement
already made of the arc of the meridian of Paris, appointed a scientific
commission for that purpose. From that commission the name of Palmyrin
Rosette was omitted, apparently for no other reason than his personal
unpopularity. Furious at the slight, the professor resolved to set to work
independently on his own account, and declaring that there were inaccuracies in
the previous geodesic operations, he determined to re-examine the results of the


'


last triangulation which had united Formentera to the Spanish coast by a triangle,
one of the sides of which measured over a hundred miles, the very operation
which had already been so successfully accomplished by Arago and Biot.

Accordingly, leaving Paris for the Balearic Isles, he placed his observatory
on the highest point of Formentera, and accompanied as he was only by his
servant, Joseph, led the life of a recluse. He secured the services of a former
assistant, and dispatched him to a high peak on the coast of Spain, where he had
to superintend a reverberator, which, with the aid of a glass, could be seen from
Formentera. A few books and instruments, and two months' victuals, was all the
baggage he took with him, except an excellent astronomical telescope, which
was, indeed, almost part and parcel of himself, and with which he assiduously
scanned the heavens, in the sanguine anticipation of making some discovery
which would immortalize his name.

The task he had undertaken demanded the utmost patience. Night after night,
in order to fix the apex of his triangle, he had to linger on the watch for the
assistant's signal-light, but he did not forget that his predecessors, Arago and
Biot, had had to wait sixty-one days for a similar purpose. What retarded the
work was the dense fog which, it has been already mentioned, at that time
enveloped not only that part of Europe, but almost the entire world.

Never failing to turn to the best advantage the few intervals when the mist
lifted a little, the astronomer would at the same time cast an inquiring glance at
the firmament, as he was greatly interested in the revision of the chart of the
heavens, in the region contiguous to the constellation Gemini.

To the naked eye this constellation consists of only six stars, but through a
telescope ten inches in diameter, as many as six thousand are visible. Rosette,
however, did not possess a reflector of this magnitude, and was obliged to
content himself with the good but comparatively small instrument he had.

On one of these occasions, whilst carefully gauging the recesses of Gemini,
he espied a bright speck which was unregistered in the chart, and which at first
he took for a small star that had escaped being entered in the catalogue. But the
observation of a few separate nights soon made it manifest that the star was
rapidly changing its position with regard to the adjacent stars, and the
astronomer's heart began to leap at the thought that the renown of the discovery
of a new planet would be associated with his name.

Redoubling his attention, he soon satisfied himself that what he saw was not
a planet; the rapidity of its displacement rather forced him to the conjecture that
it must be a comet, and this opinion was soon strengthened by the appearance of
a coma, and subsequently confirmed, as the body approached the sun, by the
development of a tail.


A comet! The discovery was fatal to all further progress in the triangulation.
However conscientiously the assistant on the Spanish coast might look to the
kindling of the beacon, Rosette had no glances to spare for that direction; he had
no eyes except for the one object of his notice, no thoughts apart from that one
quarter of the firmament.

A comet! No time must be lost in calculating its elements.

Now, in order to calculate the elements of a comet, it is always deemed the
safest mode of procedure to assume the orbit to be a parabola. Ordinarily, comets
are conspicuous at their perihelia, as being their shortest distances from the sun,
which is the focus of their orbit, and inasmuch as a parabola is but an ellipse
with its axis indefinitely produced, for some short portion of its pathway the
orbit may be indifferently considered either one or the other; but in this
particular case the professor was right in adopting the supposition of its being
parabolic.

Just as in a circle, it is necessary to know three points to determine the
circumference; so in ascertaining the elements of a comet, three different
positions must be observed before what astronomers call its "ephemeris" can be
established.

But Professor Rosette did not content himself with three positions; taking
advantage of every rift in the fog he made ten, twenty, thirty observations both in
right ascension and in declination, and succeeded in working out with the most
minute accuracy the five elements of the comet which was evidently advancing
with astounding rapidity towards the earth.

These elements were:

1. The inclination of the plane of the cometary orbit to the plane of the
ecliptic, an angle which is generally considerable, but in this case the planes
were proved to coincide.

2. The position of the ascending node, or the point where the comet crossed
the terrestrial orbit.

These two elements being obtained, the position in space of the comet's orbit
was determined.

3. The direction of the axis major of the orbit, which was found by
calculating the longitude of the comet's perihelion.

4. The perihelion distance from the sun, which settled the precise form of the
parabola.

5. The motion of the comet, as being retrograde, or, unlike the planets, from
east to west.

Rosette thus found himself able to calculate the date at which the comet
would reach its perihelion, and, overjoyed at his discovery, without thinking of


calling it Palmyra or Rosette, after his own name, he resolved that it should be
known as Gallia.

His next business was to draw up a formal report. Not only did he at once
recognize that a collision with the earth was possible, but he soon foresaw that it
was inevitable, and that it must happen on the night of the 31st of December;
moreover, as the bodies were moving in opposite directions, the shock could
hardly fail to be violent.

To say that he was elated at the prospect was far below the truth; his delight
amounted almost to delirium. Anyone else would have hurried from the solitude
of Formentera in sheer fright; but, without communicating a word of his startling
discovery, he remained resolutely at his post. From occasional newspapers which
he had received, he had learnt that fogs, dense as ever, continued to envelop both
hemispheres, so that he was assured that the existence of the comet was utterly
unknown elsewhere; and the ignorance of the world as to the peril that
threatened it averted the panic that would have followed the publication of the
facts, and left the philosopher of Formentera in sole possession of the great
secret. He clung to his post with the greater persistency, because his calculations
had led him to the conclusion that the comet would strike the earth somewhere to
the south of Algeria, and as it had a solid nucleus, he felt sure that, as he
expressed it, the effect would be "unique," and he was anxious to be in the
vicinity.

The shock came, and with it the results already recorded. Palmyrin Rosette
was suddenly separated from his servant Joseph, and when, after a long period of
unconsciousness, he came to himself, he found that he was the solitary occupant
of the only fragment that survived of the Balearic Archipelago.

Such was the substance of the narrative which the professor gave with
sundry repetitions and digressions; while he was giving it, he frequently paused
and frowned as if irritated in a way that seemed by no means justified by the
patient and good-humored demeanor of his audience.

"But now, gentlemen," added the professor, "I must tell you something more.
Important changes have resulted from the collision; the cardinal points have
been displaced; gravity has been diminished: not that I ever supposed for a
minute, as you did, that I was still upon the earth. No! the earth, attended by her
moon, continued to rotate along her proper orbit. But we, gentlemen, have
nothing to complain of; our destiny might have been far worse; we might all
have been crushed to death, or the comet might have remained in adhesion to the
earth; and in neither of these cases should we have had the satisfaction of
making this marvelous excursion through untraversed solar regions. No,
gentlemen, I repeat it, we have nothing to regret."


And as the professor spoke, he seemed to kindle with the emotion of such
supreme contentment that no one had the heart to gainsay his assertion. Ben
Zoof alone ventured an unlucky remark to the effect that if the comet had
happened to strike against Montmartre, instead of a bit of Africa, it would have
met with some resistance.

"Pshaw!" said Rosette, disdainfully. "A mole-hill like Montmartre would
have been ground to powder in a moment."

"Mole-hill!" exclaimed Ben Zoof, stung to the quick. "I can tell you it would
have caught up your bit of a comet and worn it like a feather in a cap."

The professor looked angry, and Servadac having imposed silence upon his
orderly, explained the worthy soldier's sensitiveness on all that concerned
Montmartre. Always obedient to his master, Ben Zoof held his tongue; but he
felt that he could never forgive the slight that had been cast upon his beloved
home.

It was now all-important to learn whether the astronomer had been able to
continue his observations, and whether he had learned sufficient of Gallia's path
through space to make him competent to determine, at least approximately, the
period of its revolution round the sun. With as much tact and caution as he could,
Lieutenant Procope endeavored to intimate the general desire for some
information on this point.

"Before the shock, sir," answered the professor, "I had conclusively
demonstrated the path of the comet; but, in consequence of the modifications
which that shock has entailed upon my comet's orbit, I have been compelled
entirely to recommence my calculations."

The lieutenant looked disappointed.

"Although the orbit of the earth was unaltered," continued the professor, "the
result of the collision was the projection of the comet into a new orbit
altogether."

"And may I ask," said Procope, deferentially, "whether you have got the
elements of the fresh orbit?"

"Yes."

"Then perhaps you know--"

"IT know this, sir, that at 47 minutes 35.6 seconds after two o'clock on the
morning of the 1st of January last, Gallia, in passing its ascending node, came in
contact with the earth; that on the 10th of January it crossed the orbit of Venus;
that it reached its perihelion on the 15th; that it re-crossed the orbit of Venus;
that on the 1st of February it passed its descending node; on the 13th crossed the
orbit of Mars; entered the zone of the telescopic planets on the 10th of March,
and, attracting Nerina, carried it off as a satellite."


Servadac interposed:

"We are already acquainted with well-nigh all these extraordinary facts;
many of them, moreover, we have learned from documents which we have
picked up, and which, although unsigned, we cannot entertain a doubt have
originated with you."

Professor Rosette drew himself up proudly and said: "Of course, they
originated with me. I sent them off by hundreds. From whom else could they
come?"

"From no one but yourself, certainly," rejoined the count, with grave
politeness.

Hitherto the conversation had thrown no light upon the future movements of
Gallia, and Rosette was disposed apparently to evade, or at least to postpone, the
subject. When, therefore, Lieutenant Procope was about to press his inquiries in
a more categorical form, Servadac, thinking it advisable not prematurely to press
the little savant too far, interrupted him by asking the professor how he
accounted for the earth having suffered so little from such a formidable
concussion.

"I account for it in this way," answered Rosette: "the earth was traveling at
the rate of 28,000 leagues an hour, and Gallia at the rate of 57,000 leagues an
hour, therefore the result was the same as though a train rushing along at a speed
of about 86,000 leagues an hour had suddenly encountered some obstacle. The
nucleus of the comet, being excessively hard, has done exactly what a ball would
do fired with that velocity close to a pane of glass. It has crossed the earth
without cracking it."

"It is possible you may be right," said Servadac, thoughtfully.

"Right! of course I am right!" replied the snappish professor. Soon, however,
recovering his equanimity, he continued: "It is fortunate that the earth was only
touched obliquely; if the comet had impinged perpendicularly, it must have
plowed its way deep below the surface, and the disasters it might have caused
are beyond reckoning. Perhaps," he added, with a smile, "even Montmartre
might not have survived the calamity."

"Sir!" shouted Ben Zoof, quite unable to bear the unprovoked attack.

"Quiet, Ben Zoof!" said Servadac sternly.

Fortunately for the sake of peace, Isaac Hakkabut, who at length was
beginning to realize something of the true condition of things, came forward at
this moment, and in a voice trembling with eagerness, implored the professor to
tell him when they would all be back again upon the earth.

"Are you in a great hurry?" asked the professor coolly.

The Jew was about to speak again, when Captain Servadac interposed:


"Allow me to say that, in somewhat more scientific terms, I was about to ask you
the same question. Did I not understand you to say that, as the consequence of
the collision, the character of the comet's orbit has been changed?"

"You did, sir."

"Did you imply that the orbit has ceased to be a parabola?"

"Just so."

"Is it then an hyperbola? and are we to be carried on far and away into
remote distance, and never, never to return?"

"I did not say an hyperbola."

"And is it not?"

"Tt is not."

"Then it must be an ellipse?"

“Yes.

"And does its plane coincide with the plane of the earth?"

"Yes."

"Then it must be a periodic comet?"

"Tt is."

Servadac involuntarily raised a ringing shout of joy that echoed again along
the gallery.

"Yes," continued the professor, "Gallia is a periodic comet, and allowing for
the perturbations to which it is liable from the attraction of Mars and Jupiter and
Saturn, it will return to the earth again in two years precisely."

"You mean that in two years after the first shock, Gallia will meet the earth at
the same point as they met before?" said Lieutenant Procope.

"T am afraid so," said Rosette.

"Why afraid?"

"Because we are doing exceedingly well as we are." The professor stamped
his foot upon the ground, by way of emphasis, and added, "If I had my will,
Gallia should never return to the earth again!"


CHAPTER IV. A REVISED CALENDAR

All previous hypotheses, then, were now forgotten in the presence of the one
great fact that Gallia was a comet and gravitating through remote solar regions.
Captain Servadac became aware that the huge disc that had been looming
through the clouds after the shock was the form of the retreating earth, to the
proximity of which the one high tide they had experienced was also to be
attributed.

As to the fulfillment of the professor's prediction of an ultimate return to the


terrestrial sphere, that was a point on which it must be owned that the captain,
after the first flush of his excitement was over, was not without many
misgivings.

The next day or two were spent in providing for the accommodation of the
new comer. Fortunately his desires were very moderate; he seemed to live
among the stars, and as long as he was well provided with coffee, he cared little
for luxuries, and paid little or no regard to the ingenuity with which all the
internal arrangements of Nina's Hive had been devised. Anxious to show all
proper respect to his former tutor, Servadac proposed to leave the most
comfortable apartment of the place at his disposal; but the professor resolutely
declined to occupy it, saying that what he required was a small chamber, no
matter how small, provided that it was elevated and secluded, which he could
use as an observatory and where he might prosecute his studies without
disturbance. A general search was instituted, and before long they were lucky
enough to find, about a hundred feet above the central grotto, a small recess or
reduct hollowed, as it were, in the mountain side, which would exactly answer
their purpose. It contained room enough for a bed, a table, an armchair, a chest
of drawers, and, what was of still more consequence, for the indispensable
telescope. One small stream of lava, an off-shoot of the great torrent, sufficed to
warm the apartment enough.

In these retired quarters the astronomer took up his abode. It was on all
hands acknowledged to be advisable to let him go on entirely in his own way.
His meals were taken to him at stated intervals; he slept but little; carried on his
calculations by day, his observations by night, and very rarely made his
appearance amongst the rest of the little community.

The cold now became very intense, the thermometer registering 30 degrees
F. below zero. The mercury, however, never exhibited any of those fluctuations
that are ever and again to be observed in variable climates, but continued slowly
and steadily to fall, and in all probability would continue to do so until it reached
the normal temperature of the regions of outlying space.

This steady sinking of the mercury was accompanied by a complete stillness
of the atmosphere; the very air seemed to be congealed; no particle of it stirred;
from zenith to horizon there was never a cloud; neither were there any of the
damp mists or dry fogs which so often extend over the polar regions of the earth;
the sky was always clear; the sun shone by day and the stars by night without
causing any perceptible difference in the temperature.

These peculiar conditions rendered the cold endurable even in the open air.
The cause of so many of the diseases that prove fatal to Arctic explorers resides
in the cutting winds, unwholesome fogs, or terrible snow drifts, which, by drying


up, relaxing, or otherwise affecting the lungs, make them incapable of fulfilling
their proper functions. But during periods of calm weather, when the air has been
absolutely still, many polar navigators, well-clothed and properly fed, have been
known to withstand a temperature when the thermometer has fallen to 60
degrees below zero. It was the experience of Parry upon Melville Island, of Kane
beyond latitude 81 degrees north, and of Hall and the crew of the Polaris, that,
however intense the cold, in the absence of the wind they could always brave its
rigor.

Notwithstanding, then, the extreme lowness of the temperature, the little
population found that they were able to move about in the open air with perfect
immunity. The governor general made it his special care to see that his people
were all well fed and warmly clad. Food was both wholesome and abundant, and
besides the furs brought from the Dobryna's stores, fresh skins could very easily
be procured and made up into wearing apparel. A daily course of out-door
exercise was enforced upon everyone; not even Pablo and Nina were exempted
from the general rule; the two children, muffled up in furs, looking like little
Esquimeaux, skated along together, Pablo ever at his companion's side, ready to
give her a helping hand whenever she was weary with her exertions.

After his interview with the newly arrived astronomer, Isaac Hakkabut slunk
back again to his tartan. A change had come over his ideas; he could no longer
resist the conviction that he was indeed millions and millions of miles away
from the earth, where he had carried on so varied and remunerative a traffic. It
might be imagined that this realization of his true position would have led him to
a better mind, and that, in some degree at least, he would have been induced to
regard the few fellow-creatures with whom his lot had been so strangely cast,
otherwise than as mere instruments to be tumed to his own personal and
pecuniary advantage; but no--the desire of gain was too thoroughly ingrained
into his hard nature ever to be eradicated, and secure in his knowledge that he
was under the protection of a French officer, who, except under the most urgent
necessity, would not permit him to be molested in retaining his property, he
determined to wait for some emergency to arise which should enable him to use
his present situation for his own profit.

On the one hand, the Jew took it into account that although the chances of
returning to the earth might be remote, yet from what he had heard from the
professor he could not believe that they were improbable; on the other, he knew
that a considerable sum of money, in English and Russian coinage, was in the
possession of various members of the little colony, and this, although valueless
now, would be worth as much as ever if the proper condition of things should be
restored; accordingly, he set his heart on getting all the monetary wealth of


Gallia into his possession, and to do this he must sell his goods. But he would
not sell them yet; there might come a time when for many articles the supply
would not be equal to the demand; that would be the time for him; by waiting he
reckoned he should be able to transact some lucrative business.

Such in his solitude were old Isaac's cogitations, whilst the universal
population of Nina's Hive were congratulating themselves upon being rid of his
odious presence.

As already stated in the message brought by the carrier pigeon, the distance
traveled by Gallia in April was 39,000,000 leagues, and at the end of the month
she was 110,000,000 leagues from the sun. A diagram representing the elliptical
orbit of the planet, accompanied by an ephemeris made out in minute detail, had
been drawn out by the professor. The curve was divided into twenty-four
sections of unequal length, representing respectively the distance described in
the twenty-four months of the Gallian year, the twelve former divisions,
according to Kepler's law, gradually diminishing in length as they approached
the point denoting the aphelion and increasing as they neared the perihelion.

It was on the 12th of May that Rosette exhibited this result of his labors to
Servadac, the count, and the lieutenant, who visited his apartment and naturally
examined the drawing with the keenest interest. Gallia's path, extending beyond
the orbit of Jupiter, lay clearly defined before their eyes, the progress along the
orbit and the solar distances being inserted for each month separately. Nothing
could look plainer, and if the professor's calculations were correct (a point upon
which they dared not, if they would, express the semblance of a doubt), Gallia
would accomplish her revolution in precisely two years, and would meet the
earth, which would in the same period of time have completed two annual
revolutions, in the very same spot as before. What would be the consequences of
a second collision they scarcely ventured to think.

Without lifting his eye from the diagram, which he was still carefully
scrutinizing, Servadac said, "I see that during the month of May, Gallia will only
travel 30,400,000 leagues, and that this will leave her about 140,000,000 leagues
distant from the sun."

"Just so," replied the professor.

"Then we have already passed the zone of the telescopic planets, have we
not?" asked the count.

"Can you not use your eyes?" said the professor, testily. "If you will look you
will see the zone marked clearly enough upon the map."

Without noticing the interruption, Servadac continued his own remarks, "The
comet then, I see, is to reach its aphelion on the 15th of January, exactly a
twelvemonth after passing its perihelion."


"A twelvemonth! Not a Gallian twelvemonth?" exclaimed Rosette.

Servadac looked bewildered. Lieutenant Procope could not suppress a smile.

"What are you laughing at?" demanded the professor, turning round upon
him angrily.

"Nothing, sir; only it amuses me to see how you want to revise the terrestrial
calendar."

"I want to be logical, that's all."

"By all manner of means, my dear professor, let us be logical."

"Well, then, listen to me," resumed the professor, stiffly. "I presume you are
taking it for granted that the Gallian year--by which I mean the time in which
Gallia makes one revolution round the sun--is equal in length to two terrestrial
years."

They signified their assent.

"And that year, like every other year, ought to be divided into twelve
months."

"Yes, certainly, if you wish it,” said the captain, acquiescing.

"If I wish it!" exclaimed Rosette. "Nothing of the sort! Of course a year must
have twelve months!"

"Of course," said the captain.

"And how many days will make a month?" asked the professor.

"I suppose sixty or sixty-two, as the case may be. The days now are only half
as long as they used to be," answered the captain.

"Servadac, don't be thoughtless!" cried Rosette, with all the petulant
impatience of the old pedagogue. "If the days are only half as long as they were,
sixty of them cannot make up a twelfth part of Gallia's year--cannot be a month."

"I suppose not," replied the confused captain.

"Do you not see, then," continued the astronomer, "that if a Gallian month is
twice as long as a terrestrial month, and a Gallian day is only half as long as a
terrestrial day, there must be a hundred and twenty days in every month?"

"No doubt you are right, professor,” said Count Timascheff; "but do you not
think that the use of a new calendar such as this would practically be very
troublesome?"

"Not at all! not at all! I do not intend to use any other," was the professor's
bluff reply.

After pondering for a few moments, the captain spoke again. "According,
then, to this new calendar, it isn't the middle of May at all; it must now be some
time in March."

"Yes," said the professor, "to-day is the 26th of March. It is the 266th day of
the Gallian year. It corresponds with the 133d day of the terrestrial year. You are


quite correct, it is the 26th of March."

"Strange!" muttered Servadac.

"And a month, a terrestrial month, thirty old days, sixty new days hence, it
will be the 86th of March."

"Ha, ha!" roared the captain; "this is logic with a vengeance!"

The old professor had an undefined consciousness that his former pupil was
laughing at him; and as it was growing late, he made an excuse that he had no
more leisure. The visitors accordingly quitted the observatory.

It must be owned that the revised calendar was left to the professor's sole
use, and the colony was fairly puzzled whenever he referred to such unheard-of
dates as the 47th of April or the 118th of May.

According to the old calendar, June had now arrived; [illustration omitted]
[page intentionally blank] and by the professor's tables Gallia during the month
would have advanced 27,500,000 leagues farther along its orbit, and would have
attained a distance of 155,000,000 leagues from the sun. The thermometer
continued to fall; the atmosphere remained clear as heretofore. The population
performed their daily avocations with systematic routine; and almost the only
thing that broke the monotony of existence was an occasional visit from the
blustering, nervous, little professor, when some sudden fancy induced him to
throw aside his astronomical studies for a time, and pay a visit to the common
hall. His arrival there was generally hailed as the precursor of a little season of
excitement. Somehow or other the conversation would eventually work its way
round to the topic of a future collision between the comet and the earth; and in
the same degree as this was a matter of sanguine anticipation to Captain
Servadac and his friends, it was a matter of aversion to the astronomical
enthusiast, who had no desire to quit his present quarters in a sphere which,
being of his own discovery, he could hardly have cared for more if it had been of
his own creation. The interview would often terminate in a scene of considerable
animation.

On the 27th of June (old calendar) the professor burst like a cannon-ball into
the central hall, where they were all assembled, and without a word of salutation
or of preface, accosted the lieutenant in the way in which in earlier days he had
been accustomed to speak to an idle school-boy, "Now, lieutenant! no evasions!
no shufflings! Tell me, have you or have you not circumnavigated Gallia?"

The lieutenant drew himself up stiffly. "Evasions! shufflings! I am not
accustomed, sir--" he began in a tone evidencing no little resentment; but
catching a hint from the count he subdued his voice, and simply said, "We have."

"And may I ask," continued the professor, quite unaware of his previous
discourtesy, "whether, when you made your voyage, you took any account of


distances?"

"As approximately as I could," replied the lieutenant; "I did what I could by
log and compass. I was unable to take the altitude of sun or star."

"At what result did you arrive? What is the measurement of our equator?"

"T estimate the total circumference of the equator to be about 1,400 miles."

"Ah!" said the professor, more than half speaking to himself, "a
circumference of 1,400 miles would give a diameter of about 450 miles. That
would be approximately about one-sixteenth of the diameter of the earth."

Raising his voice, he continued, "Gentlemen, in order to complete my
account of my comet Gallia, I require to know its area, its mass, its volume, its
density, its specific gravity."

"Since we know the diameter," remarked the lieutenant, "there can be no
difficulty in finding its surface and its volume."

"And did I say there was any difficulty?" asked the professor, fiercely. "I
have been able to reckon that ever since I was born."

"Cock-a-doodle-doo!" cried Ben Zoof, delighted at any opportunity of
paying off his old grudge.

The professor looked at him, but did not vouchsafe a word. Addressing the
captain, he said, "Now, Servadac, take your paper and a pen, and find me the
surface of Gallia."

With more submission than when he was a school-boy, the captain sat down
and endeavored to recall the proper formula.

"The surface of a sphere? Multiply circumference by diameter."

"Right!" cried Rosette; "but it ought to be done by this time."

"Circumference, 1,400; diameter, 450; area of surface, 630,000," read the
captain.

"True," replied Rosette, "630,000 square miles; just 292 times less than that
of the earth."

"Pretty little comet! nice little comet!" muttered Ben Zoof.

The astronomer bit his lip, snorted, and cast at him a withering look, but did
not take any further notice.

"Now, Captain Servadac," said the professor, "take your pen again, and find
me the volume of Gallia."

The captain hesitated.

"Quick, quick!" cried the professor, impatiently; "surely you have not
forgotten how to find the volume of a sphere!"

"A moment's breathing time, please."

"Breathing time, indeed! A mathematician should not want breathing time!
Come, multiply the surface by the third of the radius. Don't you recollect?"


Captain Servadac applied himself to his task while the by-standers waited,
with some difficulty suppressing their inclination to laugh. There was a short
silence, at the end of which Servadac announced that the volume of the comet
was 47,880,000 cubic miles.

"Just about 5,000 times less than the earth," observed the lieutenant.

"Nice little comet! pretty little comet!" said Ben Zoof.

The professor scowled at him, and was manifestly annoyed at having the
insignificant dimensions of his comet pointed out in so disparaging a manner.
Lieutenant Procope further remarked that from the earth he supposed it to be
about as conspicuous as a star of the seventh magnitude, and would require a
good telescope to see it.

"Ha, ha!" laughed the orderly, aloud; "charming little comet! so pretty; and
so modest!"

"You rascal!" roared the professor, and clenched his hand in passion, as if
about to strike him. Ben Zoof laughed the more, and was on the point of
repeating his satirical comments, when a stern order from the captain made him
hold his tongue. The truth was that the professor was just as sensitive about his
comet as the orderly was about Montmartre, and if the contention between the
two had been allowed to go on unchecked, it is impossible to say what serious
quarrel might not have arisen.

When Professor Rosette's equanimity had been restored, he said, "Thus, then,
gentlemen, the diameter, the surface, the volume of my comet are settled; but
there is more to be done. I shall not be satisfied until, by actual measurement, I
have determined its mass, its density, and the force of gravity at its surface."

"A laborious problem," remarked Count Timascheff.

"Laborious or not, it has to be accomplished. I am resolved to find out what
my comet weighs.”

"Would it not be of some assistance, if we knew of what substance it is
composed?" asked the lieutenant.

"That is of no moment at all," replied the professor; "the problem is
independent of it."

"Then we await your orders," was the captain's reply.

"You must understand, however," said Rosette, "that there are various
preliminary calculations to be made; you will have to wait till they are finished."

"As long as you please," said the count.

"No hurry at all," observed the captain, who was not in the least impatient to
continue his mathematical exercises.

"Then, gentlemen," said the astronomer, "with your leave we will for this
purpose make an appointment a few weeks hence. What do you say to the 62d of


April?"
Without noticing the general smile which the novel date provoked, the
astronomer left the hall, and retired to his observatory.


CHAPTER V. WANTED: A STEELYARD

Under the still diminishing influence of the sun's attraction, but without let or
hindrance, Gallia continued its interplanetary course, accompanied by Nerina, its
captured satellite, which performed its fortnightly revolutions with unvarying
regularity.

Meanwhile, the question beyond all others important was ever recurring to
the minds of Servadac and his two companions: were the astronomer's
calculations correct, and was there a sound foundation for his prediction that the
comet would again touch the earth? But whatever might be their doubts or
anxieties, they were fain to keep all their misgivings to themselves; the professor
was of a temper far too cross-grained for them to venture to ask him to revise or
re-examine the results of his observations.

The rest of the community by no means shared in their uneasiness. Negrete
and his fellow-countrymen yielded to their destiny with philosophical
indifference. Happier and better provided for than they had ever been in their
lives, it did not give them a passing thought, far less cause any serious concern,
whether they were still circling round the sun, or whether they were being
carried right away within the limits of another system. Utterly careless of the
future, the majos, light-hearted as ever, carolled out their favorite songs, just as if
they had never quitted the shores of their native land.

Happiest of all were Pablo and Nina. Racing through the galleries of the
Hive, clambering over the rocks upon the shore, one day skating far away across
the frozen ocean, the next fishing in the lake that was kept liquid by the heat of
the lava-torrent, the two children led a life of perpetual enjoyment. Nor was their
recreation allowed to interfere with their studies. Captain Servadac, who in
common with the count really liked them both, conceived that the
responsibilities of a parent in some degree had devolved upon him, and took
great care in superintending their daily lessons, which he succeeded in making
hardly less pleasant than their sports.

Indulged and loved by all, it was litthke wonder that young Pablo had no
longing for the scorching plains of Andalusia, or that little Nina had lost all wish
to return with her pet goat to the barren rocks of Sardinia. They had now a home
in which they had nothing to desire.

"Have you no father nor mother?" asked Pablo, one day.


"No," she answered.

"No more have I," said the boy, "I used to run along by the side of the
diligences when I was in Spain."

"I used to look after goats at Madalena," said Nina; "but it is much nicer
here--I am so happy here. I have you for a brother, and everybody is so kind. I
am afraid they will spoil us, Pablo," she added, smiling.

"Oh, no, Nina; you are too good to be spoiled, and when I am with you, you
make me good too," said Pablo, gravely.

July had now arrived. During the month Gallia's advance along its orbit
would be reduced to 22,000,000 leagues, the distance from the sun at the end
being 172,000,000 leagues, about four and a half times as great as the average
distance of the earth from the sun. It was traveling now at about the same speed
as the earth, which traverses the ecliptic at a rate of 21,000,000 leagues a month,
or 28,800 leagues an hour.

In due time the 62d April, according to the revised Gallian calendar, dawned;
and in punctual fulfillment of the professor's appointment, a note was delivered
to Servadac to say that he was ready, and hoped that day to commence
operations for calculating the mass and density of his comet, as well as the force
of gravity at its surface.

A point of far greater interest to Captain Servadac and his friends would have
been to ascertain the nature of the substance of which the comet was composed,
but they felt pledged to render the professor any aid they could in the researches
upon which he had set his heart. Without delay, therefore, they assembled in the
central hall, where they were soon joined by Rosette, who seemed to be in fairly
good temper.

"Gentlemen," he began, "I propose to-day to endeavor to complete our
observations of the elements of my comet. Three matters of investigation are
before us. First, the measure of gravity at its surface; this attractive force we
know, by the increase of our own muscular force, must of course be considerably
less than that at the surface of the earth. Secondly, its mass, that is, the quality of
its matter. And thirdly, its density or quantity of matter in a unit of its volume.
We will proceed, gentlemen, if you please, to weigh Gallia."

Ben Zoof, who had just entered the hall, caught the professor's last sentence,
and without saying a word, went out again and was absent for some minutes.
When he returned, he said, "If you want to weigh this comet of yours, I suppose
you want a pair of scales; but I have been to look, and I cannot find a pair
anywhere. And what's more," he added mischievously, "you won't get them
anywhere."

A frown came over the professor's countenance. Servadac saw it, and gave


his orderly a sign that he should desist entirely from his bantering.

"I require, gentlemen," resumed Rosette, "first of all to know by how much
the weight of a kilogramme here differs from its weight upon the earth; the
attraction, as we have said, being less, the weight will proportionately be less
also."

"Then an ordinary pair of scales, being under the influence of attraction, I
suppose, would not answer your purpose," submitted the lieutenant.

"And the very kilogramme weight you used would have become lighter,” put
in the count, deferentially.

"Pray, gentlemen, do not interrupt me," said the professor, authoritatively, as
if ex cathedra. "I need no instruction on these points."

Procope and Timascheff demurely bowed their heads.

The professor resumed. "Upon a steelyard, or spring-balance, dependent
upon mere tension or flexibility, the attraction will have no influence. If I
suspend a weight equivalent to the weight of a kilogramme, the index will
register the proper weight on the surface of Gallia. Thus I shall arrive at the
difference I want: the difference between the earth's attraction and the comet's.
Will you, therefore, have the goodness to provide me at once with a steelyard
and a tested kilogramme?"

The audience looked at one another, and then at Ben Zoof, who was
thoroughly acquainted with all their resources. "We have neither one nor the
other," said the orderly.

The professor stamped with vexation.

"I believe old Hakkabut has a steelyard on board his tartan," said Ben Zoof,
presently.

"Then why didn't you say so before, you idiot?" roared the excitable little
man.

Anxious to pacify him, Servadac assured him that every exertion should be
made to procure the instrument, and directed Ben Zoof to go to the Jew and
borrow it.

"No, stop a moment," he said, as Ben Zoof was moving away on his, errand;
"perhaps I had better go with you myself; the old Jew may make a difficulty
about lending us any of his property."

"Why should we not all go?" asked the count; "we should see what kind of a
life the misanthrope leads on board the Hansa."

The proposal met with general approbation. Before they started, Professor
Rosette requested that one of the men might be ordered to cut him a cubic
decimeter out of the solid substance of Gallia. "My engineer is the man for that,"
said the count; "he will do it well for you if you will give him the precise


measurement."

"What! you don't mean,” exclaimed the professor, again going off into a
passion, "that you haven't a proper measure of length?"

Ben Zoof was sent off to ransack the stores for the article in question, but no
measure was forthcoming. "Most likely we shall find one on the tartan," said the
orderly.

"Then let us lose no time in trying," answered the professor, as he hustled
with hasty strides into the gallery.

The rest of the party followed, and were soon in the open air upon the rocks
that overhung the shore. They descended to the level of the frozen water and
made their way towards the little creek where the Dobryna and the Hansa lay
firmly imprisoned in their icy bonds.

The temperature was low beyond previous experience; but well muffled up
in fur, they all endured it without much actual suffering. Their breath issued in
vapor, which was at once congealed into little crystals upon their whiskers,
beards, eyebrows, and eyelashes, until their faces, covered with countless snow-
white prickles, were truly ludicrous. The little professor, most comical of all,
resembled nothing so much as the cub of an Arctic bear.

It was eight o'clock in the morning. The sun was rapidly approaching the
zenith; but its disc, from the extreme remoteness, was proportionately dwarfed;
its beams being all but destitute of their proper warmth and radiance. The
volcano to its very summit and the surrounding rocks were still covered with the
unsullied mantle of snow that had fallen while the atmosphere was still to some
extent charged with vapor; but on the north side the snow had given place to the
cascade of fiery lava, which, making its way down the sloping rocks as far as the
vaulted opening of the central cavern, fell thence perpendicularly into the sea.
Above the cavern, 130 feet up the mountain, was a dark hole, above which the
stream of lava made a bifurcation in its course. From this hole projected the case
of an astronomer's telescope; it was the opening of Palmyrin Rosette's
observatory.

Sea and land seemed blended into one dreary whiteness, to which the pale
blue sky offered scarcely any contrast. The shore was indented with the marks of
many footsteps left by the colonists either on their way to collect ice for drinking
purposes, or as the result of their skating expeditions; the edges of the skates had
cut out a labyrinth of curves complicated as the figures traced by aquatic insects
upon the surface of a pool.

Across the quarter of a mile of level ground that lay between the mountain
and the creek, a series of footprints, frozen hard into the snow, marked the course
taken by Isaac Hakkabut on his last return from Nina's Hive.


On approaching the creek, Lieutenant Procope drew his companions'
attention to the elevation of the Dobryna's and Hansa's waterline, both vessels
being now some fifteen feet above the level of the sea.

"What a strange phenomenon!" exclaimed the captain.

"It makes me very uneasy," rejoined the lieutenant; "in shallow places like
this, as the crust of ice thickens, it forces everything upwards with irresistible
force."

"But surely this process of congelation must have a limit!" said the count.

"But who can say what that limit will be? Remember that we have not yet
reached our maximum of cold," replied Procope.

"Indeed, I hope not!" exclaimed the professor; "where would be the use of
our traveling 200,000,000 leagues from the sun, if we are only to experience the
same temperature as we should find at the poles of the earth?"

"Fortunately for us, however, professor," said the lieutenant, with a smile,
"the temperature of the remotest space never descends beyond 70 degrees below
Zero."

"And as long as there is no wind," added Servadac, "we may pass
comfortably through the winter, without a single attack of catarrh."

Lieutenant Procope proceeded to impart to the count his anxiety about the
situation of his yacht. He pointed out that by the constant superposition of new
deposits of ice, the vessel would be elevated to a great height, and consequently
in the event of a thaw, it must be exposed to a calamity similar to those which in
polar seas cause destruction to so many whalers.

There was no time now for concerting measures offhand to prevent the
disaster, for the other members of the party had already reached the spot where
the Hansa lay bound in her icy trammels. A flight of steps, recently hewn by
Hakkabut himself, gave access for the present to the gangway, but it was evident
that some different contrivance would have to be resorted to when the tartan
should be elevated perhaps to a hundred feet.

A thin curl of blue smoke issued from the copper funnel that projected above
the mass of snow which had accumulated upon the deck of the Hansa. The
owner was sparing of his fuel, and it was only the non-conducting layer of ice
enveloping the tartan that rendered the internal temperature endurable.

"Hi! old Nebuchadnezzar, where are you?" shouted Ben Zoof, at the full
strength of his lungs.

At the sound of his voice, the cabin door opened, and the Jew's head and
shoulders protruded onto the deck.


CHAPTER VI. MONEY AT A PREMIUM

"Who's there? I have nothing here for anyone. Go away!" Such was the
inhospitable greeting with which Isaac Hakkabut received his visitors.

"Hakkabut! do you take us for thieves?" asked Servadac, in tones of stern
displeasure.

"Oh, your Excellency, my lord, I did not know that it was you," whined the
Jew, but without emerging any farther from his cabin.

"Now, old Hakkabut, come out of your shell! Come and show the governor
proper respect, when he gives you the honor of his company," cried Ben Zoof,
who by this time had clambered onto the deck.

After considerable hesitation, but still keeping his hold upon the cabin-door,
the Jew made up his mind to step outside. "What do you want?" he inquired,
timorously.

"T want a word with you," said Servadac, "but I do not want to stand talking
out here in the cold."

Followed by the rest of the party, he proceeded to mount the steps. The Jew
trembled from head to foot. "But I cannot let you into my cabin. I am a poor
man; I have nothing to give you," he moaned piteously.

"Here he is!" laughed Ben Zoof, contemptuously; "he is beginning his
chapter of lamentations over again. But standing out here will never do. Out of
the way, old Hakkabut, I say! out of the way!" and, without more ado, he thrust
the astonished Jew on one side and opened the door of the cabin.

Servadac, however, declined to enter until he had taken the pains to explain
to the owner of the tartan that he had no intention of laying violent hands upon
his property, and that if the time should ever come that his cargo was in
requisition for the common use, he should receive a proper price for his goods,
the same as he would in Europe.

"Europe, indeed!" muttered the Jew maliciously between his teeth.
"European prices will not do for me. I must have Gallian prices--and of my own
fixing, too!"

So large a portion of the vessel had been appropriated to the cargo that the
space reserved for the cabin was of most meager dimensions. In one corner of
the compartment stood a small iron stove, in which smoldered a bare handful of
coals; in another was a trestle-board which served as a bed; two or three stools
and a rickety deal table, together with a few cooking utensils, completed a stock
of furniture which was worthy of its proprietor.

On entering the cabin, Ben Zoof's first proceeding was to throw on the fire a
liberal supply of coals, utterly regardless of the groans of poor Isaac, who would
almost as soon have parted with his own bones as submit to such reckless


expenditure of his fuel. The perishing temperature of the cabin, however, was
sufficient justification for the orderly's conduct, and by a little skillful
manipulation he soon succeeded in getting up a tolerable fire.

The visitors having taken what seats they could, Hakkabut closed the door,
and, like a prisoner awaiting his sentence, stood with folded hands, expecting the
captain to speak.

"Listen," said Servadac; "we have come to ask a favor."

Imagining that at least half his property was to be confiscated, the Jew began
to break out into his usual formula about being a poor man and having nothing to
spare; but Servadac, without heeding his complainings, went on: "We are not
going to ruin you, you know."

Hakkabut looked keenly into the captain's face.

"We have only come to know whether you can lend us a steelyard."

So far from showing any symptom of relief, the old miser exclaimed, with a
stare of astonishment, as if he had been asked for some thousand francs: "A
steelyard?"

"Yes!" echoed the professor, impatiently; "a steelyard."

"Have you not one?" asked Servadac.

"To be sure he has!" said Ben Zoof.

Old Isaac stammered and stuttered, but at last confessed that perhaps there
might be one amongst the stores.

"Then, surely, you will not object to lend it to us?" said the captain.

"Only for one day," added the professor.

The Jew stammered again, and began to object. "It is a very delicate
instrument, your Excellency. The cold, you know, the cold may do injury to the
spring; and perhaps you are going to use it to weigh something very heavy."

"Why, old Ephraim, do you suppose we are going to weigh a mountain with
it?" said Ben Zoof.

"Better than that!" cried out the professor, triumphantly; "we are going to
weigh Gallia with it; my comet."

"Merciful Heaven!" shrieked Isaac, feigning consternation at the bare
suggestion.

Servadac knew well enough that the Jew was holding out only for a good
bargain, and assured him that the steelyard was required for no other purpose
than to weigh a kilogramme, which (considering how much lighter everything
had become) could not possibly put the slightest strain upon the instrument.

The Jew still spluttered, and moaned, and hesitated.

"Well, then," said Servadac, "if you do not like to lend us your steelyard, do
you object to sell it to us?"


Isaac fairly shrieked aloud. "God of Israel!" he ejaculated, "sell my
steelyard? Would you deprive me of one of the most indispensable of my means
of livelihood? How should I weigh my merchandise without my steelyard--my
solitary steelyard, so delicate and so correct?"

The orderly wondered how his master could refrain from strangling the old
miser upon the spot; but Servadac, rather amused than otherwise, determined to
try another form of persuasion. "Come, Hakkabut, I see that you are not disposed
either to lend or to sell your steelyard. What do you say to letting us hire it?"

The Jew's eyes twinkled with a satisfaction that he was unable to conceal.
"But what security would you give? The instrument is very valuable;" and he
looked more cunning than ever.

"What is it worth? If it is worth twenty francs, I will leave a deposit of a
hundred. Will that satisfy you?"

He shook his head doubtfully. "It is very little; indeed, it is too little, your
Excellency. Consider, it is the only steelyard in all this new world of ours; it is
worth more, much more. If I take your deposit it must be in gold--all gold. But
how much do you agree to give me for the hire--the hire, one day?"

"You shall have twenty francs," said Servadac.

"Oh, it is dirt cheap; but never mind, for one day, you shall have it. Deposit
in gold money a hundred francs, and twenty francs for the hire." The old man
folded his hands in meek resignation.

"The fellow knows how to make a good bargain," said Servadac, as Isaac,
after casting a distrustful look around, went out of the cabin.

"Detestable old wretch!" replied the count, full of disgust.

Hardly a minute elapsed before the Jew was back again, carrying his
precious steelyard with ostentatious care. It was of an ordinary kind. A spring
balance, fitted with a hook, held the article to be weighed; a pointer, revolving
on a disc, indicated the weight of the article. Professor Rosette was manifestly
right in asserting that such a machine would register results quite independently
of any change in the force of attraction. On the earth it would have registered a
kilogramme as a kilogramme; here it recorded a different value altogether, as the
result of the altered force of gravity.

Gold coinage to the worth of one hundred and twenty francs was handed
over to the Jew, who clutched at the money with unmistakable eagerness. The
steelyard was committed to the keeping of Ben Zoof, and the visitors prepared to
quit the Hansa.

All at once it occurred to the professor that the steelyard would be absolutely
useless to him, unless he had the means for ascertaining the precise measurement
of the unit of the soil of Gallia which he proposed to weigh. "Something more


you must lend me," he said, addressing the Jew. "I must have a measure, and I
must have a kilogramme."

"I have neither of them," answered Isaac. "I have neither. I am sorry; I am
very sorry." And this time the old Jew spoke the truth. He would have been
really glad to do another stroke or two of business upon terms as advantageous
as the transaction he had just concluded.

Palmyrin Rosette scratched his head in perplexity, glaring round upon his
companions as if they were personally responsible for his annoyance. He
muttered something about finding a way out of his difficulty, and hastily
mounted the cabin-ladder. The rest followed, but they had hardly reached the
deck when the chink of money was heard in the room below. Hakkabut was
locking away the gold in one of the drawers.

Back again, down the ladder, scrambled the little professor, and before the
Jew was aware of his presence he had seized him by the tail of his slouchy
overcoat. "Some of your money! I must have money!" he said.

"Money!" gasped Hakkabut; "I have no money." He was pale with fright, and
hardly knew what he was saying.

"Falsehood!" roared Rosette. "Do you think I cannot see?" And peering
down into the drawer which the Jew was vainly trying to close, he cried, "Heaps
of money! French money! Five-franc pieces! the very thing I want! I must have
them!"

The captain and his friends, who had returned to the cabin looked on with
mingled amusement and bewilderment.

"They are mine!" shrieked Hakkabut.

"T will have them!" shouted the professor.

"You shall kill me first!" bellowed the Jew.

"No, but I must!" persisted the professor again.

It was manifestly time for Servadac to interfere. "My dear professor," he
said, smiling, "allow me to settle this little matter for you."

"Ah! your Excellency," moaned the agitated Jew, "protect me! I am but a
poor man--"

"None of that, Hakkabut. Hold your tongue." And, turning to Rosette, the
captain said, "If, sir, | understand right, you require some silver five-franc pieces
for your operation?"

"Forty," said Rosette, surlily.

"Two hundred francs!" whined Hakkabut.

"Silence!" cried the captain.

"T must have more than that," the professor continued. "I want ten two-franc
pieces, and twenty half-francs."


"Let me see," said Servadac, "how much is that in all? Two hundred and
thirty francs, is it not?"

"I dare say it is," answered the professor.

"Count, may I ask you," continued Servadac, "to be security to the Jew for
this loan to the professor?"

"Loan!" cried the Jew, "do you mean only a loan?"

"Silence!" again shouted the captain.

Count Timascheff, expressing his regret that his purse contained only paper
money, begged to place it at Captain Servadac's disposal.

"No paper, no paper!" exclaimed Isaac. "Paper has no currency in Gallia."

"About as much as silver," coolly retorted the count.

"I am a poor man," began the Jew.

"Now, Hakkabut, stop these miserable lamentations of yours, once for all.
Hand us over two hundred and thirty francs in silver money, or we will proceed
to help ourselves."

Isaac began to yell with all his might: "Thieves! thieves!"

In a moment Ben Zoof's hand was clasped tightly over his mouth. "Stop that
howling, Belshazzar!"

"Let him alone, Ben Zoof. He will soon come to his senses," said Servadac,
quietly.

When the old Jew had again recovered himself, the captain addressed him.
"Now, tell us, what interest do you expect?"

Nothing could overcome the Jew's anxiety to make another good bargain. He
began: "Money is scarce, very scarce, you know--"

"No more of this!" shouted Servadac. "What interest, I say, what interest do
you ask?"

Faltering and undecided still, the Jew went on. "Very scarce, you know. Ten
francs a day, I think, would not be unreasonable, considering--"

The count had no patience to allow him to finish what he was about to say.
He flung down notes to the value of several rubles. With a greediness that could
not be concealed, Hakkabut grasped them all. Paper, indeed, they were; but the
cunning Israelite knew that they would in any case be security far beyond the
value of his cash. He was making some eighteen hundred per cent. interest, and
accordingly chuckled within himself at his unexpected stroke of business.

The professor pocketed his French coins with a satisfaction far more
demonstrative. "Gentlemen," he said, "with these franc pieces I obtain the means
of determining accurately both a meter and a kilogramme."


CHAPTER VII. GALLIA WEIGHED

A quarter of an hour later, the visitors to the Hansa had reassembled in the
common hall of Nina's Hive.

"Now, gentlemen, we can proceed," said the professor. "May I request that
this table may be cleared?"

Ben Zoof removed the various articles that were lying on the table, and the
coins which had just been borrowed from the Jew were placed upon it in three
piles, according to their value.

The professor commenced. "Since none of you gentlemen, at the time of the
shock, took the precaution to save either a meter measure or a kilogramme
weight from the earth, and since both these articles are necessary for the
calculation on which we are engaged, I have been obliged to devise means of my
own to replace them."

This exordium delivered, he paused and seemed to watch its effect upon his
audience, who, however, were too well acquainted with the professor's temper to
make any attempt to exonerate themselves from the rebuke of carelessness, and
submitted silently to the implied reproach.

"I have taken pains," he continued, "to satisfy myself that these coins are in
proper condition for my purpose. I find them unworn and unchipped; indeed,
they are almost new. They have been hoarded instead of circulated; accordingly,
they are fit to be utilized for my purpose of obtaining the precise length of a
terrestrial meter."

Ben Zoof looked on in perplexity, regarding the lecturer with much the same
curiosity as he would have watched the performances of a traveling mountebank
at a fair in Montmartre; but Servadac and his two friends had already divined the
professor's meaning. They knew that French coinage is all decimal, the franc
being the standard of which the other coins, whether gold, silver, or copper, are
multiples or measures; they knew, too, that the caliber or diameter of each piece
of money is rigorously determined by law, and that the diameters of the silver
coins representing five francs, two francs, and fifty centimes measure thirty-
seven, twenty-seven, and eighteen millimeters respectively; and they accordingly
guessed that Professor Rosette had conceived the plan of placing such a number
of these coins in juxtaposition that the length of their united diameters should
measure exactly the thousand millimeters that make up the terrestrial meter.

The measurement thus obtained was by means of a pair of compasses
divided accurately into ten equal portions, or decimeters, each of course 3.93
inches long. A lath was then cut of this exact length and given to the engineer of
the Dobryna, who was directed to cut out of the solid rock the cubic decimeter
required by the professor.


The next business was to obtain the precise weight of a kilogramme. This
was by no means a difficult matter. Not only the diameters, but also the weights,
of the French coins are rigidly determined by law, and as the silver five-franc
pieces always weigh exactly twenty-five grammes, the united weight of forty of
these coins is known to amount to one kilogramme.

"Oh!" cried Ben Zoof; "to be able to do all this I see you must be rich as well
as learned."

With a good-natured laugh at the orderly's remark, the meeting adjourned for
a few hours. By the appointed time the engineer had finished his task, and with
all due care had prepared a cubic decimeter of the material of the comet.

"Now, gentlemen," said Professor Rosette, "we are in a position to complete
our calculation; we can now arrive at Gallia's attraction, density, and mass."

Everyone gave him his complete attention.

"Before I proceed," he resumed, "I must recall to your minds Newton's
general law, 'that the attraction of two bodies is directly proportional to the
product of their masses, and inversely proportional to the square of their
distances."

"Yes," said Servadac; "we remember that."

"Well, then," continued the professor, "keep it in mind for a few minutes
now. Look here! In this bag are forty five-franc pieces--altogether they weigh
exactly a kilogramme; by which I mean that if we were on the earth, and I were
to hang the bag on the hook of the steelyard, the indicator on the dial would
register one kilogramme. This is clear enough, I suppose?"

As he spoke the professor designedly kept his eyes fixed upon Ben Zoof. He
was avowedly following the example of Arago, who was accustomed always in
lecturing to watch the countenance of the least intelligent of his audience, and
when he felt that he had made his meaning clear to him, he concluded that he
must have succeeded with all the rest. In this case, however, it was technical
ignorance, rather than any lack of intelligence, that justified the selection of the
orderly for this special attention.

Satisfied with his scrutiny of Ben Zoof's face, the professor went on. "And
now, gentlemen, we have to see what these coins weigh here upon Gallia."

He suspended the money bag to the hook; the needle oscillated, and stopped.
"Read it off!" he said.

The weight registered was one hundred and thirty-three grammes.

"There, gentlemen, one hundred and thirty-three grammes! Less than one-
seventh of a kilogramme! You see, consequently, that the force of gravity here
on Gallia is not one-seventh of what it is upon the earth!"

"Interesting!" cried Servadac, "most interesting! But let us go on and


compute the mass."

"No, captain, the density first," said Rosette.

"Certainly," said the lieutenant; "for, as we already know the volume, we can
determine the mass as soon as we have ascertained the density."

The professor took up the cube of rock. "You know what this is," he went on
to say. "You know, gentlemen, that this block is a cube hewn from the substance
of which everywhere, all throughout your voyage of circumnavigation, you
found Gallia to be composed--a substance to which your geological attainments
did not suffice to assign a name."

"Our curiosity will be gratified," said Servadac, "if you will enlighten our
ignorance."

But Rosette did not take the slightest notice of the interruption.

"A substance it is which no doubt constitutes the sole material of the comet,
extending from its surface to its innermost depths. The probability is that it
would be so; your experience confirms that probability: you have found no trace
of any other substance. Of this rock here is a solid decimeter; let us get at its
weight, and we shall have the key which will unlock the problem of the whole
weight of Gallia. We have demonstrated that the force of attraction here is only
one-seventh of what it is upon the earth, and shall consequently have to multiply
the apparent weight of our cube by seven, in order to ascertain its proper weight.
Do you understand me, goggle-eyes?"

This was addressed to Ben Zoof, who was staring hard at him. "No!" said
Ben Zoof.

"T thought not; it is of no use waiting for your puzzle-brains to make it out. I
must talk to those who can understand."

The professor took the cube, and, on attaching it to the hook of the steelyard,
found that its apparent weight was one kilogramme and four hundred and thirty
grammes.

"Here it is, gentlemen; one kilogramme, four hundred and thirty grammes.
Multiply that by seven; the product is, as nearly as possible, ten kilogrammes.
What, therefore, is our conclusion? Why, that the density of Gallia is just about
double the density of the earth, which we know is only five kilogrammes to a
cubic decimeter. Had it not been for this greater density, the attraction of Gallia
would only have been one-fifteenth instead of one-seventh of the terrestrial
attraction."

The professor could not refrain from exhibiting his gratification that,
however inferior in volume, in density, at least, his comet had the advantage over
the earth.

Nothing further now remained than to apply the investigations thus finished


to the determining of the mass or weight. This was a matter of little labor.

"Let me see," said the captain; "what is the force of gravity upon the various
planets?"

"You can't mean, Servadac, that you have forgotten that? But you always
were a disappointing pupil."

The captain could not help himself: he was forced to confess that his
memory had failed him.

"Well, then," said the professor, "I must remind you. Taking the attraction on
the earth as 1, that on Mercury is 1.15, on Venus it is.92, on Mars.5, and on
Jupiter 2.45; on the moon the attraction is.16, whilst on the surface of the sun a
terrestrial kilogramme would weigh 28 kilogrammes."

"Therefore, if a man upon the surface of the sun were to fall down, he would
have considerable difficulty in getting up again. A cannon ball, too, would only
fly a few yards," said Lieutenant Procope.

"A jolly battle-field for cowards!" exclaimed Ben Zoof.

"Not so jolly, Ben Zoof, as you fancy," said his master; "the cowards would
be too heavy to run away."

Ben Zoof ventured the remark that, as the smallness of Gallia secured to its
inhabitants such an increase of strength and agility, he was almost sorry that it
had not been a little smaller still.

"Though it could not anyhow have been very much smaller," he added,
looking slyly at the professor.

"Idiot!" exclaimed Rosette. "Your head is too light already; a puff of wind
would blow it away."

"I must take care of my head, then, and hold it on," replied the irrepressible
orderly.

Unable to get the last word, the professor was about to retire, when Servadac
detained him.

"Permit me to ask you one more question," he said. "Can you tell me what is
the nature of the soil of Gallia?"

"Yes, I can answer that. And in this matter I do not think your impertinent
orderly will venture to put Montmartre into the comparison. This soil is of a
substance not unknown upon the earth." And speaking very slowly, the professor
said: "It contains 70 per cent. of tellurium, and 30 per cent. of gold."

Servadac uttered an exclamation of surprise.

"And the sum of the specific gravities of these two substances is 10,
precisely the number that represents Gallia's density."

"A comet of gold!" ejaculated the captain.

"Yes; a realization of what the illustrious Maupertuis has already deemed


probable," replied the astronomer.

"If Gallia, then, should ever become attached to the earth, might it not bring
about an important revolution in all monetary affairs?" inquired the count.

"No doubt about it!" said Rosette, with manifest satisfaction. "It would
supply the world with about 246,000 trillions of francs."

"It would make gold about as cheap as dirt, I suppose," said Servadac.

The last observation, however, was entirely lost upon the professor, who had
left the hall with an air almost majestic, and was already on his way to the
observatory.

"And what, I wonder, is the use of all these big figures?" said Ben Zoof to his
master, when next day they were alone together.

"That's just the charm of them, my good fellow," was the captain's cool reply,
"that they are of no use whatever."


CHAPTER VIII. JUPITER SOMEWHAT CLOSE

Except as to the time the comet would take to revolve round the sun, it must
be confessed that all the professor's calculations had comparatively little interest
for anyone but himself, and he was consequently left very much to pursue his
studies in solitude.

The following day was the 1st of August, or, according to Rosette, the 63rd
of April. In the course of this month Gallia would travel 16,500,000 leagues,
attaining at the end a distance of 197,000,000 leagues from the sun. This would
leave 81,000,000 leagues more to be traversed before reaching the aphelion of
the 15th of January, after which it would begin once more to approach the sun.

But meanwhile, a marvelous world, never before so close within the range of
human vision, was revealing itself. No wonder that Palmyrin Rosette cared so
little to quit his observatory; for throughout those calm, clear Gallian nights,
when the book of the firmament lay open before him, he could revel in a
spectacle which no previous astronomer had ever been permitted to enjoy.

The glorious orb that was becoming so conspicuous an object was none other
than the planet Jupiter, the largest of all the bodies existing within the influence
of solar attraction. During the seven months that had elapsed since its collision
with the earth, the comet had been continuously approaching the planet, until the
distance between them was scarcely more than 61,000,000 leagues, and this
would go on diminishing until the 15th of October.

Under these circumstances, was it perfectly certain that no danger could
accrue? Was not Gallia, when its pathway led it into such close proximity to this
enormous planet, running a risk of being attracted within its influence? Might


not that influence be altogether disastrous? The professor, it is true, in his
estimate of the duration of his comet's revolution, had represented that he had
made all proper allowances for any perturbations that would be caused either by
Jupiter, by Saturn, or by Mars; but what if there were any errors in his
calculations? what if there should be any elements of disturbance on which he
had not reckoned?

Speculations of this kind became more and more frequent, and Lieutenant
Procope pointed out that the danger incurred might be of a fourfold character:
first, that the comet, being irresistibly attracted, might be drawn on to the very
surface of the planet, and there annihilated; secondly, that as the result of being
brought under that attraction, it might be transformed into a satellite, or even a
sub-satellite, of that mighty world; thirdly, that it might be diverted into a new
orbit, which would never be coincident with the ecliptic; or, lastly, its course
might be so retarded that it would only reach the ecliptic too late to permit any
junction with the earth. The occurrence of any one of these contingencies would
be fatal to their hopes of reunion with the globe, from which they had been so
strangely severed.

To Rosette, who, without family ties which he had never found leisure or
inclination to contract, had no shadow of desire to return to the earth, it would be
only the first of these probabilities that could give him any concern. Total
annihilation might not accord with his views, but he would be quite content for
Gallia to miss its mark with regard to the earth, indifferent whether it revolved as
a new Satellite around Jupiter, or whether it wended its course through the
untraversed regions of the milky way. The rest of the community, however, by
no means sympathized with the professor's sentiments, and the following month
was a period of considerable doubt and anxiety.

On the 1st of September the distance between Gallia and Jupiter was
precisely the same as the mean distance between the earth and the sun; on the
16th, the distance was further reduced to 26,000,000 leagues. The planet began
to assume enormous dimensions, and it almost seemed as if the comet had
already been deflected from its elliptical orbit, and was rushing on in a straight
line towards the overwhelming luminary.

The more they contemplated the character of this gigantic planet, the more
they became impressed with the likelihood of a serious perturbation in their own
course. The diameter of Jupiter is 85,390 miles, nearly eleven times as great as
that of the earth; his volume is 1,387 times, and his mass 300 times greater; and
although the mean density is only about a quarter of that of the earth, and only a
third of that of water (whence it has been supposed that the superficies of Jupiter
is liquid), yet his other proportions were large enough to warrant the


apprehension that important disturbances might result from his proximity.

"I forget my astronomy, lieutenant," said Servadac. "Tell me all you can
about this formidable neighbor."

The lieutenant having refreshed his memory by reference to Flammarion's
Recits de I'Infini, of which he had a Russian translation, and some other books,
proceeded to recapitulate that Jupiter accomplishes his revolution round the sun
in 4,332 days 14 hours and 2 minutes; that he travels at the rate of 467 miles a
minute along an orbit measuring 2,976 millions of miles; and that his rotation on
his axis occupies only 9 hours and 55 minutes.

"His days, then, are shorter than ours?" interrupted the captain.

"Considerably," answered the lieutenant, who went on to describe how the
displacement of a point at the equator of Jupiter was twenty-seven times as rapid
as on the earth, causing the polar compression to be about 2,378 miles; how the
axis, being nearly perpendicular, caused the days and nights to be nearly of the
same length, and the seasons to be invariable; and how the amount of light and
heat received by the planet is only a twenty-fifth part of that received by the
earth, the average distance from the sun being 475,693,000 miles.

"And how about these satellites? Sometimes, I suppose, Jupiter has the
benefit of four moons all shining at once?" asked Servadac.

Of the satellites, Lieutenant Procope went on to say that one is rather smaller
than our own moon; that another moves round its primary at an interval about
equal to the moon's distance from ourselves; but that they all revolve in
considerably less time: the first takes only | day 18 hours 27 minutes; the second
takes 3 days 13 hours 14 minutes; the third, 7 days 3 hours 42 minutes; whilst
the largest of all takes but 16 days 16 hours 32 minutes. The most remote
revolves round the planet at a distance of 1,192,820 miles.

"They have been enlisted into the service of science," said Procope. "It is by
their movements that the velocity of light has been calculated; and they have
been made available for the determination of terrestrial longitudes."

"Tt must be a wonderful sight," said the captain.

"Yes," answered Procope. "I often think Jupiter is like a prodigious clock
with four hands."

"I only hope that we are not destined to make a fifth hand," answered
Servadac.

Such was the style of the conversation that was day by day reiterated during
the whole month of suspense. Whatever topic might be started, it seemed soon to
settle down upon the huge orb that was looming upon them with such
threatening aspect.

"The more remote that these planets are from the sun," said Procope, "the


more venerable and advanced in formation are they found to be. Neptune,
situated 2,746,271,000 miles from the sun, issued from the solar nebulosity,
thousands of millions of centuries back. Uranus, revolving 1,753,851,000 miles
from the center of the planetary system, is of an age amounting to many hundred
millions of centuries. Jupiter, the colossal planet, gravitating at a distance of
475,693,000 miles, may be reckoned as 70,000,000 centuries old. Mars has
existed for 1,000,000,000 years at a distance of 139,212,000 miles. The earth,
91,430,000 miles from the sun, quitted his burning bosom 100,000,000 years
ago. Venus, revolving now 66,131,000 miles away, may be assigned the age of
50,000,000 years at least; and Mercury, nearest of all, and youngest of all, has
been revolving at a distance of 35,393,000 miles for the space of 10,000,000
years--the same time as the moon has been evolved from the earth."

Servadac listened attentively. He was at a loss what to say; and the only reply
he made to the recital of this novel theory was to the effect that, if it were true,
he would prefer being captured by Mercury than by Jupiter, for Mercury, being
so much the younger, would probably prove the less imperative and self-willed
master.

It was on the 1st of September that the comet had crossed the orbit of Jupiter,
and on the 1st of October the two bodies were calculated to be at their minimum
separation. No direct shock, however, could be apprehended; the demonstration
was sufficiently complete that the orbit of Gallia did not coincide with that of the
planet, the orbit of Jupiter being inclined at an angle of 1 degrees 19 mins to the
orbit of the earth, with which that of Gallia was, no doubt, coincident.

As the month of September verged towards its close, Jupiter began to wear
an aspect that must have excited the admiration of the most ignorant or the most
indifferent observer. Its salient points were illumined with novel and radiant
tints, and the solar rays, reflected from its disc, glowed with a mingled softness
and intensity upon Gallia, so that Nerina had to pale her beauty.

Who could wonder that Rosette, enthusiast as he was, should be irremovable
from his observatory? Who could expect otherwise than that, with the prospect
before him of viewing the giant among planets, ten times nearer than any mortal
eye had ever done, he should have begrudged every moment that distracted his
attention?

Meanwhile, as Jupiter grew large, the sun grew small.

From its increased remoteness the diameter of the sun's disc was diminished
to 5 degrees 46 mins.

And what an increased interest began to be associated with the satellites!
They were visible to the naked eye! Was it not a new record in the annals of
science?


Although it is acknowledged that they are not ordinarily visible on earth
without the aid of a somewhat powerful telescope, it has been asserted that a
favored few, endued with extraordinary powers of vision, have been able to
identify them with an unassisted eye; but here, at least, in Nina's Hive were
many rivals, for everyone could so far distinguish them one from the other as to
describe them by their colors. The first was of a dull white shade; the second was
blue; the third was white and brilliant; the fourth was orange, at times
approaching to a red. It was further observed that Jupiter itself was almost void
of scintillation.

Rosette, in his absorbing interest for the glowing glories of the planet,
seemed to be beguiled into comparative forgetfulness of the charms of his
comet; but no astronomical enthusiasm of the professor could quite allay the
general apprehension that some serious collision might be impending.

Time passed on. There was nothing to justify apprehension. The question
was continually being asked, "What does the professor really think?"

"Our friend the professor," said Servadac, "is not likely to tell us very much;
but we may feel pretty certain of one thing: he wouldn't keep us long in the dark,
if he thought we were not going back to the earth again. The greatest satisfaction
he could have would be to inform us that we had parted from the earth for ever."

"I trust from my very soul," said the count, "that his prognostications are
correct."

"The more I see of him, and the more I listen to him," replied Servadac, "the
more I become convinced that his calculations are based on a solid foundation,
and will prove correct to the minutest particular."

Ben Zoof here interrupted the conversation. "I have something on my mind,"
he said.

"Something on your mind? Out with it!" said the captain.

"That telescope!" said the orderly; "it strikes me that that telescope which the
old professor keeps pointed up at yonder big sun is bringing it down straight
upon us."

The captain laughed heartily.

"Laugh, captain, if you like; but I feel disposed to break the old telescope
into atoms."

"Ben Zoof," said Servadac, his laughter exchanged for a look of stern
displeasure, "touch that telescope, and you shall swing for it!"

The orderly looked astonished.

"I am governor here," said Servadac.

Ben Zoof knew what his master meant, and to him his master's wish was law.

The interval between the comet and Jupiter was, by the 1st of October,


reduced to 43,000,000 miles. The belts all parallel to Jupiter's equator were very
distinct in their markings. Those immediately north and south of the equator
were of a dusky hue; those toward the poles were alternately dark and light; the
intervening spaces of the planet's superficies, between edge and edge, being
intensely bright. The belts themselves were occasionally broken by spots, which
the records of astronomy describe as varying both in form and in extent.

The physiology of belts and spots alike was beyond the astronomer's power
to ascertain; and even if he should be destined once again to take his place in an
astronomical congress on the earth, he would be just as incapable as ever of
determining whether or no they owed their existence to the external
accumulation of vapor, or to some internal agency. It would not be Professor
Rosette's lot to enlighten his brother savants to any great degree as to the
mysteries that are associated with this, which must ever rank as one of the most
magnificent amongst the heavenly orbs.

As the comet approached the critical point of its career it cannot be denied
that there was an unacknowledged consciousness of alarm. Mutually reserved,
though ever courteous, the count and the captain were secretly drawn together by
the prospect of a common danger; and as their return to the earth appeared to
them to become more and more dubious, they abandoned their views of narrow
isolation, and tried to embrace the wider philosophy that acknowledges the
credibility of a habitable universe.

But no philosophy could be proof against the common instincts of their
humanity; their hearts, their hopes, were set upon their natural home; no
speculation, no science, no experience, could induce them to give up their fond
and sanguine anticipation that once again they were to come in contact with the
earth.

"Only let us escape Jupiter," said Lieutenant Procope, repeatedly, "and we
are free from anxiety."

"But would not Saturn lie ahead?" asked Servadac and the count in one
breath.

"No!" said Procope; "the orbit of Saturn is remote, and does not come
athwart our path. Jupiter is our sole hindrance. Of Jupiter we must say, as
William Tell said, 'Once through the ominous pass and all is well.""

The 15th of October came, the date of the nearest approximation of the
comet to the planet. They were only 31,000,000 miles apart. What would now
transpire? Would Gallia be diverted from its proper way? or would it hold the
course that the astronomer had predicted?

Early next morning the captain ventured to take the count and the lieutenant
up to the observatory. The professor was in the worst of tempers.


That was enough. It was enough, without a word, to indicate the course
which events had taken. The comet was pursuing an unaltered way.

The astronomer, correct in his prognostications, ought to have been the most
proud and contented of philosophers; his pride and contentment were both
overshadowed by the certainty that the career of his comet was destined to be so
transient, and that it must inevitably once again come into collision with the
earth.


CHAPTER IX MARKET PRICES IN GALLIA


"All right!" said Servadac, convinced by the professor's ill humor that the
danger was past; "no doubt we are in for a two years’ excursion, but fifteen
months more will take us back to the earth!"

"And we shall see Montmartre again!" exclaimed Ben Zoof, in excited tones
that betrayed his delight in the anticipation.

To use a nautical expression, they had safely "rounded the point," and they
had to be congratulated on their successful navigation; for if, under the influence
of Jupiter's attraction, the comet had been retarded for a single hour, in that hour
the earth would have already traveled 2,300,000 miles from the point where
contact would ensue, and many centuries would elapse before such a
coincidence would possibly again occur.

On the 1st of November Gallia and Jupiter were 40,000,000 miles apart. It
was little more than ten weeks to the 15th of January, when the comet would
begin to re-approach the sun. Though light and heat were now reduced to a
twenty-fifth part of their terrestrial intensity, so that a perpetual twilight seemed
to have settled over Gallia, yet the population felt cheered even by the little that
was left, and buoyed up by the hope that they should ultimately regain their
proper position with regard to the great luminary, of which the temperature has
been estimated as not less than 5,000,000 degrees.

Of the anxiety endured during the last two months Isaac Hakkabut had
known nothing. Since the day he had done his lucky stroke of business he had
never left the tartan; and after Ben Zoof, on the following day, had returned the
steelyard and the borrowed cash, receiving back the paper roubles deposited, all
communication between the Jew and Nina's Hive had ceased. In the course of
the few minutes' conversation which Ben Zoof had held with him, he had
mentioned that he knew that the whole soil of Gallia was made of gold; but the
old man, guessing that the orderly was only laughing at him as usual, paid no
attention to the remark, and only meditated upon the means he could devise to
get every bit of the money in the new world into his own possession. No one
grieved over the life of solitude which Hakkabut persisted in leading. Ben Zoof
giggled heartily, as he repeatedly observed "it was astonishing how they
reconciled themselves to his absence."

The time came, however, when various circumstances prompted him to think
he must renew his intercourse with the inhabitants of the Hive. Some of his
goods were beginning to spoil, and he felt the necessity of turning them into


money, if he would not be a loser; he hoped, moreover, that the scarcity of his
commodities would secure very high prices.

It happened, just about this same time, that Ben Zoof had been calling his
master's attention to the fact that some of their most necessary provisions would
soon be running short, and that their stock of coffee, sugar, and tobacco would
want replenishing. Servadac's mind, of course, turned to the cargo on board the
Hansa, and he resolved, according to his promise, to apply to the Jew and
become a purchaser. Mutual interest and necessity thus conspired to draw
Hakkabut and the captain together.

Often and often had Isaac gloated in his solitude over the prospect of first
selling a portion of his merchandise for all the gold and silver in the colony. His
recent usurious transaction had whetted his appetite. He would next part with
some more of his cargo for all the paper money they could give him; but still he
should have goods left, and they would want these. Yes, they should have these,
too, for promissory notes. Notes would hold good when they got back again to
the earth; bills from his Excellency the governor would be good bills; anyhow
there would be the sheriff. By the God of Israel! he would get good prices, and
he would get fine interest!

Although he did not know it, he was proposing to follow the practice of the
Gauls of old, who advanced money on bills for payment in a future life.
Hakkabut's "future life," however, was not many months in advance of the
present.

Still Hakkabut hesitated to make the first advance, and it was accordingly
with much satisfaction that he hailed Captain Servadac's appearance on board
the Hansa.

"Hakkabut," said the captain, plunging without further preface into business,
"we want some coffee, some tobacco, and other things. I have come to-day to
order them, to settle the price, and to-morrow Ben Zoof shall fetch the goods
away."

"Merciful, heavens!" the Jew began to whine; but Servadac cut him short.

"None of that miserable howling! Business! I am come to buy your goods. I
shall pay for them."

"Ah yes, your Excellency," whispered the Jew, his voice trembling like a
street beggar. "Don't impose on me. I am poor; I am nearly ruined already."

"Cease your wretched whining!" cried Servadac. "I have told you once, I
shall pay for all I buy."

"Ready money?" asked Hakkabut.

"Yes, ready money. What makes you ask?" said the captain, curious to hear
what the Jew would say.


"Well, you see--you see, your Excellency," stammered out the Jew, "to give
credit to one wouldn't do, unless I gave credit to another. You are solvent--I
mean honorable, and his lordship the count is honorable; but maybe--maybe--"

"Well?" said Servadac, waiting, but inclined to kick the old rascal out of his
sight.

"T shouldn't like to give credit," he repeated.

"IT have not asked you for credit. I have told you, you shall have ready
money."

"Very good, your Excellency. But how will you pay me?"

"Pay you? Why, we shall pay you in gold and silver and copper, while our
money lasts, and when that is gone we shall pay you in bank notes."

"Oh, no paper, no paper!" groaned out the Jew, relapsing into his accustomed
whine.

"Nonsense, man!" cried Servadac.

"No paper!" reiterated Hakkabut.

"Why not? Surely you can trust the banks of England, France, and Russia."

"Ah no! I must have gold. Nothing so safe as gold."

"Well then,” said the captain, not wanting to lose his temper, "you shall have
it your own way; we have plenty of gold for the present. We will leave the bank
notes for by and by." The Jew's countenance brightened, and Servadac, repeating
that he should come again the next day, was about to quit the vessel.

"One moment, your Excellency," said Hakkabut, sidling up with a
hypocritical smile; "I suppose I am to fix my own prices."

"You will, of course, charge ordinary prices--proper market prices; European
prices, I mean."

"Merciful heavens!" shrieked the old man, "you rob me of my rights; you
defraud me of my privilege. The monopoly of the market belongs to me. It is the
custom; it is my right; it is my privilege to fix my own prices."

Servadac made him understand that he had no intention of swerving from his
decision.

"Merciful heavens!" again howled the Jew, "it is sheer ruin. The time of
monopoly is the time for profit; it is the time for speculation."

"The very thing, Hakkabut, that I am anxious to prevent. Just stop now, and
think a minute. You seem to forget my rights; you are forgetting that, if I please, I
can confiscate all your cargo for the common use. You ought to think yourself
lucky in getting any price at all. Be contented with European prices; you will get
no more. I am not going to waste my breath on you. I will come again to-
morrow;" and, without allowing Hakkabut time to renew his lamentations,
Servadac went away.


All the rest of the day the Jew was muttering bitter curses against the thieves
of Gentiles in general, and the governor of Gallia in particular, who were
robbing him of his just profits, by binding him down to a maximum price for his
goods, just as if it were a time of revolution in the state. But he would be even
with them yet; he would have it all out of them: he would make European prices
pay, after all. He had a plan--he knew how; and he chuckled to himself, and
grinned maliciously.

True to his word, the captain next morning arrived at the tartan. He was
accompanied by Ben Zoof and two Russian sailors. "Good-morning, old Eleazar;
we have come to do our little bit of friendly business with you, you know," was
Ben Zoof's greeting.

"What do you want to-day?" asked the Jew.

"To-day we want coffee, and we want sugar, and we want tobacco. We must
have ten kilogrammes of each. Take care they are all good; all first rate. I am
commissariat officer, and I am responsible."

"IT thought you were the governor's aide-de-camp," said Hakkabut.

"So I am, on state occasions; but to-day, I tell you. I am superintendent of the
commissariat department. Now, look sharp!"

Hakkabut hereupon descended into the hold of the tartan, and soon returned,
carrying ten packets of tobacco, each weighing one kilogramme, and securely
fastened by strips of paper, labeled with the French government stamp.

"Ten kilogrammes of tobacco at twelve francs a kilogramme: a hundred and
twenty francs," said the Jew.

Ben Zoof was on the point of laying down the money, when Servadac
stopped him.

"Let us just see whether the weight is correct."

Hakkabut pointed out that the weight was duly registered on every packet,
and that the packets had never been unfastened. The captain, however, had his
own special object in view, and would not be diverted. The Jew fetched his
steelyard, and a packet of the tobacco was suspended to it.

"Merciful heavens!" screamed Isaac.

The index registered only 133 grammes!

"You see, Hakkabut, I was right. I was perfectly justified in having your
goods put to the test," said Servadac, quite seriously.

"But--but, your Excellency--" stammered out the bewildered man.

"You will, of course, make up the deficiency," the captain continued, not
noticing the interruption.

"Oh, my lord, let me say--" began Isaac again.

"Come, come, old Caiaphas, do you hear? You are to make up the


deficiency," exclaimed Ben Zoof.

"Ah, yes, yes; but--"

The unfortunate Israelite tried hard to speak, but his agitation prevented him.
He understood well enough the cause of the phenomenon, but he was
overpowered by the conviction that the "cursed Gentiles" wanted to cheat him.
He deeply regretted that he had not a pair of common scales on board.

"Come, I say, old Jedediah, you are a long while making up what's short,"
said Ben Zoof, while the Jew was still stammering on.

As soon as he recovered his power of articulation, Isaac began to pour out a
medley of lamentations and petitions for mercy. The captain was inexorable.
"Very sorry, you know, Hakkabut. It is not my fault that the packet is short
weight; but I cannot pay for a kilogramme except I have a kilogramme."

Hakkabut pleaded for some consideration.

"A bargain is a bargain," said Servadac. "You must complete your contract."

And, moaning and groaning, the miserable man was driven to make up the
full weight as registered by his own steelyard. He had to repeat the process with
the sugar and coffee: for every kilogramme he had to weigh seven. Ben Zoof and
the Russians jeered him most unmercifully.

"I say, old Mordecai, wouldn't you rather give your goods away, than sell
them at this rate? I would."

"I say, old Pilate, a monopoly isn't always a good thing, is it?"

"I say, old Sepharvaim, what a flourishing trade you're driving!"

Meanwhile seventy kilogrammes of each of the articles required were
weighed, and the Jew for each seventy had to take the price of ten.

All along Captain Servadac had been acting only in jest. Aware that old Isaac
was an utter hypocrite, he had no compunction in turning a business transaction
with him into an occasion for a bit of fun. But the joke at an end, he took care
that the Jew was properly paid all his legitimate due.


CHAPTER X. FAR INTO SPACE

A month passed away. Gallia continued its course, bearing its little
population onwards, so far removed from the ordinary influence of human
passions that it might almost be said that its sole ostensible vice was represented
by the greed and avarice of the miserable Jew.

After all, they were but making a voyage--a strange, yet a transient,
excursion through solar regions hitherto untraversed; but if the professor's
calculations were correct--and why should they be doubted?--their little vessel
was destined, after a two years’ absence, once more to return "to port." The


landing, indeed, might be a matter of difficulty; but with the good prospect
before them of once again standing on terrestrial shores, they had nothing to do
at present except to make themselves as comfortable as they could in their
present quarters.

Thus confident in their anticipations, neither the captain, the count, nor the
lieutenant felt under any serious obligation to make any extensive provisions for
the future; they saw no necessity for expending the strength of the people, during
the short summer that would intervene upon the long severity of winter, in the
cultivation or the preservation of their agricultural resources. Nevertheless, they
often found themselves talking over the measures they would have been driven
to adopt, if they had found themselves permanently attached to their present
home.

Even after the turning-point in their career, they knew that at least nine
months would have to elapse before the sea would be open to navigation; but at
the very first arrival of summer they would be bound to arrange for the Dobryna
and the Hansa to retransport themselves and all their animals to the shores of
Gourbi Island, where they would have to commence their agricultural labors to
secure the crops that must form their winter store. During four months or
thereabouts, they would lead the lives of farmers and of sportsmen; but no
sooner would their haymaking and their corn harvest have been accomplished,
than they would be compelled again, like a swarm of bees, to retire to their semi-
troglodyte existence in the cells of Nina's Hive.

Now and then the captain and his friends found themselves speculating
whether, in the event of their having to spend another winter upon Gallia, some
means could not be devised by which the dreariness of a second residence in the
recesses of the volcano might be escaped. Would not another exploring
expedition possibly result in the discovery of a vein of coal or other combustible
matter, which could be turned to account in warming some erection which they
might hope to put up? A prolonged existence in their underground quarters was
felt to be monotonous and depressing, and although it might be all very well for
a man like Professor Rosette, absorbed in astronomical studies, it was ill suited
to the temperaments of any of themselves for any longer period than was
absolutely indispensable.

One contingency there was, almost too terrible to be taken into account. Was
it not to be expected that the time might come when the internal fires of Gallia
would lose their activity, and the stream of lava would consequently cease to
flow? Why should Gallia be exempt from the destiny that seemed to await every
other heavenly body? Why should it not roll onwards, like the moon, a dark cold
mass in space?


In the event of such a cessation of the volcanic eruption, whilst the comet
was still at so great a distance from the sun, they would indeed be at a loss to
find a substitute for what alone had served to render life endurable at a
temperature of 60 degrees below zero. Happily, however, there was at present no
symptom of the subsidence of the lava's stream; the volcano continued its regular
and unchanging discharge, and Servadac, ever sanguine, declared that it was
useless to give themselves any anxiety upon the matter.

On the 15th of December, Gallia was 276,000,000 leagues from the sun, and,
as it was approximately to the extremity of its axis major, would travel only
some 11,000,000 or 12,000,000 leagues during the month. Another world was
now becoming a conspicuous object in the heavens, and Palmyrin Rosette, after
rejoicing in an approach nearer to Jupiter than any other mortal man had ever
attained, was now to be privileged to enjoy a similar opportunity of
contemplating the planet Saturn. Not that the circumstances were altogether so
favorable. Scarcely 31,000,000 miles had separated Gallia from Jupiter; the
minimum distance of Saturn would not be less than 415,000,000 miles; but even
this distance, although too great to affect the comet's progress more than had
been duly reckoned on, was considerably shorter than what had ever separated
Saturn from the earth.

To get any information about the planet from Rosette appeared quite
impossible. Although equally by night and by day he never seemed to quit his
telescope, he did not evince the slightest inclination to impart the result of his
observations. It was only from the few astronomical works that happened to be
included in the Dobryna's library that any details could be gathered, but these
were sufficient to give a large amount of interesting information.

Ben Zoof, when he was made aware that the earth would be invisible to the
naked eye from the surface of Saturn, declared that he then, for his part, did not
care to learn any more about such a planet; to him it was indispensable that the
earth should remain in sight, and it was his great consolation that hitherto his
native sphere had never vanished from his gaze.

At this date Saturn was revolving at a distance of 420,000,000 miles from
Gallia, and consequently 874,440,000 miles from the sun, receiving only a
hundredth part of the light and heat which that luminary bestows upon the earth.
On consulting their books of reference, the colonists found that Saturn completes
his revolution round the sun in a period of 29 years and 167 days, traveling at the
rate of more than 21,000 miles an hour along an orbit measuring 5,490 millions
of miles in length. His circumference is about 220,000 miles; his superficies,
144,000 millions of square miles; his volume, 143,846 millions of cubic miles.
Saturn is 735 times larger than the earth, consequently he is smaller than Jupiter;


in mass he is only 90 times greater than the earth, which gives him a density less
than that of water. He revolves on his axis in 10 hours 29 minutes, causing his
own year to consist of 86,630 days; and his seasons, on account of the great
inclination of his axis to the plane of his orbit, are each of the length of seven
terrestrial years.

Although the light received from the sun is comparatively feeble, the nights
upon Saturn must be splendid. Eight satellites--Mimas, Enceladus, Tethys,
Dione, Rhea, Titan, Hyperion, and Japetus--accompany the planet; Mimas, the
Nearest to its primary, rotating on its axis in 221/2 hours, and revolving at a
distance of only 120,800 miles, whilst Japetus, the most remote, occupies 79
days in its rotation, and revolves at a distance of 2,314,000 miles.

Another most important contribution to the magnificence of the nights upon
Saturn is the triple ring with which, as a brilliant setting, the planet is
encompassed. To an observer at the equator, this ring, which has been estimated
by Sir William Herschel as scarcely 100 miles in thickness, must have the
appearance of a narrow band of light passing through the zenith 12,000 miles
above his head. As the observer, however, increases his latitude either north or
south, the band will gradually widen out into three detached and concentric
rings, of which the innermost, dark though transparent, is 9,625 miles in breadth;
the intermediate one, which is brighter than the planet itself, being 17,605 miles
broad; and the outer, of a dusky hue, being 8,660 miles broad.

Such, they read, is the general outline of this strange appendage, which
revolves in its own plane in 10 hours 32 minutes. Of what matter it is composed,
and how it resists disintegration, is still an unsettled question; but it might almost
seem that the Designer of the universe, in permitting its existence, had been
willing to impart to His intelligent creatures the manner in which celestial bodies
are evolved, and that this remarkable ring-system is a remnant of the nebula
from which Saturn was himself developed, and which, from some unknown
cause, has become solidified. If at any time it should disperse, it would either fall
into fragments upon the surface of Saturn, or the fragments, mutually coalescing,
would form additional satellites to circle round the planet in its path.

To any observer stationed on the planet, between the extremes of lat. 45
degrees on either side of the equator, these wonderful rings would present
various strange phenomena. Sometimes they would appear as an illuminated
arch, with the shadow of Saturn passing over it like the hour-hand over a dial; at
other times they would be like a semi-aureole of light. Very often, too, for
periods of several years, daily eclipses of the sun must occur through the
interposition of this triple ring.

Truly, with the constant rising and setting of the satellites, some with bright


discs at their full, others like silver crescents, in quadrature, as well as by the
encircling rings, the aspect of the heavens from the surface of Saturn must be as
impressive as it is gorgeous.

Unable, indeed, the Gallians were to realize all the marvels of this strange
world. After all, they were practically a thousand times further off than the great
astronomers have been able to approach by means of their giant telescopes. But
they did not complain; their little comet, they knew, was far safer where it was;
far better out of the reach of an attraction which, by affecting their path, might
have annihilated their best hopes.

The distances of several of the brightest of the fixed stars have been
estimated. Amongst others, Vega in the constellation Lyra is 100 millions of
millions of miles away; Sirius in Canis Major, 123 millions of millions; the Pole-
star, 282 millions of millions; and Capella, 340 millions of millions of miles, a
figure represented by no less than fifteen digits.

The hard numerical statement of these enormous figures, however, fails
altogether in any adequate way to convey a due impression of the magnitude of
these distances. Astronomers, in their ingenuity, have endeavored to use some
other basis, and have found "the velocity of light" to be convenient for their
purpose. They have made their representations something in this way:

"Suppose," they say, "an observer endowed with an infinite length of vision:
suppose him stationed on the surface of Capella; looking thence towards the
earth, he would be a spectator of events that had happened seventy years
previously; transport him to a star ten times distant, and he will be reviewing the
terrestrial sphere of 720 years back; carry him away further still, to a star so
remote that it requires something less than nineteen centuries for light to reach it,
and he would be a witness of the birth and death of Christ; convey him further
again, and he shall be looking upon the dread desolation of the Deluge; take him
away further yet (for space is infinite), and he shall be a spectator of the Creation
of the spheres. History is thus stereotyped in space; nothing once accomplished
can ever be effaced."

Who can altogether be astonished that Palmyrin Rosette, with his burning
thirst for astronomical research, should have been conscious of a longing for yet
wider travel through the sidereal universe? With his comet now under the
influence of one star, now of another, what various systems might he not have
explored! what undreamed-of marvels might not have revealed themselves
before his gaze! The stars, fixed and immovable in name, are all of them in
motion, and Gallia might have followed them in their un-tracked way.

But Gallia had a narrow destiny. She was not to be allowed to wander away
into the range of attraction of another center; nor to mingle with the star clusters,


some of which have been entirely, others partially resolved; nor was she to lose
herself amongst the 5,000 nebulae which have resisted hitherto the grasp of the
most powerful reflectors. No; Gallia was neither to pass beyond the limits of the
solar system, nor to travel out of sight of the terrestrial sphere. Her orbit was
circumscribed to little over 1,500 millions of miles; and, in comparison with the
infinite space beyond, this was a mere nothing.


CHAPTER XI. A FETE DAY

The temperature continued to decrease; the mercurial thermometer, which
freezes at 42 degrees below zero, was no longer of service, and the spirit
thermometer of the Dobryna had been brought into use. This now registered 53
degrees below freezing-point.

In the creek, where the two vessels had been moored for the winter, the
elevation of the ice, in anticipation of which Lieutenant Procope had taken the
precautionary measure of beveling, was going on slowly but irresistibly, and the
tartan was upheaved fifty feet above the level of the Gallian Sea, while the
schooner, as being lighter, had been raised to a still greater altitude.

So irresistible was this gradual process of elevation, so utterly defying all
human power to arrest, that the lieutenant began to feel very anxious as to the
safety of his yacht. With the exception of the engine and the masts, everything
had been cleared out and conveyed to shore, but in the event of a thaw it
appeared that nothing short of a miracle could prevent the hull from being
dashed to pieces, and then all means of leaving the promontory would be gone.
The Hansa, of course, would share a similar fate; in fact, it had already heeled
over to such an extent as to render it quite dangerous for its obstinate owner,
who, at the peril of his life, resolved that he would stay where he could watch
over his all-precious cargo, though continually invoking curses on the ill-fate of
which he deemed himself the victim.

There was, however, a stronger will than Isaac Hakkabut's. Although no one
of all the community cared at all for the safety of the Jew, they cared very much
for the security of his cargo, and when Servadac found that nothing would
induce the old man to abandon his present quarters voluntarily, he very soon
adopted measures of coercion that were far more effectual than any
representations of personal danger.

"Stop where you like, Hakkabut," said the captain to him; "but understand
that I consider it my duty to make sure that your cargo is taken care of. I am
going to have it carried across to land, at once."

Neither groans, nor tears, nor protestations on the part of the Jew, were of the


slightest avail. Forthwith, on the 20th of December, the removal of the goods
commenced.

Both Spaniards and Russians were all occupied for several days in the work
of unloading the tartan. Well muffled up as they were in furs, they were able to
endure the cold with impunity, making it their special care to avoid actual
contact with any article made of metal, which, in the low state of the
temperature, would inevitably have taken all the skin off their hands, as much as
if it had been red-hot. The task, however, was brought to an end without accident
of any kind; and when the stores of the Hansa were safely deposited in the
galleries of the Hive, Lieutenant Procope avowed that he really felt that his mind
had been unburdened from a great anxiety.

Captain Servadac gave old Isaac full permission to take up his residence
amongst the rest of the community, promised him the entire control over his own
property, and altogether showed him so much consideration that, but for his
unbounded respect for his master, Ben Zoof would have liked to reprimand him
for his courtesy to aman whom he so cordially despised.

Although Hakkabut clamored most vehemently about his goods being
carried off "against his will," in his heart he was more than satisfied to see his
property transferred to a place of safety, and delighted, moreover, to know that
the transport had been effected without a farthing of expense to himself. As
soon, then, as he found the tartan empty, he was only too glad to accept the offer
that had been made him, and very soon made his way over to the quarters in the
gallery where his merchandise had been stored. Here he lived day and night. He
supplied himself with what little food he required from his own stock of
provisions, a small spirit-lamp sufficing to perform all the operations of his
meager cookery. Consequently all intercourse between himself and the rest of
the inhabitants was entirely confined to business transactions, when occasion
required that some purchase should be made from his stock of commodities.
Meanwhile, all the silver and gold of the colony was gradually finding its way to
a double-locked drawer, of which the Jew most carefully guarded the key.

The 1st of January was drawing near, the anniversary of the shock which had
resulted in the severance of thirty-six human beings from the society of their
fellow-men. Hitherto, not one of them was missing. The unvarying calmness of
the climate, notwithstanding the cold, had tended to maintain them in good
health, and there seemed no reason to doubt that, when Gallia returned to the
earth, the total of its little population would still be complete.

The 1st of January, it is true, was not properly "New Year's Day" in Gallia,
but Captain Servadac, nevertheless, was very anxious to have it observed as a
holiday.


"I do not think," he said to Count Timascheff and Lieutenant Procope, "that
we ought to allow our people to lose their interest in the world to which we are
all hoping to return; and how can we cement the bond that ought to unite us,
better than by celebrating, in common with our fellow-creatures upon earth, a
day that awakens afresh the kindliest sentiments of all? Besides," he added,
smiling, "I expect that Gallia, although invisible just at present to the naked eye,
is being closely watched by the telescopes of our terrestrial friends, and I have
no doubt that the newspapers and scientific journals of both hemispheres are full
of accounts detailing the movements of the new comet."

"True," asserted the count. "I can quite imagine that we are occasioning no
small excitement in all the chief observatories."

"Ay, more than that," said the lieutenant; "our Gallia is certain to be far more
than a mere object of scientific interest or curiosity. Why should we doubt that
the elements of a comet which has once come into collision with the earth have
by this time been accurately calculated? What our friend the professor has done
here, has been done likewise on the earth, where, beyond a question, all manner
of expedients are being discussed as to the best way of mitigating the violence of
a concussion that must occur."

The lieutenant's conjectures were so reasonable that they commanded assent.
Gallia could scarcely be otherwise than an object of terror to the inhabitants of
the earth, who could by no means be certain that a second collision would be
comparatively so harmless as the first. Even to the Gallians themselves, much as
they looked forward to the event, the prospect was not unmixed with alarm, and
they would rejoice in the invention of any device by which it was likely the
impetus of the shock might be deadened.

Christmas arrived, and was marked by appropriate religious observance by
everyone in the community, with the exception of the Jew, who made a point of
secluding himself more obstinately than ever in the gloomy recesses of his
retreat.

To Ben Zoof the last week of the year was full of bustle. The arrangements
for the New Year fete were entrusted to him, and he was anxious, in spite of the
resources of Gallia being so limited, to make the program for the great day as
attractive as possible.

It was a matter of debate that night whether the professor should be invited to
join the party; it was scarcely likely that he would care to come, but, on the
whole, it was felt to be advisable to ask him. At first Captain Servadac thought
of going in person with the invitation; but, remembering Rosette's dislike to
visitors, he altered his mind, and sent young Pablo up to the observatory with a
formal note, requesting the pleasure of Professor Rosette's company at the New


Year's fete.

Pablo was soon back, bringing no answer except that the professor had told
him that "to-day was the 125th of June, and that to-morrow would be the 1st of
July."

Consequently, Servadac and the count took it for granted that Palmyrin
Rosette declined their invitation.

An hour after sunrise on New Year's Day, Frenchmen, Russians, Spaniards,
and little Nina, as the representative of Italy, sat down to a feast such as never
before had been seen in Gallia. Ben Zoof and the Russian cook had quite
surpassed themselves. The wines, part of the Dobryna's stores, were of excellent
quality. Those of the vintages of France and Spain were drunk in toasting their
respective countries, and even Russia was honored in a similar way by means of
a few bottles of kummel. The company was more than contented--it was as
jovial as Ben Zoof could desire; and the ringing cheers that followed the great
toast of the day--"A happy return to our Mother Earth," must fairly have startled
the professor in the silence of his observatory.

The dejeuner over, there still remained three hours of daylight. The sun was
approaching the zenith, but so dim and enfeebled were his rays that they were
very unlike what had produced the wines of Bordeaux and Burgundy which they
had just been enjoying, and it was necessary for all, before starting upon an
excursion that would last over nightfall, to envelop themselves in the thickest of
clothing.

Full of spirits, the party left the Hive, and chattering and singing as they
went, made their way down to the frozen shore, where they fastened on their
skates. Once upon the ice, everyone followed his own fancy, and some singly,
some in groups, scattered themselves in all directions. Captain Servadac, the
count, and the lieutenant were generally seen together. Negrete and the
Spaniards, now masters of their novel exercise, wandered fleetly and gracefully
hither and thither, occasionally being out of sight completely. The Russian
sailors, following a northern custom, skated in file, maintaining their rank by
means of a long pole passed under their right arms, and in this way they
described a trackway of singular regularity. The two children, blithe as birds,
flitted about, now singly, now arm-in-arm, now joining the captain's party, now
making a short peregrination by themselves, but always full of life and spirit. As
for Ben Zoof, he was here, there, and everywhere, his imperturbable good
temper ensuring him a smile of welcome whenever he appeared.

Thus coursing rapidly over the icy plain, the whole party had soon exceeded
the line that made the horizon from the shore. First, the rocks of the coast were
lost to view; then the white crests of the cliffs were no longer to be seen; and at


last, the summit of the volcano, with its corona of vapor, was entirely out of
sight. Occasionally the skaters were obliged to stop to recover their breath, but,
fearful of frost-bite, they almost instantly resumed their exercise, and proceeded
nearly as far as Gourbi Island before they thought about retracing their course.

But night was coming on, and the sun was already sinking in the east with
the rapidity to which the residents on Gallia were by this time well accustomed.
The sunset upon this contracted horizon was very remarkable. There was not a
cloud nor a vapor to catch the tints of the declining beams; the surface of the ice
did not, as a liquid sea would, reflect the last green ray of light; but the radiant
orb, enlarged by the effect of refraction, its circumference sharply defined
against the sky, sank abruptly, as though a trap had been opened in the ice for its
reception.

Before the daylight ended. Captain Servadac had cautioned the party to
collect themselves betimes into one group. "Unless you are sure of your
whereabouts before dark," he said, "you will not find it after. We have come out
like a party of skirmishers; let us go back in full force."

The night would be dark; their moon was in conjunction, and would not be
seen; the stars would only give something of that "pale radiance" which the poet
Corneille has described.

Immediately after sunset the torches were lighted, and the long series of
flames, fanned by the rapid motion of their bearers, had much the appearance of
an enormous fiery banner. An hour later, and the volcano appeared like a dim
shadow on the horizon, the light from the crater shedding a lurid glare upon the
surrounding gloom. In time the glow of the burning lava, reflected in the icy
mirror, fell upon the troop of skaters, and cast their lengthened shadows
grotesquely on the surface of the frozen sea.

Later still, half an hour or more afterwards, the torches were all but dying
out. The shore was close at hand. All at once, Ben Zoof uttered a startled cry,
and pointed with bewildered excitement towards the mountain. Involuntarily,
one and all, they plowed their heels into the ice and came to a halt. Exclamations
of surprise and horror burst from every lip. The volcano was extinguished! The
stream of burning lava had suddenly ceased to flow!

Speechless with amazement, they stood still for some moments. There was
not one of them that did not realize, more or less, how critical was their position.
The sole source of the heat that had enabled them to brave the rigor of the cold
had failed them! death, in the cruellest of all shapes, seemed staring them in the
face--death from cold! Meanwhile, the last torch had flickered out.

It was quite dark.

"Forward!" cried Servadac, firmly.


At the word of command they advanced to the shore; clambered with no
little difficulty up the slippery rocks; gained the mouth of the gallery; groped
their way into the common hall.

How dreary! how chill it seemed!

The fiery cataract no longer spread its glowing covering over the mouth of
the grotto. Lieutenant Procope leaned through the aperture. The pool, hitherto
kept fluid by its proximity to the lava, was already encrusted with a layer of ice.

Such was the end of the New Year's Day so happily begun.


CHAPTER XII. THE BOWELS OF THE COMET

The whole night was spent in speculating, with gloomy forebodings, upon
the chances of the future. The temperature of the hall, now entirely exposed to
the outer air, was rapidly falling, and would quickly become unendurable. Far
too intense was the cold to allow anyone to remain at the opening, and the
moisture on the walls soon resolved itself into icicles. But the mountain was like
the body of a dying man, that retains awhile a certain amount of heat at the heart
after the extremities have become cold and dead. In the more interior galleries
there was still a certain degree of warmth, and hither Servadac and his
companions were glad enough to retreat.

Here they found the professor, who, startled by the sudden cold, had been
fain to make a precipitate retreat from his observatory. Now would have been the
opportunity to demand of the enthusiast whether he would like to prolong his
residence indefinitely upon his little comet. It is very likely that he would have
declared himself ready to put up with any amount of discomfort to be able to
gratify his love of investigation; but all were far too disheartened and distressed
to care to banter him upon the subject on which he was so sensitive.

Next morning, Servadac thus addressed his people. "My friends, except from
cold, we have nothing to fear. Our provisions are ample--more than enough for
the remaining period of our sojourn in this lone world of ours; our preserved
meat is already cooked; we shall be able to dispense with all fuel for cooking
purposes. All that we require is warmth--warmth for ourselves; let us secure that,
and all may be well. Now, I do not entertain a doubt but that the warmth we
require is resident in the bowels of this mountain on which we are living; to the
depth of those bowels we must penetrate; there we shall obtain the warmth
which is indispensable to our very existence."

His tone, quite as much as his words, restored confidence to many of his
people, who were already yielding to a feeling of despair. The count and the
lieutenant fervently, but silently, grasped his hand.


"Nina," said the captain, "you will not be afraid to go down to the lower
depths of the mountain, will you?"

"Not if Pablo goes," replied the child.

"Oh yes, of course, Pablo will go. You are not afraid to go, are you, Pablo?"
he said, addressing the boy.

"Anywhere with you, your Excellency," was the boy's prompt reply.

And certain it was that no time must be lost in penetrating below the heart of
the volcano; already the most protected of the many ramifications of Nina's Hive
were being pervaded by a cold that was insufferable. It was an acknowledged
impossibility to get access to the crater by the exterior declivities of the
mountain-side; they were far too steep and too slippery to afford a foothold. It
must of necessity be entered from the interior.

Lieutenant Procope accordingly undertook the task of exploring all the
galleries, and was soon able to report that he had discovered one which he had
every reason to believe abutted upon the central funnel. His reason for coming to
this conclusion was that the caloric emitted by the rising vapors of the hot lava
seemed to be oozing, as it were, out of the tellurium, which had been
demonstrated already to be a conductor of heat. Only succeed in piercing
through this rock for seven or eight yards, and the lieutenant did not doubt that
his way would be opened into the old lava-course, by following which he hoped
descent would be easy.

Under the lieutenant's direction the Russian sailors were immediately set to
work. Their former experience had convinced them that spades and pick-axes
were of no avail, and their sole resource was to proceed by blasting with
gunpowder. However skillfully the operation might be carried on, it must
necessarily occupy several days, and during that time the sufferings from cold
must be very severe.

"If we fail in our object, and cannot get to the depths of the mountain, our
little colony is doomed," said Count Timascheff.

"That speech is not like yourself," answered Servadac, smiling. "What has
become of the faith which has hitherto carried you so bravely through all our
difficulties?"

The count shook his head, as if in despair, and said, sadly, "The Hand that
has hitherto been outstretched to help seems now to be withdrawn."

"But only to test our powers of endurance," rejoined the captain, earnestly.
"Courage, my friend, courage! Something tells me that this cessation of the
eruption is only partial; the internal fire is not all extinct. All is not over yet. It is
too soon to give up; never despair!"

Lieutenant Procope quite concurred with the captain. Many causes, he knew,


besides the interruption of the influence of the oxygen upon the mineral
substances in Gallia's interior, might account for the stoppage of the lava-flow in
this one particular spot, and he considered it more than probable that a fresh
outlet had been opened in some other part of the surface, and that the eruptive
matter had been diverted into the new channel. But at present his business was to
prosecute his labors so that a retreat might be immediately effected from their
now untenable position.

Restless and agitated, Professor Rosette, if he took any interest in these
discussions, certainly took no share in them. He had brought his telescope down
from the observatory into the common hall, and there at frequent intervals, by
night and by day, he would endeavor to continue his observations; but the
intense cold perpetually compelled him to desist, or he would literally have been
frozen to death. No sooner, however, did he find himself obliged to retreat from
his study of the heavens, than he would begin overwhelming everybody about
him with bitter complaints, pouring out his regrets that he had ever quitted his
quarters at Formentera.

On the 4th of January, by persevering industry, the process of boring was
completed, and the lieutenant could hear that fragments of the blasted rock, as
the sailors cleared them away with their spades, were rolling into the funnel of
the crater. He noticed, too, that they did not fall perpendicularly, but seemed to
slide along, from which he inferred that the sides of the crater were sloping; he
had therefore reason to hope that a descent would be found practicable.

Larger and larger grew the orifice; at length it would admit a man's body, and
Ben Zoof, carrying a torch, pushed himself through it, followed by the lieutenant
and Servadac. Procope's conjecture proved correct. On entering the crater, they
found that the sides slanted at the angle of about 4 degrees; moreover, the
eruption had evidently been of recent origin, dating probably only from the
shock which had invested Gallia with a proportion of the atmosphere of the
earth, and beneath the coating of ashes with which they were covered, there were
various irregularities in the rock, not yet worn away by the action of the lava,
and these afforded a tolerably safe footing.

"Rather a bad staircase!" said Ben Zoof, as they began to make their way
down.

In about half an hour, proceeding in a southerly direction, they had
descended nearly five hundred feet. From time to time they came upon large
excavations that at first sight had all the appearance of galleries, but by waving
his torch, Ben Zoof could always see their extreme limits, and it was evident that
the lower strata of the mountain did not present the same system of ramification
that rendered the Hive above so commodious a residence.


It was not a time to be fastidious; they must be satisfied with such
accommodation as they could get, provided it was warm. Captain Servadac was
only too glad to find that his hopes about the temperature were to a certain extent
realized. The lower they went, the greater was the diminution in the cold, a
diminution that was far more rapid than that which is experienced in making the
descent of terrestrial mines. In this case it was a volcano, not a colliery, that was
the object of exploration, and thankful enough they were to find that it had not
become extinct. Although the lava, from some unknown cause, had ceased to
rise in the crater, yet plainly it existed somewhere in an incandescent state, and
was still transmitting considerable heat to inferior strata.

Lieutenant Procope had brought in his hand a mercurial thermometer, and
Servadac carried an aneroid barometer, by means of which he could estimate the
depth of their descent below the level of the Gallian Sea. When they were six
hundred feet below the orifice the mercury registered a temperature of 6 degrees
below zero.

"Six degrees!" said Servadac; "that will not suit us. At this low temperature
we could not survive the winter. We must try deeper down. I only hope the
ventilation will hold out."

There was, however, nothing to fear on the score of ventilation. The great
current of air that rushed into the aperture penetrated everywhere, and made
respiration perfectly easy.

The descent was continued for about another three hundred feet, which
brought the explorers to a total depth of nine hundred feet from their old
quarters. Here the thermometer registered 12 degrees above zero--a temperature
which, if only it were permanent, was all they wanted. There was no advantage
in proceeding any further along the lava-course; they could already hear the dull
rumblings that indicated that they were at no great distance from the central
focus.

"Quite near enough for me!" exclaimed Ben Zoof. "Those who are chilly are
welcome to go as much lower as they like. For my part, I shall be quite warm
enough here."

After throwing the gleams of torch-light in all directions, the explorers seated
themselves on a jutting rock, and began to debate whether it was practicable for
the colony to make an abode in these lower depths of the mountain. The
prospect, it must be owned, was not inviting. The crater, it is true, widened out
into a cavern sufficiently large, but here its accommodation ended. Above and
below were a few ledges in the rock that would serve as receptacles for
provisions; but, with the exception of a small recess that must be reserved for
Nina, it was clear that henceforth they must all renounce the idea of having


separate apartments. The single cave must be their dining-room, drawing-room,
and dormitory, all in one. From living the life of rabbits in a warren, they were
reduced to the existence of moles, with the difference that they could not, like
them, forget their troubles in a long winter's sleep.

The cavern, however, was quite capable of being lighted by means of lamps
and lanterns. Among the stores were several barrels of oil and a considerable
quantity of spirits of wine, which might be burned when required for cooking
purposes. Moreover, it would be unnecessary for them to confine themselves
entirely to the seclusion of their gloomy residence; well wrapped up, there would
be nothing to prevent them making occasional excursions both to the Hive and to
the sea-shore. A supply of fresh water would be constantly required; ice for this
purpose must be perpetually carried in from the coast, and it would be necessary
to arrange that everyone in turn should perform this office, as it would be no
sinecure to clamber up the sides of the crater for 900 feet, and descend the same
distance with a heavy burden.

But the emergency was great, and it was accordingly soon decided that the
little colony should forthwith take up its quarters in the cave. After all, they said,
they should hardly be much worse off than thousands who annually winter in
Arctic regions. On board the whaling-vessels, and in the establishments of the
Hudson's Bay Company, such luxuries as separate cabins or sleeping-chambers
are never thought of; one large apartment, well heated and ventilated, with as
few corners as possible, is considered far more healthy; and on board ship the
entire hold, and in forts a single floor, is appropriated to this purpose. The
recollection of this fact served to reconcile them, in a great degree, to the change
to which they felt it requisite to submit.

Having remounted the ascent, they made the result of their exploration
known to the mass of the community, who received the tidings with a sense of
relief, and cordially accepted the scheme of the migration.

The first step was to clear the cavern of its accumulation of ashes, and then
the labor of removal commenced in earnest. Never was a task undertaken with
greater zest. The fear of being to a certainty frozen to death if they remained
where they were, was a stimulus that made everyone put forth all his energies.
Beds, furniture, cooking utensils--first the stores of the Dobryna, then the cargo
of the tartan--all were carried down with the greatest alacrity, and the diminished
weight combined with the downhill route to make the labor proceed with
incredible briskness.

Although Professor Rosette yielded to the pressure of circumstances, and
allowed himself to be conducted to the lower regions, nothing would induce him
to allow his telescope to be carried underground; and as it was undeniable that it


would certainly be of no service deep down in the bowels of the mountain, it was
allowed to remain undisturbed upon its tripod in the great hall of Nina's Hive.

As for Isaac Hakkabut, his outcry was beyond description lamentable. Never,
in the whole universe, had a merchant met with such reverses; never had such a
pitiable series of losses befallen an unfortunate man. Regardless of the ridicule
which his abject wretchedness excited, he howled on still, and kept up an
unending wail; but meanwhile he kept a keen eye upon every article of his
property, and amidst universal laughter insisted on having every item registered
in an inventory as it was transferred to its appointed place of safety. Servadac
considerately allowed the whole of the cargo to be deposited in a hollow apart by
itself, over which the Jew was permitted to keep a watch as vigilant as he
pleased.

By the 10th the removal was accomplished. Rescued, at all events, from the
exposure to a perilous temperature of 60 degrees below zero, the community was
installed in its new home. The large cave was lighted by the Dobryna's lamps,
while several lanterns, suspended at intervals along the acclivity that led to their
deserted quarters above, gave a weird picturesqueness to the scene, that might
vie with any of the graphic descriptions of the "Arabian Nights' Entertainments."

"How do you like this, Nina?" said Ben Zoof.

"Va bene!" replied the child. "We are only living in the cellars instead of
upon the ground floor."

"We will try and make ourselves comfortable," said the orderly.

"Oh yes, we will be happy here," rejoined the child; "it is nice and warm."

Although they were as careful as they could to conceal their misgivings from
the rest, Servadac and his two friends could not regard their present situation
without distrust. When alone, they would frequently ask each other what would
become of them all, if the volcanic heat should really be subsiding, or if some
unexpected perturbation should retard the course of the comet, and compel them
to an indefinitely prolonged residence in their grim abode. It was scarcely likely
that the comet could supply the fuel of which ere long they would be in urgent
need. Who could expect to find coal in the bowels of Gallia,--coal, which is the
residuum of ancient forests mineralized by the lapse of ages? Would not the
lava-cinders exhumed from the extinct volcano be their last poor resource?

"Keep up your spirits, my friends," said Servadac; "we have plenty of time
before us at present. Let us hope that as fresh difficulties arise, fresh ways of
escape will open. Never despair!"

"True," said the count; "it is an old saying that 'Necessity is the mother of
invention.’ Besides, I should think it very unlikely that the internal heat will fail
us now before the summer."


The lieutenant declared that he entertained the same hope. As the reason of
his opinion he alleged that the combustion of the eruptive matter was most
probably of quite recent origin, because the comet before its collision with the
earth had possessed no atmosphere, and that consequently no oxygen could have
penetrated to its interior.

"Most likely you are right,” replied the count; "and so far from dreading a
failure of the internal heat, I am not quite sure that we may not be exposed to a
more terrible calamity still?"

"What?" asked Servadac.

"The calamity of the eruption breaking out suddenly again, and taking us by
surprise."

"Heavens!" cried the captain, "we will not think of that."

"The outbreak may happen again," said the lieutenant, calmly; "but it will be
our fault, our own lack of vigilance, if we are taken by surprise." And so the
conversation dropped.

The 15th of January dawned; and the comet was 220,000,000 leagues from
the sun.

Gallia had reached its aphelion.


CHAPTER XIII. DREARY MONTHS

Henceforth, then, with a velocity ever increasing, Gallia would re-approach
the sun.

Except the thirteen Englishmen who had been left at Gibraltar, every living
creature had taken refuge in the dark abyss of the volcano's crater.

And with those Englishmen, how had it fared?

"Far better than with ourselves," was the sentiment that would have been
universally accepted in Nina's Hive. And there was every reason to conjecture
that so it was. The party at Gibraltar, they all agreed, would not, like themselves,
have been compelled to have recourse to a stream of lava for their supply of
heat; they, no doubt, had had abundance of fuel as well as food; and in their solid
casemate, with its substantial walls, they would find ample shelter from the rigor
of the cold. The time would have been passed at least in comfort, and perhaps in
contentment; and Colonel Murphy and Major Oliphant would have had leisure
more than sufficient for solving the most abstruse problems of the chessboard.
All of them, too, would be happy in the confidence that when the time should
come, England would have full meed of praise to award to the gallant soldiers
who had adhered so well and so manfully to their post.

It did, indeed, more than once occur to the minds both of Servadac and his


friends that, if their condition should become one of extreme emergency, they
might, as a last resource, betake themselves to Gibraltar, and there seek a refuge;
but their former reception had not been of the kindest, and they were little
disposed to renew an acquaintanceship that was marked by so little cordiality.
Not in the least that they would expect to meet with any inhospitable rebuff. Far
from that; they knew well enough that Englishmen, whatever their faults, would
be the last to abandon their fellow-creatures in the hour of distress. Nevertheless,
except the necessity became far more urgent than it had hitherto proved, they
resolved to endeavor to remain in their present quarters. Up till this time no
casualties had diminished their original number, but to undertake so long a
journey across that unsheltered expanse of ice could scarcely fail to result in the
loss of some of their party.

However great was the desire to find a retreat for every living thing in the
deep hollow of the crater, it was found necessary to slaughter almost all the
domestic animals before the removal of the community from Nina's Hive. To
have stabled them all in the cavern below would have been quite impossible,
whilst to have left them in the upper galleries would only have been to abandon
them to a cruel death; and since meat could be preserved for an indefinite time in
the original store-places, now colder than ever, the expedient of killing the
animals seemed to recommend itself as equally prudent and humane.

Naturally the captain and Ben Zoof were most anxious that their favorite
horses should be saved, and accordingly, by dint of the greatest care, all
difficulties in the way were overcome, and Zephyr and Galette were conducted
down the crater, where they were installed in a large hole and provided with
forage, which was still abundant.

Birds, subsisting only on scraps thrown out to them did not cease to follow
the population in its migration, and so numerous did they become that multitudes
of them had repeatedly to be destroyed.

The general re-arrangement of the new residence was no easy business, and
occupied so much time that the end of January arrived before they could be said
to be fairly settled. And then began a life of dreary monotony. Then seemed to
creep over everyone a kind of moral torpor as well as physical lassitude, which
Servadac, the count, and the lieutenant did their best not only to combat in
themselves, but to counteract in the general community. They provided a variety
of intellectual pursuits; they instituted debates in which everybody was
encouraged to take part; they read aloud, and explained extracts from the
elementary manuals of science, or from the books of adventurous travel which
their library supplied; and Russians and Spaniards, day after day, might be seen
gathered round the large table, giving their best attention to instruction which


should send them back to Mother Earth less ignorant than they had left her.

Selfish and morose, Hakkabut could never be induced to be present at these
social gatherings. He was far too much occupied in his own appropriated corner,
either in conning his accounts, or in counting his money. Altogether, with what
he had before, he now possessed the round sum of 150,000 francs, half of which
was in sterling gold; but nothing could give him any satisfaction while he knew
that the days were passing, and that he was denied the opportunity of putting out
his capital in advantageous investments, or securing a proper interest.

Neither did Palmyrin Rosette find leisure to take any share in the mutual
intercourse. His occupation was far too absorbing for him to suffer it to be
interrupted, and to him, living as he did perpetually in a world of figures, the
winter days seemed neither long nor wearisome. Having ascertained every
possible particular about his comet, he was now devoting himself with equal
ardor to the analysis of all the properties of the satellite Nerina, to which he
appeared to assert the same claim of proprietorship.

In order to investigate Nerina it was indispensable that he should make
several actual observations at various points of the orbit; and for this purpose he
repeatedly made his way up to the grotto above, where, in spite of the extreme
severity of the cold, he would persevere in the use of his telescope till he was all
but paralyzed. But what he felt more than anything was the want of some retired
apartment, where he could pursue his studies without hindrance or intrusion.

It was about the beginning of February, when the professor brought his
complaint to Captain Servadac, and begged him to assign him a chamber, no
matter how small, in which he should be free to carry on his task in silence and
without molestation. So readily did Servadac promise to do everything in his
power to provide him with the accommodation for which he asked, that the
professor was put into such a manifest good temper that the captain ventured to
speak upon the matter that was ever uppermost in his mind.

"I do not mean," he began timidly, "to cast the least imputation of inaccuracy
upon any of your calculations, but would you allow me, my dear professor, to
suggest that you should revise your estimate of the duration of Gallia's period of
revolution. It is so important, you know, so all important; the difference of one
half minute, you know, would so certainly mar the expectation of reunion with
the earth--"

And seeing a cloud gathering on Rosette's face, he added:

"IT am sure Lieutenant Procope would be only too happy to render you any
assistance in the revision."

"Sir," said the professor, bridling up, "I want no assistant; my calculations
want no revision. I never make an error. I have made my reckoning as far as


Gallia is concerned. I am now making a like estimate of the elements of Nerina."

Conscious how impolitic it would be to press this matter further, the captain
casually remarked that he should have supposed that all the elements of Nerina
had been calculated long since by astronomers on the earth. It was about as
unlucky a speech as he could possibly have made. The professor glared at him
fiercely.

"Astounding, sir!" he exclaimed. "Yes! Nerina was a planet then; everything
that appertained to the planet was determined; but Nerina is a moon now. And do
you not think, sir, that we have a right to know as much about our moon as those
terrestrials"--and he curled his lip as he spoke with a contemptuous emphasis--
"know of theirs?"

"I beg pardon," said the corrected captain.

"Well then, never mind," replied the professor, quickly appeased; "only will
you have the goodness to get me a proper place for study?"

"T will, as I promised, do all I can," answered Servadac.

"Very good," said the professor. "No immediate hurry; an hour hence will
do."

But in spite of this condescension on the part of the man of science, some
hours had to elapse before any place of retreat could be discovered likely to suit
his requirements; but at length a little nook was found in the side of the cavern
just large enough to hold an armchair and a table, and in this the astronomer was
soon ensconced to his entire satisfaction.

Buried thus, nearly 900 feet below ground, the Gallians ought to have had
unbounded mental energy to furnish an adequate reaction to the depressing
monotony of their existence; but many days would often elapse without any one
of them ascending to the surface of the soil, and had it not been for the necessity
of obtaining fresh water, it seemed almost probable that there would never have
been an effort made to leave the cavern at all.

A few excursions, it is true, were made in the downward direction. The three
leaders, with Ben Zoof, made their way to the lower depths of the crater, not
with the design of making any further examination as to the nature of the rock--
for although it might be true enough that it contained thirty per cent. of gold, it
was as valueless to them as granite--but with the intention of ascertaining
whether the subterranean fire still retained its activity. Satisfied upon this point,
they came to the conclusion that the eruption which had so suddenly ceased in
one spot had certainly broken out in another.

February, March, April, May, passed wearily by; but day succeeded to day
with such gloomy sameness that it was little wonder that no notice was taken of
the lapse of time. The people seemed rather to vegetate than to live, and their


want of vigor became at times almost alarming. The readings around the long
table ceased to be attractive, and the debates, sustained by few, became utterly
wanting in animation. The Spaniards could hardly be roused to quit their beds,
and seemed to have scarcely energy enough to eat. The Russians,
constitutionally of more enduring temperament, did not give way to the same
extent, but the long and drear confinement was beginning to tell upon them all.
Servadac, the count, and the lieutenant all knew well enough that it was the want
of air and exercise that was the cause of much of this mental depression; but
what could they do? The most serious remonstrances on their part were entirely
in vain. In fact, they themselves occasionally fell a prey to the same lassitude
both of body and mind. Long fits of drowsiness, combined with an utter aversion
to food, would come over them. It almost seemed as if their entire nature had
become degenerate, and that, like tortoises, they could sleep and fast till the
return of summer.

Strange to say, little Nina bore her hardships more bravely than any of them.
Flitting about, coaxing one to eat, another to drink, rousing Pablo as often as he
seemed yielding to the common languor, the child became the life of the party.
Her merry prattle enlivened the gloom of the grim cavern like the sweet notes of
a bird; her gay Italian songs broke the monotony of the depressing silence; and
almost unconscious as the half-dormant population of Gallia were of her
influence, they still would have missed her bright presence sorely. The months
still glided on; how, it seemed impossible for the inhabitants of the living tomb
to say. There was a dead level of dullness.

At the beginning of June the general torpor appeared slightly to relax its hold
upon its victims. This partial revival was probably due to the somewhat
increased influence of the sun, still far, far away. During the first half of the
Gallian year, Lieutenant Procope had taken careful note of Rosette's monthly
announcements of the comet's progress, and he was able now, without reference
to the professor, to calculate the rate of advance on its way back towards the sun.
He found that Gallia had re-crossed the orbit of Jupiter, but was still at the
enormous distance of 197,000,000 leagues from the sun, and he reckoned that in
about four months it would have entered the zone of the telescopic planets.

Gradually, but uninterruptedly, life and spirits continued to revive, and by the
end of the month Servadac and his little colony had regained most of their
ordinary physical and mental energies. Ben Zoof, in particular, roused himself
with redoubled vigor, like a giant refreshed from his slumbers. The visits,
consequently, to the long-neglected galleries of Nina's Hive became more and
more frequent.

One day an excursion was made to the shore. It was still bitterly cold, but the


atmosphere had lost nothing of its former stillness, and not a cloud was visible
from horizon to zenith. The old footmarks were all as distinct as on the day in
which they had been imprinted, and the only portion of the shore where any
change was apparent was in the little creek. Here the elevation of the ice had
gone on increasing, until the schooner and the tartan had been uplifted to a
height of 150 feet, not only rendering them quite inaccessible, but exposing them
to all but certain destruction in the event of a thaw.

Isaac Hakkabut, immovable from the personal oversight of his property in
the cavern, had not accompanied the party, and consequently was in blissful
ignorance of the fate that threatened his vessel. "A good thing the old fellow
wasn't there to see," observed Ben Zoof; "he would have screamed like a
peacock. What a misfortune it is," he added, speaking to himself, "to have a
peacock's voice, without its plumage!"

During the months of July and August, Gallia advanced 164,000,000 leagues
along her orbit. At night the cold was still intense, but in the daytime the sun,
here full upon the equator, caused an appreciable difference of 20 degrees in the
temperature. Like birds, the population spent whole days exposed to its grateful
warmth, rarely returning till nightfall to the shade of their gloomy home.

This spring-time, if such it may be called, had a most enlivening influence
upon all. Hope and courage revived as day by day the sun's disc expanded in the
heavens, and every evening the earth assumed a greater magnitude amongst the
fixed stars. It was distant yet, but the goal was cheeringly in view.

"I can't believe that yonder little speck of light contains my mountain of
Montmartre," said Ben Zoof, one night, after he had been gazing long and
steadily at the far-off world.

"You will, I hope, some day find out that it does," answered his master.

"I hope so," said the orderly, without moving his eye from the distant sphere.
After meditating a while, he spoke again. "I suppose Professor Rosette couldn't
make his comet go straight back, could he?"

"Hush!" cried Servadac.

Ben Zoof understood the correction.

"No," continued the captain; "it is not for man to disturb the order of the
universe. That belongs to a Higher Power than ours!"


CHAPTER XIV. THE PROFESSOR PERPLEXED

Another month passed away, and it was now September, but it was still
impossible to leave the warmth of the subterranean retreat for the more airy and
commodious quarters of the Hive, where "the bees" would certainly have been


frozen to death in their cells. It was altogether quite as much a matter of
congratulation as of regret that the volcano showed no symptoms of resuming its
activity; for although a return of the eruption might have rendered their former
resort again habitable, any sudden outbreak would have been disastrous to them
where they were, the crater being the sole outlet by which the burning lava could
escape.

"A wretched time we have had for the last seven months," said the orderly
one day to his master; "but what a comfort little Nina has been to us all!"

"Yes, indeed,” replied Servadac; "she is a charming little creature. I hardly
know how we should have got on without her."

"What is to become of her when we arrive back at the earth?"

"Not much fear, Ben Zoof, but that she will be well taken care of. Perhaps
you and I had better adopt her."

"Ay, yes," assented the orderly. "You can be her father, and I can be her
mother."

Servadac laughed. "Then you and I shall be man and wife."

"We have been as good as that for a long time," observed Ben Zoof, gravely.

By the beginning of October, the temperature had so far moderated that it
could scarcely be said to be intolerable. The comet's distance was scarcely three
times as great from the sun as the earth from the sun, so that the thermometer
rarely sunk beyond 35 degrees below zero. The whole party began to make
almost daily visits to the Hive, and frequently proceeded to the shore, where they
resumed their skating exercise, rejoicing in their recovered freedom like
prisoners liberated from a dungeon. Whilst the rest were enjoying their
recreation, Servadac and the count would hold long conversations with
Lieutenant Procope about their present position and future prospects, discussing
all manner of speculations as to the results of the anticipated collision with the
earth, and wondering whether any measures could be devised for mitigating the
violence of a shock which might be terrible in its consequences, even if it did not
entail a total annihilation of themselves.

There was no visitor to the Hive more regular than Rosette. He had already
directed his telescope to be moved back to his former observatory, where, as
much as the cold would permit him, he persisted in making his all-absorbing
studies of the heavens.

The result of these studies no one ventured to inquire; but it became
generally noticed that something was very seriously disturbing the professor's
equanimity. Not only would he be seen toiling more frequently up the arduous
way that lay between his nook below and his telescope above, but he would be
heard muttering in an angry tone that indicated considerable agitation.


One day, as he was hurrying down to his study, he met Ben Zoof, who,
secretly entertaining a feeling of delight at the professor's manifest discomfiture,
made some casual remark about things not being very straight. The way in which
his advance was received the good orderly never divulged, but henceforward he
maintained the firm conviction that there was something very much amiss up in
the sky.

To Servadac and his friends this continual disquietude and ill-humor on the
part of the professor occasioned no little anxiety. From what, they asked, could
his dissatisfaction arise? They could only conjecture that he had discovered
some flaw in his reckonings; and if this were so, might there not be reason to
apprehend that their anticipations of coming into contact with the earth, at the
settled time, might all be falsified?

Day followed day, and still there was no cessation of the professor's
discomposure. He was the most miserable of mortals. If really his calculations
and his observations were at variance, this, in a man of his irritable temperament,
would account for his perpetual perturbation. But he entered into no explanation;
he only climbed up to his telescope, looking haggard and distressed, and when
compelled by the frost to retire, he would make his way back to his study more
furious than ever. At times he was heard giving vent to his vexation. "Confound
it! what does it mean? what is she doing? All behind! Is Newton a fool? Is the
law of universal gravitation the law of universal nonsense?" And the little man
would seize his head in both his hands, and tear away at the scanty locks which
he could ill afford to lose.

Enough was overheard to confirm the suspicion that there was some
irreconcilable discrepancy between the results of his computation and what he
had actually observed; and yet, if he had been called upon to say, he would have
sooner insisted that there was derangement in the laws of celestial mechanism,
than have owned there was the least probability of error in any of his own
calculations. Assuredly, if the poor professor had had any flesh to lose he would
have withered away to a shadow.

But this state of things was before long to come to an end. On the 12th, Ben
Zoof, who was hanging about outside the great hall of the cavern, heard the
professor inside utter a loud cry. Hurrying in to ascertain the cause, he found
Rosette in a state of perfect frenzy, in which ecstasy and rage seemed to be
struggling for the predominance.

"Eureka! Eureka!" yelled the excited astronomer.

"What, in the name of peace, do you mean?" bawled Ben Zoof, in open-
mouthed amazement.

"Eureka!" again shrieked the little man.


"How? What? Where?" roared the bewildered orderly.

"Eureka! I say," repeated Rosette; "and if you don't understand me, you may
go to the devil!"

Without availing himself of this polite invitation, Ben Zoof betook himself to
his master. "Something has happened to the professor," he said; "he is rushing
about like a madman, screeching and yelling 'Eureka!""

"Eureka?" exclaimed Servadac. "That means he has made a discovery;" and,
full of anxiety, he hurried off to meet the professor.

But, however great was his desire to ascertain what this discovery implied,
his curiosity was not yet destined to be gratified. The professor kept muttering in
incoherent phrases: "Rascal! he shall pay for it yet. I will be even with him!
Cheat! Thrown me out!" But he did not vouchsafe any reply to Servadac's
inquiries, and withdrew to his study.

From that day Rosette, for some reason at present incomprehensible, quite
altered his behavior to Isaac Hakkabut, a man for whom he had always hitherto
evinced the greatest repugnance and contempt. All at once he began to show a
remarkable interest in the Jew and his affairs, paying several visits to the dark
little storehouse, making inquiries as to the state of business and expressing
some solicitude about the state of the exchequer.

The wily Jew was taken somewhat by surprise, but came to an immediate
conclusion that the professor was contemplating borrowing some money; he was
consequently very cautious in all his replies.

It was not Hakkabut's habit ever to advance a loan except at an extravagant
rate of interest, or without demanding far more than an adequate security. Count
Timascheff, a Russian nobleman, was evidently rich; to him perhaps, for a
proper consideration, a loan might be made: Captain Servadac was a Gascon,
and Gascons are proverbially poor; it would never do to lend any money to him;
but here was a professor, a mere man of science, with circumscribed means; did
he expect to borrow? Certainly Isaac would as soon think of flying, as of lending
money to him. Such were the thoughts that made him receive all Rosette's
approaches with a careful reservation.

It was not long, however, before Hakkabut was to be called upon to apply his
money to a purpose for which he had not reckoned. In his eagerness to effect
sales, he had parted with all the alimentary articles in his cargo without having
the precautionary prudence to reserve enough for his own consumption.
Amongst other things that failed him was his stock of coffee, and as coffee was a
beverage without which he deemed it impossible to exist, he found himself in
considerable perplexity.

He pondered the matter over for a long time, and ultimately persuaded


himself that, after all, the stores were the common property of all, and that he
had as much right to a share as anyone else. Accordingly, he made his way to
Ben Zoof, and, in the most amiable tone he could assume, begged as a favor that
he would let him have a pound of coffee.

The orderly shook his head dubiously.

"A pound of coffee, old Nathan? I can't say."

"Why not? You have some?" said Isaac.

"Oh yes! plenty--a hundred kilogrammes."

"Then let me have one pound. I shall be grateful."

"Hang your gratitude!"

"Only one pound! You would not refuse anybody else."

"That's just the very point, old Samuel; if you were anybody else, I should
know very well what to do. I must refer the matter to his Excellency."

"Oh, his Excellency will do me justice."

"Perhaps you will find his justice rather too much for you." And with this
consoling remark, the orderly went to seek his master.

Rosette meanwhile had been listening to the conversation, and secretly
rejoicing that an opportunity for which he had been watching had arrived.
"What's the matter, Master Isaac? Have you parted with all your coffee?" he
asked, in a sympathizing voice, when Ben Zoof was gone.

"Ah! yes, indeed," groaned Hakkabut, "and now I require some for my own
use. In my little black hole I cannot live without my coffee."

"Of course you cannot," agreed the professor.

"And don't you think the governor ought to let me have it?"

"No doubt."

"Oh, I must have coffee," said the Jew again.

"Certainly," the professor assented. "Coffee is nutritious; it warms the blood.
How much do you want?"

"A pound. A pound will last me for a long time."

"And who will weigh it for you?" asked Rosette, scarcely able to conceal the
eagerness that prompted the question.

"Why, they will weigh it with my steelyard, of course. There is no other
balance here." And as the Jew spoke, the professor fancied he could detect the
faintest of sighs.

"Good, Master Isaac; all the better for you! You will get your seven pounds
instead of one!"

"Yes; well, seven, or thereabouts--thereabouts," stammered the Jew with
considerable hesitation.

Rosette scanned his countenance narrowly, and was about to probe him with


further questions, when Ben Zoof returned. "And what does his Excellency say?"
inquired Hakkabut.

"Why, Nehemiah, he says he shan't give you any."

"Merciful heavens!" began the Jew.

"He says he doesn't mind selling you a little."

"But, by the holy city, why does he make me pay for what anybody else
could have for nothing?"

"As I told you before, you are not anybody else; so, come along. You can
afford to buy what you want. We should like to see the color of your money."

"Merciful heavens!" the old man whined once more.

"Now, none of that! Yes or no? If you are going to buy, say so at once; if not,
I shall shut up shop."

Hakkabut knew well enough that the orderly was not a man to be trifled
with, and said, in a tremulous voice, "Yes, I will buy."

The professor, who had been looking on with much interest, betrayed
manifest symptoms of satisfaction.

"How much do you want? What will you charge for it?" asked Isaac,
mournfully, putting his hand into his pocket and chinking his money.

"Oh, we will deal gently with you. We will not make any profit. You shall
have it for the same price that we paid for it. Ten francs a pound, you know."

The Jew hesitated.

"Come now, what is the use of your hesitating? Your gold will have no value
when you go back to the world."

"What do you mean?" asked Hakkabut, startled.

"You will find out some day," answered Ben Zoof, significantly.

Hakkabut drew out a small piece of gold from his pocket, took it close under
the lamp, rolled it over in his hand, and pressed it to his lips. "Shall you weigh
me the coffee with my steelyard?" he asked, in a quavering voice that confirmed
the professor's suspicions.

"There is nothing else to weigh it with; you know that well enough, old
Shechem," said Ben Zoof. The steelyard was then produced; a tray was
suspended to the hook, and upon this coffee was thrown until the needle
registered the weight of one pound. Of course, it took seven pounds of coffee to
do this.

"There you are! There's your coffee, man!" Ben Zoof said.

"Are you sure?" inquired Hakkabut, peering down close to the dial. "Are you
quite sure that the needle touches the point?"

"Yes; look and see."

"Give it a little push, please."


"Why?"

"Because--because--"

"Well, because of what?" cried the orderly, impatiently.

"Because I think, perhaps--I am not quite sure--perhaps the steelyard is not
quite correct."

The words were not uttered before the professor, fierce as a tiger, had rushed
at the Jew, had seized him by the throat, and was shaking him till he was black in
the face.

"Help! help!" screamed Hakkabut. "I shall be strangled."

"Rascal! consummate rascal! thief! villain!" the professor reiterated, and
continued to shake the Jew furiously.

Ben Zoof looked on and laughed, making no attempt to interfere; he had no
sympathy with either of the two.

The sound of the scuffling, however, drew the attention of Servadac, who,
followed by his companions, hastened to the scene. The combatants were soon
parted. "What is the meaning of all this?" demanded the captain.

As soon as the professor had recovered his breath, exhausted by his
exertions, he said, "The old reprobate, the rascal has cheated us! His steelyard is
wrong! He is a thief!"

Captain Servadac looked sternly at Hakkabut.

"How is this, Hakkabut? Is this a fact?"

"No, no--yes--no, your Excellency, only--"

"He is a cheat, a thief!" roared the excited astronomer. "His weights
deceive!"

"Stop, stop!" interposed Servadac; "let us hear. Tell me, Hakkabut--"

"The steelyard lies! It cheats! it lies!" roared the irrepressible Rosette.

"Tell me, Hakkabut, I say," repeated Servadac.

The Jew only kept on stammering, "Yes--no--I don't know."

But heedless of any interruption, the professor continued, "False weights!
That confounded steelyard! It gave a false result! The mass was wrong! The
observations contradicted the calculations; they were wrong! She was out of
place! Yes, out of place entirely."

"What!" cried Servadac and Procope in a breath, "out of place?"

"Yes, completely," said the professor.

"Gallia out of place?" repeated Servadac, agitated with alarm.

"T did not say Gallia," replied Rosette, stamping his foot impetuously; "I said
Nerina."

"Oh, Nerina," answered Servadac. "But what of Gallia?" he inquired, still
nervously.


"Gallia, of course, is on her way to the earth. I told you so. But that Jew is a
rascal!"


CHAPTER XV. A JOURNEY AND A DISAPPOINTMENT

It was as the professor had said. From the day that Isaac Hakkabut had
entered upon his mercantile career, his dealings had all been carried on by a
system of false weight. That deceitful steelyard had been the mainspring of his
fortune. But when it had become his lot to be the purchaser instead of the
vendor, his spirit had groaned within him at being compelled to reap the fruits of
his own dishonesty. No one who had studied his character could be much
surprised at the confession that was extorted from him, that for every supposed
kilogramme that he had ever sold the true weight was only 750 grammes, or just
five and twenty per cent. less than it ought to have been.

The professor, however, had ascertained all that he wanted to know. By
estimating his comet at a third as much again as its proper weight, he had found
that his calculations were always at variance with the observed situation of the
satellite, which was immediately influenced by the mass of its primary.

But now, besides enjoying the satisfaction of having punished old Hakkabut,
Rosette was able to recommence his calculations with reference to the elements
of Nerina upon a correct basis, a task to which he devoted himself with
redoubled energy.

It will be easily imagined that Isaac Hakkabut, thus caught in his own trap,
was jeered most unmercifully by those whom he had attempted to make his
dupes. Ben Zoof, in particular, was never wearied of telling him how on his
return to the world he would be prosecuted for using false weights, and would
certainly become acquainted with the inside of a prison. Thus badgered, he
secluded himself more than ever in his dismal hole, never venturing, except
when absolutely obliged, to face the other members of the community.

On the 7th of October the comet re-entered the zone of the telescopic planets,
one of which had been captured as a satellite, and the origin of the whole of
which is most probably correctly attributed to the disintegration of some large
planet that formerly revolved between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter. By the
beginning of the following month half of this zone had been traversed, and only
two months remained before the collision with the earth was to be expected. The
temperature was now rarely below 12 degrees below zero, but that was far too
cold to permit the slightest symptoms of a thaw. The surface of the sea remained
as frozen as ever, and the two vessels, high up on their icy pedestals, remained
unaltered in their critical position.


It was about this time that the question began to be mooted whether it would
not be right to reopen some communication with the Englishmen at Gibraltar.
Not that any doubt was entertained as to their having been able successfully to
cope with the rigors of the winter; but Captain Servadac, in a way that did honor
to his generosity, represented that, however uncourteous might have been their
former behavior, it was at least due to them that they should be informed of the
true condition of things, which they had had no opportunity of learning; and,
moreover, that they should be invited to co-operate with the population of Nina's
Hive, in the event of any measures being suggested by which the shock of the
approaching collision could be mitigated.

The count and the lieutenant both heartily concurred in Servadac's sentiments
of humanity and prudence, and all agreed that if the intercourse were to be
opened at all, no time could be so suitable as the present, while the surface of the
sea presented a smooth and solid footing. After a thaw should set in, neither the
yacht nor the tartan could be reckoned on for service, and it would be
inexpedient to make use of the steam launch, for which only a few tons of coal
had been reserved, just sufficient to convey them to Gourbi Island when the
occasion should arise; whilst as to the yawl, which, transformed into a sledge,
had performed so successful a trip to Formentera, the absence of wind would
make that quite unavailable. It was true that with the return of summer
temperature, there would be certain to be a derangement in the atmosphere of
Gallia, which would result in wind, but for the present the air was altogether too
still for the yawl to have any prospects of making its way to Gibraltar.

The only question remaining was as to the possibility of going on foot. The
distance was somewhere about 240 miles. Captain Servadac declared himself
quite equal to the undertaking. To skate sixty or seventy miles a day would be
nothing, he said, to a practical skater like himself. The whole journey there and
back might be performed in eight days. Provided with a compass, a sufficient
supply of cold meat, and a spirit lamp, by which he might boil his coffee, he was
perfectly sure he should, without the least difficulty, accomplish an enterprise
that chimed in so exactly with his adventurous spirit.

Equally urgent were both the count and the lieutenant to be allowed to
accompany him; nay, they even offered to go instead; but Servadac, expressing
himself as most grateful for their consideration, declined their offer, and avowed
his resolution of taking no other companion than his own orderly.

Highly delighted at his master's decision, Ben Zoof expressed his satisfaction
at the prospect of "stretching his legs a bit," declaring that nothing could induce
him to permit the captain to go alone. There was no delay. The departure was
fixed for the following morning, the 2nd of November.


Although it is not to be questioned that a genuine desire of doing an act of
kindness to his fellow-creatures was a leading motive of Servadac's proposed
visit to Gibraltar, it must be owned that another idea, confided to nobody, least of
all to Count Timascheff, had been conceived in the brain of the worthy Gascon.
Ben Zoof had an inkling that his master was "up to some other little game,"
when, just before starting, he asked him privately whether there was a French
tricolor among the stores. "I believe so," said the orderly.

"Then don't say a word to anyone, but fasten it up tight in your knapsack."

Ben Zoof found the flag, and folded it up as he was directed. Before
proceeding to explain this somewhat enigmatical conduct of Servadac, it is
necessary to refer to a certain physiological fact, coincident but unconnected
with celestial phenomena, originating entirely in the frailty of human nature. The
nearer that Gallia approached the earth, the more a sort of reserve began to
spring up between the captain and Count Timascheff. Though they could not be
said to be conscious of it, the remembrance of their former rivalry, so completely
buried in oblivion for the last year and ten months, was insensibly recovering its
hold upon their minds, and the question was all but coming to the surface as to
what would happen if, on their return to earth, the handsome Madame de L----
should still be free. From companions in peril, would they not again be avowed
rivals? Conceal it as they would, a coolness was undeniably stealing over an
intimacy which, though it could never be called affectionate, had been uniformly
friendly and courteous.

Under these circumstances, it was not surprising that Hector Servadac should
not have confided to the count a project which, wild as it was, could scarcely
have failed to widen the unacknowledged breach that was opening in their
friendship.

The project was the annexation of Ceuta to the French dominion. The
Englishmen, rightly enough, had continued to occupy the fragment of Gibraltar,
and their claim was indisputable. But the island of Ceuta, which before the shock
had commanded the opposite side of the strait, and had been occupied by
Spaniards, had since been abandoned, and was therefore free to the first
occupant who should lay claim to it. To plant the tricolor upon it, in the name of
France, was now the cherished wish of Servadac's heart.

"Who knows," he said to himself, "whether Ceuta, on its return to earth, may
not occupy a grand and commanding situation? What a proud thing it would be
to have secured its possession to France!"

Next morning, as soon as they had taken their brief farewell of their friends,
and were fairly out of sight of the shore, Servadac imparted his design to Ben
Zoof, who entered into the project with the greatest zest, and expressed himself


delighted, not only at the prospect of adding to the dominions of his beloved
country, but of stealing a march upon England.

Both travelers were warmly clad, the orderly's knapsack containing all the
necessary provisions. The journey was accomplished without special incident;
halts were made at regular intervals, for the purpose of taking food and rest. The
temperature by night as well as by day was quite endurable, and on the fourth
afternoon after starting, thanks to the straight course which their compass
enabled them to maintain, the adventurers found themselves within a few miles
of Ceuta.

As soon as Ben Zoof caught sight of the rock on the western horizon, he was
all excitement. Just as if he were in a regiment going into action, he talked
wildly about "columns" and "squares" and "charges." The captain, although less
demonstrative, was hardly less eager to reach the rock. They both pushed
forward with all possible speed till they were within a mile and a half of the
shore, when Ben Zoof, who had a very keen vision, stopped suddenly, and said
that he was sure he could see something moving on the top of the island.

"Never mind, let us hasten on," said Servadac. A few minutes carried them
over another mile, when Ben Zoof stopped again.

"What is it, Ben Zoof?" asked the captain.

"It looks to me like a man on a rock, waving his arms in the air," said the
orderly.

"Plague on it!" muttered Servadac; "I hope we are not too late." Again they
went on; but soon Ben Zoof stopped for the third time.

"It is a semaphore, sir; I see it quite distinctly." And he was not mistaken; it
had been a telegraph in motion that had caught his eye.

"Plague on it!" repeated the captain.

"Too late, sir, do you think?" said Ben Zoof.

"Yes, Ben Zoof; if that's a telegraph--and there is no doubt of it--somebody
has been before us and erected it; and, moreover, if it is moving, there must be
somebody working it now."

He was keenly disappointed. Looking towards the north, he could distinguish
Gibraltar faintly visible in the extreme distance, and upon the summit of the rock
both Ben Zoof and himself fancied they could make out another semaphore,
giving signals, no doubt, in response to the one here.

"Yes, it is only too clear; they have already occupied it, and established their
communications," said Servadac.

"And what are we to do, then?" asked Ben Zoof.

"We must pocket our chagrin, and put as good a face on the matter as we
can," replied the captain.


"But perhaps there are only four or five Englishmen to protect the place,"
said Ben Zoof, as if meditating an assault.

"No, no, Ben Zoof," answered Servadac; "we must do nothing rash. We have
had our warming, and, unless our representations can induce them to yield their
position, we must resign our hope."

Thus discomfited, they had reached the foot of the rock, when all at once,
like a "Jack-in-the-box," a sentinel started up before them with the challenge:

"Who goes there?"

"Friends. Vive la France!" cried the captain.

"Hurrah for England!" replied the soldier.

By this time four other men had made their appearance from the upper part
of the rock.

"What do you want?" asked one of them, whom Servadac remembered to
have seen before at Gibraltar.

"Can I speak to your commanding officer?" Servadac inquired.

"Which?" said the man. "The officer in command of Ceuta?"

"Yes, if there is one."

"I will acquaint him with your arrival," answered the Englishman, and
disappeared.

In a few minutes the commanding officer, attired in full uniform, was seen
descending to the shore. It was Major Oliphant himself.

Servadac could no longer entertain a doubt that the Englishmen had
forestalled him in the occupation of Ceuta. Provisions and fuel had evidently
been conveyed thither in the boat from Gibraltar before the sea had frozen, and a
solid casemate, hollowed in the rock, had afforded Major Oliphant and his
contingent ample protection from the rigor of the winter. The ascending smoke
that rose above the rock was sufficient evidence that good fires were still kept
up; the soldiers appeared to have thriven well on what, no doubt, had been a
generous diet, and the major himself, although he would scarcely have been
willing to allow it, was slightly stouter than before.

Being only about twelve miles distant from Gibraltar, the little garrison at
Ceuta had felt itself by no means isolated in its position; but by frequent
excursions across the frozen strait, and by the constant use of the telegraph, had
kept up their communication with their fellow-countrymen on the other island.
Colonel Murphy and the major had not even been forced to forego the pleasures
of the chessboard. The game that had been interrupted by Captain Servadac's
former visit was not yet concluded; but, like the two American clubs that played
their celebrated game in 1846 between Washington and Baltimore, the two
gallant officers made use of the semaphore to communicate their well-digested


moves.

The major stood waiting for his visitor to speak.

"Major Oliphant, I believe?" said Servadac, with a courteous bow.

"Yes, sir, Major Oliphant, officer in command of the garrison at Ceuta," was
the Englishman's reply. "And to whom," he added, "may I have the honor of
speaking?"

"To Captain Servadac, the governor general of Gallia."

"Indeed!" said the major, with a supercilious look.

"Allow me to express my surprise," resumed the captain, "at seeing you
installed as commanding officer upon what I have always understood to be
Spanish soil. May I demand your claim to your position?"

"My claim is that of first occupant."

"But do you not think that the party of Spaniards now resident with me may
at some future time assert a prior right to the proprietorship?"

"T think not, Captain Servadac."

"But why not?" persisted the captain.

"Because these very Spaniards have, by formal contract, made over Ceuta, in
its integrity, to the British government."

Servadac uttered an exclamation of surprise.

"And as the price of that important cession," continued Major Oliphant,
"they have received a fair equivalent in British gold."

"Ah!" cried Ben Zoof, "that accounts for that fellow Negrete and his people
having such a lot of money."

Servadac was silent. It had become clear to his mind what had been the
object of that secret visit to Ceuta which he had heard of as being made by the
two English officers. The arguments that he had intended to use had completely
fallen through; all that he had now to do was carefully to prevent any suspicion
of his disappointed project.

"May I be allowed to ask, Captain Servadac, to what I am indebted for the
honor of this visit?" asked Major Oliphant presently.

"I have come, Major Oliphant, in the hope of doing you and your
companions a service," replied Servadac, rousing himself from his reverie.

"Ah, indeed!" replied the major, as though he felt himself quite independent
of all services from exterior sources.

"I thought, major, that it was not unlikely you were in ignorance of the fact
that both Ceuta and Gibraltar have been traversing the solar regions on the
surface of a comet."

The major smiled incredulously; but Servadac, nothing daunted, went on to
detail the results of the collision between the comet and the earth, adding that, as


there was the almost immediate prospect of another concussion, it had occurred
to him that it might be advisable for the whole population of Gallia to unite in
taking precautionary measures for the common welfare.

"In fact, Major Oliphant," he said in conclusion, "I am here to inquire
whether you and your friends would be disposed to join us in our present
quarters."

"I am obliged to you, Captain Servadac," answered the major stiffly; "but we
have not the slightest intention of abandoning our post. We have received no
government orders to that effect; indeed, we have received no orders at all. Our
own dispatch to the First Lord of the Admiralty still awaits the mail."

"But allow me to repeat," insisted Servadac, "that we are no longer on the
earth, although we expect to come in contact with it again in about eight weeks."

"I have no doubt," the major answered, "that England will make every effort
to reclaim us."

Servadac felt perplexed. It was quite evident that Major Oliphant had not
been convinced of the truth of one syllable of what he had been saying.

"Then I am to understand that you are determined to retain your two
garrisons here and at Gibraltar?" asked Servadac, with one last effort at
persuasion.

"Certainly; these two posts command the entrance of the Mediterranean."

"But supposing there is no longer any Mediterranean?" retorted the captain,
growing impatient.

"Oh, England will always take care of that," was Major Oliphant's cool reply.
"But excuse me,” he added presently; "I see that Colonel Murphy has just
telegraphed his next move. Allow me to wish you good-afternoon."

And without further parley, followed by his soldiers, he retired into the
casemate, leaving Captain Servadac gnawing his mustache with mingled rage
and mortification.


"A fine piece of business we have made of this!" said Ben Zoof, when he
found himself alone with his master.

"We will make our way back at once," replied Captain Servadac.

"Yes, the sooner the better, with our tails between our legs," rejoined the
orderly, who this time felt no inclination to start off to the march of the Algerian
zephyrs. And so the French tricolor returned as it had set out--in Ben Zoof's
knapsack.

On the eighth evening after starting, the travelers again set foot on the
volcanic promontory just in time to witness a great commotion.

Palmyrin Rosette was in a furious rage. He had completed all his calculations
about Nerina, but that perfidious satellite had totally disappeared. The
astronomer was frantic at the loss of his moon. Captured probably by some
larger body, it was revolving in its proper zone of the minor planets.


CHAPTER XVI. A BOLD PROPOSITION

On his return Servadac communicated to the count the result of his
expedition, and, though perfectly silent on the subject of his personal project, did
not conceal the fact that the Spaniards, without the smallest right, had sold Ceuta
to the English.

Having refused to quit their post, the Englishmen had virtually excluded
themselves from any further consideration; they had had their warning, and must
now take the consequences of their own incredulity.

Although it had proved that not a single creature either at Gourbi Island,
Gibraltar, Ceuta, Madalena, or Formentera had received any injury whatever at
the time of the first concussion, there was nothing in the least to make it certain
that a like immunity from harm would attend the second. The previous escape
was doubtless owing to some slight, though unaccountable, modification in the
rate of motion; but whether the inhabitants of the earth had fared so fortunately,
was a question that had still to be determined.

The day following Servadac's return, he and the count and Lieutenant
Procope met by agreement in the cave, formally to discuss what would be the
most advisable method of proceeding under their present prospects. Ben Zoof
was, as a matter of course, allowed to be present, and Professor Rosette had been
asked to attend; but he declined on the plea of taking no interest in the matter.
Indeed, the disappearance of his moon had utterly disconcerted him, and the
probability that he should soon lose his comet also, plunged him into an excess
of grief which he preferred to bear in solitude.

Although the barrier of cool reserve was secretly increasing between the


captain and the count, they scrupulously concealed any outward token of their
inner feelings, and without any personal bias applied their best energies to the
discussion of the question which was of such mutual, nay, of such universal
interest.

Servadac was the first to speak. "In fifty-one days, if Professor Rosette has
made no error in his calculations, there is to be a recurrence of collision between
this comet and the earth. The inquiry that we have now to make is whether we
are prepared for the coming shock. I ask myself, and I ask you, whether it is in
our power, by any means, to avert the evil consequences that are only too likely
to follow?"

Count Timascheff, in a voice that seemed to thrill with solemnity, said: "In
such events we are at the disposal of an over-ruling Providence; human
precautions cannot sway the Divine will."

"But with the most profound reverence for the will of Providence," replied
the captain, "I beg to submit that it is our duty to devise whatever means we can
to escape the threatening mischief. Heaven helps them that help themselves."

"And what means have you to suggest, may I ask?" said the count, with a
faint accent of satire.

Servadac was forced to acknowledge that nothing tangible had hitherto
presented itself to his mind.

"I don't want to intrude," observed Ben Zoof, "but I don't understand why
such learned gentlemen as you cannot make the comet go where you want it to
go."

"You are mistaken, Ben Zoof, about our learning," said the captain; "even
Professor Rosette, with all his learning, has not a shadow of power to prevent the
comet and the earth from knocking against each other."

"Then I cannot see what is the use of all this learning," the orderly replied.

"One great use of learning,” said Count Timascheff with a smile, "is to make
us know our own ignorance."

While this conversation had been going on, Lieutenant Procope had been
sitting in thoughtful silence. Looking up, he now said, "Incident to this expected
shock, there may be a variety of dangers. If, gentlemen, you will allow me, I will
enumerate them; and we shall, perhaps, by taking them seriatim, be in a better
position to judge whether we can successfully grapple with them, or in any way
mitigate their consequences."

There was a general attitude of attention. It was surprising how calmly they
proceeded to discuss the circumstances that looked so threatening and ominous.

"First of all," resumed the lieutenant, "we will specify the different ways in
which the shock may happen."


"And the prime fact to be remembered," interposed Servadac, "is that the
combined velocity of the two bodies will be about 21,000 miles an hour."

"Express speed, and no mistake!" muttered Ben Zoof.

"Just so," assented Procope. "Now, the two bodies may impinge either
directly or obliquely. If the impact is sufficiently oblique, Gallia may do
precisely what she did before: she may graze the earth; she may, or she may not,
carry off a portion of the earth's atmosphere and substance, and so she may float
away again into space; but her orbit would undoubtedly be deranged, and if we
survive the shock, we shall have small chance of ever returning to the world of
our fellow-creatures."

"Professor Rosette, I suppose," Ben Zoof remarked, "would pretty soon find
out all about that."

"But we will leave this hypothesis," said the lieutenant; "our own experience
has sufficiently shown us its advantages and its disadvantages. We will proceed
to consider the infinitely more serious alternative of direct impact; of a shock
that would hurl the comet straight on to the earth, to which it would become
attached."

"A great wart upon her face!" said Ben Zoof, laughing.

The captain held up his finger to his orderly, making him understand that he
should hold his tongue.

"It is, I presume, to be taken for granted," continued Lieutenant Procope,
"that the mass of the earth is comparatively so large that, in the event of a direct
collision, her own motion would not be sensibly retarded, and that she would
carry the comet along with her, as part of herself."

"Very little question of that, I should think," said Servadac.

"Well, then,” the lieutenant went on, "what part of this comet of ours will be
the part to come into collision with the earth? It may be the equator, where we
are; it may be at the exactly opposite point, at our antipodes; or it may be at
either pole. In any case, it seems hard to foresee whence there is to come the
faintest chance of deliverance."

"Is the case so desperate?" asked Servadac.

"IT will tell you why it seems so. If the side of the comet on which we are
resident impinges on the earth, it stands to reason that we must be crushed to
atoms by the violence of the concussion."

"Regular mincemeat!" said Ben Zoof, whom no admonitions could quite
reduce to silence.

"And if," said the lieutenant, after a moment's pause, and the slightest
possible frown at the interruption--"and if the collision should occur at our
antipodes, the sudden check to the velocity of the comet would be quite


equivalent to a shock in situ; and, another thing, we should run the risk of being
suffocated, for all our comet's atmosphere would be assimilated with the
terrestrial atmosphere, and we, supposing we were not dashed to atoms, should
be left as it were upon the summit of an enormous mountain (for such to all
intents and purposes Gallia would be), 450 miles above the level of the surface
of the globe, without a particle of air to breathe."

"But would not our chances of escape be considerably better," asked Count
Timascheff, "in the event of either of the comet's poles being the point of
contact?"

"Taking the combined velocity into account," answered the lieutenant, "I
confess that I fear the violence of the shock will be too great to permit our
destruction to be averted."

A general silence ensued, which was broken by the lieutenant himself. "Even
if none of these contingencies occur in the way we have contemplated, I am
driven to the suspicion that we shall be burnt alive."

"Burnt alive!" they all exclaimed in a chorus of horror.

"Yes. If the deductions of modern science be true, the speed of the comet,
when suddenly checked, will be transmuted into heat, and that heat will be so
intense that the temperature of the comet will be raised to some millions of
degrees."

No one having anything definite to allege in reply to Lieutenant Procope's
forebodings, they all relapsed into silence. Presently Ben Zoof asked whether it
was not possible for the comet to fall into the middle of the Atlantic.

Procope shook his head. "Even so, we should only be adding the fate of
drowning to the list of our other perils."

"Then, as I understand," said Captain Servadac, "in whatever way or in
whatever place the concussion occurs, we must be either crushed, suffocated,
roasted, or drowned. Is that your conclusion, lieutenant?"

"I confess I see no other alternative," answered Procope, calmly.

"But isn't there another thing to be done?" said Ben Zoof.

"What do you mean?" his master asked.

"Why, to get off the comet before the shock comes."

"How could you get off Gallia?"

"That I can't say," replied the orderly.

"I am not sure that that could not be accomplished," said the lieutenant.

All eyes in a moment were riveted upon him, as, with his head resting on his
hands, he was manifestly cogitating a new idea. "Yes, I think it could be
accomplished," he repeated. "The project may appear extravagant, but I do not
know why it should be impossible. Ben Zoof has hit the right nail on the head;


we must try and leave Gallia before the shock."

"Leave Gallia! How?" said Count Timascheff.

The lieutenant did not at once reply. He continued pondering for a time, and
at last said, slowly and distinctly, "By making a balloon!"

Servadac's heart sank.

"A balloon!" he exclaimed. "Out of the question! Balloons are exploded
things. You hardly find them in novels. Balloon, indeed!"

"Listen to me," replied Procope. "Perhaps I can convince you that my idea is
not so chimerical as you imagine." And, knitting his brow, he proceeded to
establish the feasibility of his plan. "If we can ascertain the precise moment
when the shock is to happen, and can succeed in launching ourselves a sufficient
time beforehand into Gallia's atmosphere, I believe it will transpire that this
atmosphere will amalgamate with that of the earth, and that a balloon whirled
along by the combined velocity would glide into the mingled atmosphere and
remain suspended in mid-air until the shock of the collision is overpast."

Count Timascheff reflected for a minute, and said, "I think, lieutenant, I
understand your project. The scheme seems tenable; and I shall be ready to co-
operate with you, to the best of my power, in putting it into execution."

"Only, remember," continued Procope, "there are many chances to one
against our success. One instant's obstruction and stoppage in our passage, and
our balloon is burnt to ashes. Still, reluctant as I am to acknowledge it, I confess
that I feel our sole hope of safety rests in our getting free from this comet."

"If the chances were ten thousand to one against us," said Servadac, "I think
the attempt ought to be made."

"But have we hydrogen enough to inflate a balloon?" asked the count.

"Hot air will be all that we shall require," the lieutenant answered; "we are
only contemplating about an hour's journey."

"Ah, a fire-balloon! A montgolfier!" cried Servadac. "But what are you going
to do for a casing?"

"I have thought of that. We must cut it out of the sails of the Dobryna; they
are both light and strong," rejoined the lieutenant. Count Timascheff
complimented the lieutenant upon his ingenuity, and Ben Zoof could not resist
bringing the meeting to a conclusion by a ringing cheer.

Truly daring was the plan of which Lieutenant Procope had thus become the
originator; but the very existence of them all was at stake, and the design must
be executed resolutely. For the success of the enterprise it was absolutely
necessary to know, almost to a minute, the precise time at which the collision
would occur, and Captain Servadac undertook the task, by gentle means or by
stern, of extracting the secret from the professor.


To Lieutenant Procope himself was entrusted the superintendence of the
construction of the montgolfier, and the work was begun at once. It was to be
large enough to carry the whole of the twenty-three residents in the volcano, and,
in order to provide the means of floating aloft long enough to give time for
selecting a proper place for descent, the lieutenant was anxious to make it carry
enough hay or straw to maintain combustion for a while, and keep up the
necessary supply of heated air.

The sails of the Dobryna, which had all been carefully stowed away in the
Hive, were of a texture unusually close, and quite capable of being made airtight
by means of a varnish, the ingredients of which were rummaged out of the
promiscuous stores of the tartan. The lieutenant himself traced out the pattern
and cut out the strips, and all hands were employed in seaming them together. It
was hardly the work for little fingers, but Nina persisted in accomplishing her
own share of it. The Russians were quite at home at occupation of this sort, and
having initiated the Spaniards into its mysteries, the task of joining together the
casing was soon complete. Isaac Hakkabut and the professor were the only two
members of the community who took no part in this somewhat tedious
proceeding.

A month passed away, but Servadac found no opportunity of getting at the
information he had pledged himself to gain. On the sole occasion when he had
ventured to broach the subject with the astronomer, he had received for answer
that as there was no hurry to get back to the earth, there need be no concern
about any dangers of transit.

Indeed, as time passed on, the professor seemed to become more and more
inaccessible. A pleasant temperature enabled him to live entirely in his
observatory, from which intruders were rigidly shut out. But Servadac bided his
time. He grew more and more impressed with the importance of finding out the
exact moment at which the impact would take place, but was content to wait for
a promising opportunity to put any fresh questions on the subject to the too
reticent astronomer.

Meanwhile, the earth's disc was daily increasing in magnitude; the comet
traveled 50,000,000 leagues during the month, at the close of which it was not
more than 78,000,000 leagues from the sun.

A thaw had now fairly set in. The breaking up of the frozen ocean was a
magnificent spectacle, and "the great voice of the sea," as the whalers
graphically describe it, was heard in all its solemnity. Little streams of water
began to trickle down the declivities of the mountain and along the shelving
shore, only to be transformed, as the melting of the snow continued, into torrents
or cascades. Light vapors gathered on the horizon, and clouds were formed and


carried rapidly along by breezes to which the Gallian atmosphere had long been
unaccustomed. All these were doubtless but the prelude to atmospheric
disturbances of a more startling character; but as indications of returning spring,
they were greeted with a welcome which no apprehensions for the future could
prevent being glad and hearty.

A double disaster was the inevitable consequence of the thaw. Both the
schooner and the tartan were entirely destroyed. The basement of the icy
pedestal on which the ships had been upheaved was gradually undermined, like
the icebergs of the Arctic Ocean, by warm currents of water, and on the night of
the 12th the huge block collapsed en masse, so that on the following moming
nothing remained of the Dobryna and the Hansa except the fragments scattered
on the shore.

Although certainly expected, the catastrophe could not fail to cause a sense
of general depression. Well-nigh one of their last ties to Mother Earth had been
broken; the ships were gone, and they had only a balloon to replace them!

To describe Isaac Hakkabut's rage at the destruction of the tartan would be
impossible. His oaths were simply dreadful; his imprecations on the accursed
race were full of wrath. He swore that Servadac and his people were responsible
for his loss; he vowed that they should be sued and made to pay him damages;
he asserted that he had been brought from Gourbi Island only to be plundered; in
fact, he became so intolerably abusive, that Servadac threatened to put him into
irons unless he conducted himself properly; whereupon the Jew, finding that the
captain was in earnest, and would not hesitate to carry the threat into effect, was
fain to hold his tongue, and slunk back into his dim hole.

By the 14th the balloon was finished, and, carefully sewn and well varnished
as it had been, it was really a very substantial structure. It was covered with a
network that had been made from the light rigging of the yacht, and the car,
composed of wicker-work that had formed partitions in the hold of the Hansa,
was quite commodious enough to hold the twenty-three passengers it was
intended to convey. No thought had been bestowed upon comfort or
convenience, as the ascent was to last for so short a time, merely long enough for
making the transit from atmosphere to atmosphere.

The necessity was becoming more and more urgent to get at the true hour of
the approaching contact, but the professor seemed to grow more obstinate than
ever in his resolution to keep his secret.

On the 15th the comet crossed the orbit of Mars, at the safe distance of
56,000,000 leagues; but during that night the community thought that their last
hour had taken them unawares. The volcano rocked and trembled with the
convulsions of internal disturbance, and Servadac and his companions,


convinced that the mountain was doomed to some sudden disruption, rushed into
the open air.

The first object that caught their attention as they emerged upon the open
rocks was the unfortunate professor, who was scrambling down the mountain-
side, piteously displaying a fragment of his shattered telescope.

It was no time for condolence.

A new marvel arrested every eye. A fresh satellite, in the gloom of night, was
shining conspicuously before them.

That satellite was a part of Gallia itself!

By the expansive action of the inner heat, Gallia, like Gambart's comet, had
been severed in twain; an enormous fragment had been detached and launched
into space!

The fragment included Ceuta and Gibraltar, with the two English garrisons!


CHAPTER XVII. THE VENTURE MADE

What would be the consequences of this sudden and complete disruption,
Servadac and his people hardly dared to think.

The first change that came under their observation was the rapidity of the
sun's appearances and disappearances, forcing them to the conviction that
although the comet still rotated on its axis from east to west, yet the period of its
rotation had been diminished by about one-half. Only six hours instead of twelve
elapsed between sunrise and sunrise; three hours after rising in the west the sun
was sinking again in the east.

"We are coming to something!" exclaimed Servadac. "We have got a year of
something like 2,880 days."

"T shouldn't think it would be an easy matter to find saints enough for such a
calendar as that!" said Ben Zoof.

Servadac laughed, and remarked that they should have the professor talking
about the 238th of June, and the 325th of December.

It soon became evident that the detached portion was not revolving round the
comet, but was gradually retreating into space. Whether it had carried with it any
portion of atmosphere, whether it possessed any other condition for supporting
life, and whether it was likely ever again to approach to the earth, were all
questions that there were no means of determining. For themselves the all-
important problem was--what effect would the rending asunder of the comet
have upon its rate of progress? and as they were already conscious of a further
increase of muscular power, and a fresh diminution of specific gravity, Servadac
and his associates could not but wonder whether the alteration in the mass of the


comet would not result in its missing the expected coincidence with the earth
altogether.

Although he professed himself incompetent to pronounce a decided opinion,
Lieutenant Procope manifestly inclined to the belief that no alteration would
ensue in the rate of Gallia's velocity; but Rosette, no doubt, could answer the
question directly, and the time had now arrived in which he must be compelled
to divulge the precise moment of collision.

But the professor was in the worst of tempers. Generally taciturn and
morose, he was more than usually uncivil whenever any one ventured to speak to
him. The loss of his telescope had doubtless a great deal to do with his ill-humor;
but the captain drew the most favorable conclusions from Rosette's continued
irritation. Had the comet been in any way projected from its course, so as to be
likely to fail in coming into contact with the earth, the professor would have
been quite unable to conceal his satisfaction. But they required to know more
than the general truth, and felt that they had no time to lose in getting at the exact
details.

The opportunity that was wanted soon came.

On the 18th, Rosette was overheard in furious altercation with Ben Zoof. The
orderly had been taunting the astronomer with the mutilation of his little comet.
A fine thing, he said, to split in two like a child's toy. It had cracked like a dry
nut; and mightn't one as well live upon an exploding bomb?--with much more to
the same effect. The professor, by way of retaliation, had commenced sneering at
the "prodigious" mountain of Montmartre, and the dispute was beginning to look
serious when Servadac entered.

Thinking he could turn the wrangling to some good account, so as to arrive
at the information he was so anxiously seeking, the captain pretended to espouse
the views of his orderly; he consequently brought upon himself the full force of
the professor's wrath.

Rosette's language became more and more violent, till Servadac, feigning to
be provoked beyond endurance, cried:

"You forget, sir, that you are addressing the Governor-General of Gallia."

"Governor-General! humbug!" roared Rosette. "Gallia is my comet!"

"I deny it," said Servadac. "Gallia has lost its chance of getting back to the
earth. Gallia has nothing to do with you. Gallia is mine; and you must submit to
the government which I please to ordain."

"And who told you that Gallia is not going back to the earth?" asked the
professor, with a look of withering scorn.

"Why, isn't her mass diminished? Isn't she split in half? Isn't her velocity all
altered?" demanded the captain.


"And pray who told you this?" again said the professor, with a sneer.

"Everybody. Everybody knows it, of course," replied Servadac.

"Everybody is very clever. And you always were a very clever scholar too.
We remember that of old, don't we?"

"Sir!"

"You nearly mastered the first elements of science, didn't you?"

"Sir!"

"A credit to your class!"

"Hold your tongue, sir!" bellowed the captain again, as if his anger was
uncontrollable.

"Not I," said the professor.

"Hold your tongue!" repeated Servadac.

"Just because the mass is altered you think the velocity is altered?"

"Hold your tongue!" cried the captain, louder than ever.

"What has mass to do with the orbit? Of how many comets do you know the
mass, and yet you know their movements? Ignorance!" shouted Rosette.

"Insolence!" retorted Servadac.

Ben Zoof, really thinking that his master was angry, made a threatening
movement towards the professor.

"Touch me if you dare!" screamed Rosette, drawing himself up to the fullest
height his diminutive figure would allow. "You shall answer for your conduct
before a court of justice!"

"Where? On Gallia?" asked the captain.

"No; on the earth."

"The earth! Pshaw! You know we shall never get there; our velocity is
changed."

"On the earth," repeated the professor, with decision.

"Trash!" cried Ben Zoof. "The earth will be too far off!"

"Not too far off for us to come across her orbit at 42 minutes and 35.6
seconds past two o'clock on the morning of this coming 1st of January."

"Thanks, my dear professor--many thanks. You have given me all the
information I required;" and, with a low bow and a gracious smile, the captain
withdrew. The orderly made an equally polite bow, and followed his master. The
professor, completely nonplussed, was left alone.

Thirteen days, then--twenty-six of the original Gallian days, fifty-two of the
present--was all the time for preparation that now remained. Every preliminary
arrangement was hurried on with the greatest earnestness.

There was a general eagerness to be quit of Gallia. Indifferent to the dangers
that must necessarily attend a balloon ascent under such unparalleled


circumstances, and heedless of Lieutenant Procope's warning that the slightest
check in their progress would result in instantaneous combustion, they all
seemed to conclude that it must be the simplest thing possible to glide from one
atmosphere to another, so that they were quite sanguine as to the successful issue
of their enterprise. Captain Servadac made a point of showing himself quite
enthusiastic in his anticipations, and to Ben Zoof the going up in a balloon was
the supreme height of his ambition. The count and the lieutenant, of colder and
less demonstrative temperament, alike seemed to realize the possible perils of
the undertaking, but even they were determined to put a bold face upon every
difficulty.

The sea had now become navigable, and three voyages were made to Gourbi
Island in the steam launch, consuming the last of their little reserve of coal.

The first voyage had been made by Servadac with several of the sailors.
They found the gourbi and the adjacent building quite uninjured by the severity
of the winter; numbers of little rivulets intersected the pasture-land; new plants
were springing up under the influence of the equatorial sun, and the luxuriant
foliage was tenanted by the birds which had flown back from the volcano.
Summer had almost abruptly succeeded to winter, and the days, though only
three hours long, were intensely hot.

Another of the voyages to the island had been to collect the dry grass and
straw which was necessary for inflating the balloon. Had the balloon been less
cumbersome it would have been conveyed to the island, whence the start would
have been effected; but as it was, it was more convenient to bring the
combustible material to the balloon.

The last of the coal having been consumed, the fragments of the shipwrecked
vessels had to be used day by day for fuel. Hakkabut began making a great
hubbub when he found that they were burning some of the spars of the Hansa;
but he was effectually silenced by Ben Zoof, who told him that if he made any
more fuss, he should be compelled to pay 50,000 francs for a balloon-ticket, or
else he should be left behind.

By Christmas Day everything was in readiness for immediate departure. The
festival was observed with a solemnity still more marked than the anniversary of
the preceding year. Every one looked forward to spending New Year's Day in
another sphere altogether, and Ben Zoof had already promised Pablo and Nina
all sorts of New Year's gifts.

It may seem strange, but the nearer the critical moment approached, the less
Hector Servadac and Count Timascheff had to say to each other on the subject.
Their mutual reserve became more apparent; the experiences of the last two
years were fading from their minds like a dream; and the fair image that had


been the cause of their original rivalry was ever rising, as a vision, between
them.

The captain's thoughts began to turn to his unfinished rondo; in his leisure
moments, rhymes suitable and unsuitable, possible and impossible, were
perpetually jingling in his imagination. He labored under the conviction that he
had a work of genius to complete. A poet he had left the earth, and a poet he
must return.

Count Timascheff's desire to return to the world was quite equaled by
Lieutenant Procope's. The Russian sailors' only thought was to follow their
master, wherever he went. The Spaniards, though they would have been
unconcerned to know that they were to remain upon Gallia, were nevertheless
looking forward with some degree of pleasure to revisiting the plains of
Andalusia; and Nina and Pablo were only too delighted at the prospect of
accompanying their kind protectors on any fresh excursion whatever.

The only malcontent was Palmyrin Rosette. Day and night he persevered in
his astronomical pursuits, declared his intention of never abandoning his comet,
and swore positively that nothing should induce him to set foot in the car of the
balloon.

The misfortune that had befallen his telescope was a never-ending theme of
complaint; and just now, when Gallia was entering the narrow zone of shooting-
stars, and new discoveries might have been within his reach, his loss made him
more inconsolable than ever. In sheer desperation, he endeavored to increase the
intensity of his vision by applying to his eyes some belladonna which he found
in the Dobryna's medicine chest; with heroic fortitude he endured the tortures of
the experiment, and gazed up into the sky until he was nearly blind. But all in
vain; not a single fresh discovery rewarded his sufferings.

No one was quite exempt from the feverish excitement which prevailed
during the last days of December. Lieutenant Procope superintended his final
arrangements. The two low masts of the schooner had been erected firmly on the
shore, and formed supports for the montgolfier, which had been duly covered
with the netting, and was ready at any moment to be inflated. The car was close
at hand. Some inflated skins had been attached to its sides, so that the balloon
might float for a time, in the event of its descending in the sea at a short distance
from the shore. If unfortunately, it should come down in mid-ocean, nothing but
the happy chance of some passing vessel could save them all from the certain
fate of being drowned.

The 31st came. Twenty-four hours hence and the balloon, with its large
living freight, would be high in the air. The atmosphere was less buoyant than
that of the earth, but no difficulty in ascending was to be apprehended.


Gallia was now within 96,000,000 miles of the sun, consequently not much
more than 4,000,000 miles from the earth; and this interval was being
diminished at the rate of nearly 208,000 miles an hour, the speed of the earth
being about 70,000 miles, that of the comet being little less than 138,000 miles
an hour.

It was determined to make the start at two o'clock, three-quarters of an hour,
or, to speak correctly 42 minutes 35.6 seconds, before the time predicted by the
professor as the instant of collision. The modified rotation of the comet caused it
to be daylight at the time.

An hour previously the balloon was inflated with perfect success, and the car
was securely attached to the network. It only awaited the stowage of the
passengers.

Isaac Hakkabut was the first to take his place in the car. But scarcely had he
done so, when Servadac noticed that his waist was encompassed by an enormous
girdle that bulged out to a very extraordinary extent. "What's all this, Hakkabut?"
he asked.

"It's only my little bit of money, your Excellency; my modest little fortune--a
mere bagatelle," said the Jew.

"And what may your little fortune weigh?" inquired the captain.

"Only about sixty-six pounds!" said Isaac.

"Sixty-six pounds!" cried Servadac. "We haven't reckoned for this."

"Merciful heavens!" began the Jew.

"Sixty-six pounds!" repeated Servadac. "We can hardly carry ourselves; we
can't have any dead weight here. Pitch it out, man, pitch it out!"

"God of Israel!" whined Hakkabut.

"Out with it, I say!" cried Servadac.

"What, all my money, which I have saved so long, and toiled for so hard?"

"Tt can't be helped," said the captain, unmoved.

"Oh, your Excellency!" cried the Jew.

"Now, old Nicodemus, listen to me," interposed Ben Zoof; "you just get rid
of that pouch of yours, or we will get rid of you. Take your choice. Quick, or out
you go!"

The avaricious old man was found to value his life above his money; he
made a lamentable outcry about it, but he unfastened his girdle at last, and put it
out of the car.

Very different was the case with Palmyrin Rosette. He avowed over and over
again his intention of never quitting the nucleus of his comet. Why should he
trust himself to a balloon, that would blaze up like a piece of paper? Why should
he leave the comet? Why should he not go once again upon its surface into the


far-off realms of space?

His volubility was brought to a sudden check by Servadac's bidding two of
the sailors, without more ado, to take him in their arms and put him quietly down
at the bottom of the car.

To the great regret of their owners, the two horses and Nina's pet goat were
obliged to be left behind. The only creature for which there was found a place
was the carrier-pigeon that had brought the professor's message to the Hive.
Servadac thought it might probably be of service in carrying some
communication to the earth.

When every one, except the captain and his orderly, had taken their places,
Servadac said, "Get in, Ben Zoof."

"After you, sir," said Ben Zoof, respectfully.

"No, no!" insisted Servadac; "the captain must be the last to leave the ship!"

A moment's hesitation and the orderly clambered over the side of the car.
Servadac followed. The cords were cut. The balloon rose with stately calmness
into the air.


CHAPTER XVIII. SUSPENSE

When the balloon had reached an elevation of about 2,500 yards, Lieutenant
Procope determined to maintain it at that level. A wire-work stove, suspended
below the casing, and filled with lighted hay, served to keep the air in the interior
at a proper temperature.

Beneath their feet was extended the basin of the Gallian Sea. An
inconsiderable speck to the north marked the site of Gourbi Island. Ceuta and
Gibraltar, which might have been expected in the west, had utterly disappeared.
On the south rose the volcano, the extremity of the promontory that jutted out
from the continent that formed the framework of the sea; whilst in every
direction the strange soil, with its commixture of tellurium and gold, gleamed
under the sun's rays with a perpetual iridescence.

Apparently rising with them in their ascent, the horizon was well-defined.
The sky above them was perfectly clear; but away in the northwest, in opposition
to the sun, floated a new sphere, so small that it could not be an asteroid, but like
a dim meteor. It was the fragment that the internal convulsion had rent from the
surface of the comet, and which was now many thousands of leagues away,
pursuing the new orbit into which it had been projected. During the hours of
daylight it was far from distinct, but after nightfall it would assume a definite
luster.

The object, however, of supreme interest was the great expanse of the


terrestrial disc, which was rapidly drawing down obliquely towards them. It
totally eclipsed an enormous portion of the firmament above, and approaching
with an ever-increasing velocity, was now within half its average distance from
the moon. So close was it, that the two poles could not be embraced in one
focus. Irregular patches of greater or less brilliancy alternated on its surface, the
brighter betokening the continents, the more somber indicating the oceans that
absorbed the solar rays. Above, there were broad white bands, darkened on the
side averted from the sun, exhibiting a slow but unintermittent movement; these
were the vapors that pervaded the terrestrial atmosphere.

But as the aeronauts were being hurried on at a speed of 70 miles a second,
this vague aspect of the earth soon developed itself into definite outlines.
Mountains and plains were no longer confused, the distinction between sea and
shore was more plainly identified, and instead of being, as it were, depicted on a
map, the surface of the earth appeared as though modelled in relief.

Twenty-seven minutes past two, and Gallia is only 72,000 miles from the
terrestrial sphere; quicker and quicker is the velocity; ten minutes later, and they
are only 36,000 miles apart!

The whole configuration of the earth is clear.

"Europe! Russia! France!" shout Procope, the count, and Servadac, almost in
a breath.

And they are not mistaken. The eastern hemisphere lies before them in the
full blaze of light, and there is no possibility of error in distinguishing continent
from continent.

The surprise only kindled their emotion to yet keener intensity, and it would
be hard to describe the excitement with which they gazed at the panorama that
was before them. The crisis of peril was close at hand, but imagination
overleaped all consideration of danger; and everything was absorbed in the one
idea that they were again within reach of that circle of humanity from which they
had supposed themselves severed forever.

And, truly, if they could have paused to study it, that panorama of the states
of Europe which was outstretched before their eyes, was conspicuous for the
fantastic resemblances with which Nature on the one hand, and international
relations on the other, have associated them. There was England, marching like
some stately dame towards the east, trailing her ample skirts and coroneted with
the cluster of her little islets; Sweden and Norway, with their bristling spine of
mountains, seemed like a splendid lion eager to spring down from the bosom of
the ice-bound north; Russia, a gigantic polar bear, stood with its head towards
Asia, its left paw resting upon Turkey, its right upon Mount Caucasus; Austria
resembled a huge cat curled up and sleeping a watchful sleep; Spain, with


Portugal as a pennant, like an unfurled banner, floated from the extremity of the
continent; Turkey, like an insolent cock, appeared to clutch the shores of Asia
with the one claw, and the land of Greece with the other; Italy, as it were a foot
and leg encased in a tight-fitting boot, was juggling deftly with the islands of
Sicily, Sardinia, and Corsica; Prussia, a formidable hatchet imbedded in the heart
of Germany, its edge just grazing the frontiers of France; whilst France itself
suggested a vigorous torso with Paris at its breast.

All at once Ben Zoof breaks the silence: "Montmartre! I see Montmartre!"
And, smile at the absurdity as others might, nothing could induce the worthy
orderly to surrender his belief that he could actually make out the features of his
beloved home.

The only individual whose soul seemed unstirred by the approaching earth
was Palmyrin Rosette. Leaning over the side of the car, he kept his eyes fixed
upon the abandoned comet, now floating about a mile and a half below him,
bright in the general irradiation which was flooding the surrounding space.

Chronometer in hand, Lieutenant Procope stood marking the minutes and
seconds as they fled; and the stillness which had once again fallen upon them all
was only broken by his order to replenish the stove, that the montgolfier might
retain its necessary level. Servadac and the count continued to gaze upon the
earth with an eagerness that almost amounted to awe. The balloon was slightly in
the rear of Gallia, a circumstance that augured somewhat favorably, because it
might be presumed that if the comet preceded the balloon in its contact with the
earth, there would be a break in the suddenness of transfer from one atmosphere
to the other.

The next question of anxiety was, where would the balloon alight? If upon
terra firma, would it be in a place where adequate resources for safety would be
at hand? If upon the ocean, would any passing vessel be within hail to rescue
them from their critical position? Truly, as the count observed to his comrades,
none but a Divine Pilot could steer them now.

"Forty-two minutes past!" said the lieutenant, and his voice seemed to thrill
through the silence of expectation.

There were not 20,000 miles between the comet and the earth!

The calculated time of impact was 2 hours 47 minutes 35.6 seconds. Five
minutes more and collision must ensue!

But was it so? Just at this moment, Lieutenant Procope observed that the
comet deviated sensibly in an oblique course. Was it possible that after all
collision would not occur?

The deviation, however, was not great; it did not justify any anticipation that
Gallia would merely graze the earth, as it had done before; it left it certain that


the two bodies would inevitably impinge.

"No doubt," said Ben Zoof, "this time we shall stick together."

Another thought occurred. Was it not only too likely that, in the fusion of the
two atmospheres, the balloon itself, in which they were being conveyed, would
be rent into ribbons, and every one of its passengers hurled into destruction, so
that not a Gallian should survive to tell the tale of their strange peregrinations?

Moments were precious; but Hector Servadac resolved that he would adopt a
device to secure that at least some record of their excursion in solar distances
should survive themselves.

Tearing a leaf from his note-book, he wrote down the name of the comet, the
list of the fragments of the earth it had carried off, the names of his companions,
and the date of the comet's aphelion; and having subscribed it with his signature,
turned to Nina and told her he must have the carrier-pigeon which was nestling
in her bosom.

The child's eyes filled with tears; she did not say a word, but imprinting a
kiss upon its soft plumage, she surrendered it at once, and the message was
hurriedly fastened to its neck. The bird wheeled round and round in a few circles
that widened in their diameter, and quickly sunk to an altitude in the comet's
atmosphere much inferior to the balloon.

Some minutes more were thus consumed and the interval of distance was
reduced to less than 8,000 miles.

The velocity became inconceivably great, but the increased rate of motion
was in no way perceptible; there was nothing to disturb the equilibrium of the
car in which they were making their aerial adventure.

"Forty-six minutes!" announced the lieutenant.

The glowing expanse of the earth's disc seemed like a vast funnel, yawning
to receive the comet and its atmosphere, balloon and all, into its open mouth.

"Forty-seven!" cried Procope.

There was half a minute yet. A thrill ran through every vein. A vibration
quivered through the atmosphere. The montgolfier, elongated to its utmost
stretch, was manifestly being sucked into a vortex. Every passenger in the
quivering car involuntarily clung spasmodically to its sides, and as the two
atmospheres amalgamated, clouds accumulated in heavy masses, involving all
around in dense obscurity, while flashes of lurid flame threw a weird glimmer on
the scene.

In a mystery every one found himself upon the earth again. They could not
explain it, but here they were once more upon terrestrial soil; in a swoon they
had left the earth, and in a similar swoon they had come back!

Of the balloon not a vestige remained, and contrary to previous computation,


the comet had merely grazed the earth, and was traversing the regions of space,
again far away!


CHAPTER XIX. BACK AGAIN

"In Algeria, captain?"

"Yes, Ben Zoof, in Algeria; and not far from Mostaganem." Such were the
first words which, after their return to consciousness, were exchanged between
Servadac and his orderly.

They had resided so long in the province that they could not for a moment be
mistaken as to their whereabouts, and although they were incapable of clearing
up the mysteries that shrouded the miracle, yet they were convinced at the first
glance that they had been returned to the earth at the very identical spot where
they had quitted it.

In fact, they were scarcely more than a mile from Mostaganem, and in the
course of an hour, when they had all recovered from the bewilderment
occasioned by the shock, they started off in a body and made their way to the
town. It was a matter of extreme surprise to find no symptom of the least
excitement anywhere as they went along. The population was perfectly calm;
every one was pursuing his ordinary avocation; the cattle were browsing quietly
upon the pastures that were moist with the dew of an ordinary January morning.
It was about eight o'clock; the sun was rising in the east; nothing could be
noticed to indicate that any abnormal incident had either transpired or been
expected by the inhabitants. As to a collision with a comet, there was not the
faintest trace of any such phenomenon crossing men's minds, and awakening, as
it surely would, a panic little short of the certified approach of the millennium.

"Nobody expects us," said Servadac; "that is very certain."

"No, indeed," answered Ben Zoof, with a sigh; he was manifestly
disappointed that his return to Mostaganem was not welcomed with a triumphal
reception.

They reached the Mascara gate. The first persons that Servadac recognized
were the two friends that he had invited to be his seconds in the duel two years
ago, the colonel of the 2nd Fusiliers and the captain of the 8th Artillery. In return
to his somewhat hesitating salutation, the colonel greeted him heartily, "Ah!
Servadac, old fellow! is it you?"

"I, myself," said the captain.

"Where on earth have you been to all this time? In the name of peace, what
have you been doing with yourself?"

"You would never believe me, colonel," answered Servadac, "if I were to tell


you; so on that point I had better hold my tongue."

"Hang your mysteries!" said the colonel; "tell me, where have you been?"

"No, my friend, excuse me," replied Servadac; "but shake hands with me in
earnest, that I may be sure I am not dreaming." Hector Servadac had made up his
mind, and no amount of persuasion could induce him to divulge his incredible
experiences.

Anxious to turn the subject, Servadac took the earliest opportunity of asking,
"And what about Madame de L----?"

"Madame de L-----!" exclaimed the colonel, taking the words out of his
mouth; "the lady is married long ago; you did not suppose that she was going to
wait for you. ‘Out of sight, out of mind,’ you know."

"True," replied Servadac; and turning to the count he said, "Do you hear
that? We shall not have to fight our duel after all."

"Most happy to be excused," rejoined the count. The rivals took each other
by the hand, and were united henceforth in the bonds of a sincere and confiding
friendship.

"An immense relief," said Servadac to himself, "that I have no occasion to
finish that confounded rondo!"

It was agreed between the captain and the count that it would be desirable in
every way to maintain the most rigid silence upon the subject of the inexplicable
phenomena which had come within their experience. It was to them both a
subject of the greatest perplexity to find that the shores of the Mediterranean had
undergone no change, but they coincided in the opinion that it was prudent to
keep their bewilderment entirely to themselves. Nothing induced them to break
their reserve.

The very next day the small community was broken up.

The Dobryna's crew, with the count and the lieutenant, started for Russia,
and the Spaniards, provided, by the count's liberality, with a competency that
ensured them from want, were despatched to their native shores. The leave
taking was accompanied by genuine tokens of regard and goodwill.

For Isaac Hakkabut alone there was no feeling of regret. Doubly ruined by
the loss of his tartan, and by the abandonment of his fortune, he disappeared
entirely from the scene. It is needless to say that no one troubled himself to
institute a search after him, and, as Ben Zoof sententiously remarked, "Perhaps
old Jehoram is making money in America by exhibiting himself as the latest
arrival from a comet!"

But however great was the reserve which Captain Servadac might make on
his part, nothing could induce Professor Rosette to conceal his experiences. In
spite of the denial which astronomer after astronomer gave to the appearance of


such a comet as Gallia at all, and of its being refused admission to the catalogue,
he published a voluminous treatise, not only detailing his own adventures, but
setting forth, with the most elaborate precision, all the elements which settled its
period and its orbit. Discussions arose in scientific circles; an overwhelming
majority decided against the representations of the professor; an unimportant
minority declared themselves in his favor, and a pamphlet obtained some degree
of notice, ridiculing the whole debate under the title of "The History of an
Hypothesis." In reply to this impertinent criticism of his labors, Rosette issued a
rejoinder full with the most vehement expressions of indignation, and reiterating
his asseveration that a fragment of Gibraltar was still traversing the regions of
space, carrying thirteen Englishmen upon its surface, and concluding by saying
that it was the great disappointment of his life that he had not been taken with
them.

Pablo and little Nina were adopted, the one by Servadac, the other by the
count, and under the supervision of their guardians, were well educated and
cared for. Some years later, Colonel, no longer Captain, Servadac, his hair
slightly streaked with grey, had the pleasure of seeing the handsome young
Spaniard united in marriage to the Italian, now grown into a charming girl, upon
whom the count bestowed an ample dowry; the young people's happiness in no
way marred by the fact that they had not been destined, as once seemed likely, to
be the Adam and Eve of a new world.

The career of the comet was ever a mystery which neither Servadac nor his
orderly could eliminate from the regions of doubt. Anyhow, they were firmer
and more confiding friends than ever.

One day, in the environs of Montmartre, where they were secure from
eavesdroppers, Ben Zoof incidentally referred to the experiences in the depths of
Nina's Hive; but stopped short and said, "However, those things never happened,
sir, did they?"

His master could only reply, "Confound it, Ben Zoof! What is a man to
believe?"


ROBUR THE CONQUEROR
By
Jules Verne


Chapter I


MYSTERIOUS SOUNDS


BANG! Bang!

The pistol shots were almost simultaneous. A cow peacefully grazing fifty
yards away received one of the bullets in her back. She had nothing to do with
the quarrel all the same.

Neither of the adversaries was hit.

Who were these two gentlemen? We do not know, although this would be an
excellent opportunity to hand down their names to posterity. All we can say is
that the elder was an Englishman and the younger an American, and both of
them were old enough to know better.

So far as recording in what locality the inoffensive ruminant had just tasted
her last tuft of herbage, nothing can be easier. It was on the left bank of Niagara,
not far from the suspension bridge which joins the American to the Canadian
bank three miles from the falls.

The Englishman stepped up to the American.

"T contend, nevertheless, that it was 'Rule Britannia!"

"And I say it was "Yankee Doodle!" replied the young American.

The dispute was about to begin again when one of the seconds--doubtless in
the interests of the milk trade--interposed.

"Suppose we say it was 'Rule Doodle’ and "Yankee Britannia’ and adjourn to
breakfast?"

This compromise between the national airs of Great Britain and the United
States was adopted to the general satisfaction. The Americans and Englishmen
walked up the left bank of the Niagara on their way to Goat Island, the neutral
ground between the falls. Let us leave them in the presence of the boiled eggs
and traditional ham, and floods enough of tea to make the cataract jealous, and
trouble ourselves no more about them. It is extremely unlikely that we shall
again meet with them in this story.

Which was right; the Englishman or the American? It is not easy to say.
Anyhow the duel shows how great was the excitement, not only in the new but
also in the old world, with regard to an inexplicable phenomenon which for a
month or more had driven everybody to distraction.

Never had the sky been so much looked at since the appearance of man on
the terrestrial globe. The night before an aerial trumpet had blared its brazen


notes through space immediately over that part of Canada between Lake Ontario
and Lake Erie. Some people had heard those notes as "Yankee Doodle," others
had heard them as "Rule Britannia," and hence the quarrel between the Anglo-
Saxons, which ended with the breakfast on Goat Island. Perhaps it was neither
one nor the other of these patriotic tunes, but what was undoubted by all was that
these extraordinary sounds had seemed to descend from the sky to the earth.

What could it be? Was it some exuberant aeronaut rejoicing on that sonorous
instrument of which the Renommée makes such obstreperous use?

No! There was no balloon and there were no aeronauts. Some strange
phenomenon had occurred in the higher zones of the atmosphere, a phenomenon
of which neither the nature nor the cause could be explained. Today it appeared
over America; forty-eight hours afterwards it was over Europe; a week later it
was in Asia over the Celestial Empire.

Hence in every country of the world--empire, kingdom, or republic--there
was anxiety which it was important to allay. If you hear in your house strange
and inexplicable noises, do you not at once endeavor to discover the cause? And
if your search is in vain, do you not leave your house and take up your quarters
in another? But in this case the house was the terrestrial globe! There are no
means of leaving that house for the moon or Mars, or Venus, or Jupiter, or any
other planet of the solar system. And so of necessity we have to find out what it
is that takes place, not in the infinite void, but within the atmospherical zones. In
fact, if there is no air there is no noise, and as there was a noise--that famous
trumpet, to wit--the phenomenon must occur in the air, the density of which
invariably diminishes, and which does not extend for more than six miles round
our spheroid.

Naturally the newspapers took up the question in their thousands, and treated
it in every form, throwing on it both light and darkness, recording many things
about it true or false, alarming and tranquillizing their readers--as the sale
required--and almost driving ordinary people mad. At one blow party politics
dropped unheeded--and the affairs of the world went on none the worse for it.

But what could this thing be? There was not an observatory that was not
applied to. If an observatory could not give a satisfactory answer what was the
use of observatories? If astronomers, who doubled and tripled the stars a
hundred thousand million miles away, could not explain a phenomenon
occurring only a few miles off, what was the use of astronomers?

The observatory at Paris was very guarded in what it said. In the
mathematical section they had not thought the statement worth noticing; in the
meridional section they knew nothing about it; in the physical observatory they
had not come across it; in the geodetic section they had had no observation; in


the meteorological section there had been no record; in the calculating room they
had had nothing to deal with. At any rate this confession was a frank one, and
the same frankness characterized the replies from the observatory of Montsouris
and the magnetic station in the park of St. Maur. The same respect for the truth
distinguished the Bureau des Longitudes.

The provinces were slightly more affirmative. Perhaps in the night of the
fifth and the morning of the sixth of May there had appeared a flash of light of
electrical origin which lasted about twenty seconds. At the Pic du Midi this light
appeared between nine and ten in the evening. At the Meteorological
Observatory on the Puy de Dome the light had been observed between one and
two o'clock in the morning; at Mont Ventoux in Provence it had been seen
between two and three o'clock; at Nice it had been noticed between three and
four o'clock; while at the Semnoz Alps between Annecy, Le Bourget, and Le
Léman, it had been detected just as the zenith was paling with the dawn.

Now it evidently would not do to disregard these observations altogether.
There could be no doubt that a light had been observed at different places, in
succession, at intervals, during some hours. Hence, whether it had been
produced from many centers in the terrestrial atmosphere, or from one center, it
was plain that the light must have traveled at a speed of over one hundred and
twenty miles an hour.

In the United Kingdom there was much perplexity. The observatories were
not in agreement. Greenwich would not consent to the proposition of Oxford.
They were agreed on one point, however, and that was: "It was nothing at all!"

But, said one, "It was an optical illusion!" While the other contended that, "It
was an acoustical illusion!" And so they disputed. Something, however, was, it
will be seen, common to both "It was an illusion."

Between the observatory of Berlin and the observatory of Vienna the
discussion threatened to end in international complications; but Russia, in the
person of the director of the observatory at Pulkowa, showed that both were
right. It all depended on the point of view from which they attacked the
phenomenon, which, though impossible in theory, was possible in practice.

In Switzerland, at the observatory of Sautis in the canton of Appenzell, at the
Righi, at the Gabriss, in the passes of the St. Gothard, at the St. Bernard, at the
Julier, at the Simplon, at Zurich, at Somblick in the Tyrolean Alps, there was a
very strong disinclination to say anything about what nobody could prove--and
that was nothing but reasonable.

But in Italy, at the meteorological stations on Vesuvius, on Etna in the old
Casa Inglesi, at Monte Cavo, the observers made no hesitation in admitting the
materiality of the phenomenon, particularly as they had seen it by day in the


form of a small cloud of vapor, and by night in that of a shooting star. But of
what it was they knew nothing.

Scientists began at last to tire of the mystery, while they continued to
disagree about it, and even to frighten the lowly and the ignorant, who, thanks to
one of the wisest laws of nature, have formed, form, and will form the immense
majority of the world's inhabitants. Astronomers and meteorologists would soon
have dropped the subject altogether had not, on the night of the 26th and 27th,
the observatory of Kautokeino at Finmark, in Norway, and during the night of
the 28th and 29th that of Isfjord at Spitzbergen--Norwegian one and Swedish the
other--found themselves agreed in recording that in the center of an aurora
borealis there had appeared a sort of huge bird, an aerial monster, whose
structure they were unable to determine, but who, there was no doubt, was
showering off from his body certain corpuscles which exploded like bombs.

In Europe not a doubt was thrown on this observation of the stations in
Finmark and Spitzbergen. But what appeared the most phenomenal about it was
that the Swedes and Norwegians could find themselves in agreement on any
subject whatever.

There was a laugh at the asserted discovery in all the observatories of South
America, in Brazil, Peru, and La Plata, and in those of Australia at Sydney,
Adelaide, and Melbourne; and Australian laughter is very catching.

To sum up, only one chief of a meteorological station ventured on a decided
answer to this question, notwithstanding the sarcasms that his solution provoked.
This was a Chinaman, the director of the observatory at Zi-Ka-Wey which rises
in the center of a vast plateau less than thirty miles from the sea, having an
immense horizon and wonderfully pure atmosphere. "It is possible," said he,
"that the object was an aviform apparatus--a flying machine!"

What nonsense!

But if the controversy was keen in the old world, we can imagine what it was
like in that portion of the new of which the United States occupy so vast an area.

A Yankee, we know, does not waste time on the road. He takes the street that
leads him straight to his end. And the observatories of the American Federation
did not hesitate to do their best. If they did not hurl their objectives at each
other's heads, it was because they would have had to put them back just when
they most wanted to use them. In this much-disputed question the observatories
of Washington in the District of Columbia, and Cambridge in Massachusetts,
found themselves opposed by those of Dartmouth College in New Hampshire,
and Ann Arbor in Michigan. The subject of their dispute was not the nature of
the body observed, but the precise moment of its observation. All of them
claimed to have seen it the same night, the same hour, the same minute, the same


second, although the trajectory of the mysterious voyager took it but a moderate
height above the horizon. Now from Massachusetts to Michigan, from New
Hampshire to Columbia, the distance is too great for this double observation,
made at the same moment, to be considered possible.

Dudley at Albany, in the state of New York, and West Point, the military
academy, showed that their colleagues were wrong by an elaborate calculation of
the right ascension and declination of the aforesaid body.

But later on it was discovered that the observers had been deceived in the
body, and that what they had seen was an aerolite. This aerolite could not be the
object in question, for how could an aerolite blow a trumpet?

It was in vain that they tried to get rid of this trumpet as an optical illusion.
The ears were no more deceived than the eyes. Something had assuredly been
seen, and something had assuredly been heard. In the night of the 12th and 13th
of May--a very dark night--the observers at Yale College, in the Sheffield
Science School, had been able to take down a few bars of a musical phrase in D
major, common time, which gave note for note, rhythm for rhythm, the chorus of
the Chant du Départ.

"Good," said the Yankee wags. "There is a French band well up in the air."

"But to joke is not to answer." Thus said the observatory at Boston, founded
by the Atlantic Iron Works Society, whose opinions in matters of astronomy and
meteorology began to have much weight in the world of science.

Then there intervened the observatory at Cincinnati, founded in 1870, on
Mount Lookout, thanks to the generosity of Mr. Kilgour, and known for its
micrometrical measurements of double stars. Its director declared with the
utmost good faith that there had certainly been something, that a traveling body
had shown itself at very short periods at different points in the atmosphere, but
what were the nature of this body, its dimensions, its speed, and its trajectory, it
was impossible to say.

It was then a journal whose publicity is immense--the "New York Herald"--
received the anonymous contribution hereunder.

"There will be in the recollection of most people the rivalry which existed a
few years ago between the two heirs of the Begum of Ragginahra, the French
doctor Sarrasin, the city of Frankville, and the German engineer Schultze, in the
city of Steeltown, both in the south of Oregon in the United States.

"Tt will not have been forgotten that, with the object of destroying Frankville,
Herr Schultze launched a formidable engine, intended to beat down the town and
annihilate it at a single blow.

"Still less will it be forgotten that this engine, whose initial velocity as it left
the mouth of the monster cannon had been erroneously calculated, had flown off


at a speed exceeding by sixteen times that of ordinary projectiles--or about four
hundred and fifty miles an hour--that it did not fall to the ground, and that it
passed into an aerolitic stage, so as to circle for ever round our globe.

"Why should not this be the body in question?"

Very ingenious, Mr. Correspondent on the "New York Herald!" but how
about the trumpet? There was no trumpet in Herr Schulze's projectile!

So all the explanations explained nothing, and all the observers had observed
in vain. There remained only the suggestion offered by the director of Zi-Ka-
Wey. But the opinion of a Chinaman!

The discussion continued, and there was no sign of agreement. Then came a
short period of rest. Some days elapsed without any object, aerolite or otherwise,
being described, and without any trumpet notes being heard in the atmosphere.
The body then had fallen on some part of the globe where it had been difficult to
trace it; in the sea, perhaps. Had it sunk in the depths of the Atlantic, the Pacific,
or the Indian Ocean? What was to be said in this matter?

But then, between the 2nd and 9th of June, there came a new series of facts
which could not possibly be explained by the unaided existence of a cosmic
phenomenon.

In a week the Hamburgers at the top of St. Michael's Tower, the Turks on the
highest minaret of St. Sophia, the Rouennais at the end of the metal spire of their
cathedral, the Strasburgers at the summit of their minister, the Americans on the
head of the Liberty statue at the entrance of the Hudson and on the Bunker Hill
monument at Boston, the Chinese at the spike of the temple of the Four Hundred
Genii at Canton, the Hindus on the sixteenth terrace of the pyramid of the temple
at Tanjore, the San Pietrini at the cross of St. Peter's at Rome, the English at the
cross of St. Paul's in London, the Egyptians at the apex of the Great Pyramid of
Ghizeh, the Parisians at the lighting conductor of the iron tower of the
Exposition of 1889, a thousand feet high, all of them beheld a flag floating from
some one of these inaccessible points.

And the flag was black, dotted with stars, and it bore a golden sun in its
center.


Chapter II


AGREEMENT IMPOSSIBLE


"And the first who says the contrary--"

"Indeed! But we will say the contrary so long as there is a place to say it in!"

"And in spite of your threats--"

"Mind what you are saying, Bat Fynn!"

"Mind what you are saying, Uncle Prudent!"

"T maintain that the screw ought to be behind!"

"And so do we! And so do we!" replied half a hundred voices confounded in
one.

"No! It ought to be in front!" shouted Phil Evans.

"In front!" roared fifty other voices, with a vigor in no whit less remarkable.

"We shall never agree!"

"Never! Never!"

"Then what is the use of a dispute?"

"It is not a dispute! It is a discussion!"

One would not have thought so to listen to the taunts, objurgations, and
vociferations which filled the lecture room for a good quarter of an hour.

The room was one of the largest in the Weldon Institute, the well-known club
in Walnut Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, U. S. A. The evening before there
had been an election of a lamplighter, occasioning many public manifestations,
noisy meetings, and even interchanges of blows, resulting in an effervescence
which had not yet subsided, and which would account for some of the
excitement just exhibited by the members of the Weldon Institute. For this was
merely a meeting of balloonists, discussing the burning question of the direction
of balloons.

In this great saloon there were struggling, pushing, gesticulating, shouting,
arguing, disputing, a hundred balloonists, all with their hats on, under the
authority of a president, assisted by a secretary and treasurer. They were not
engineers by profession, but simply amateurs of all that appertained to
aerostatics, and they were amateurs in a fury, and especially foes of those who
would oppose to aerostats "apparatuses heavier than the air," flying machines,
aerial ships, or what not. That these people might one day discover the method
of guiding balloons is possible. There could be no doubt that their president had
considerable difficulty in guiding them.


This president, well known in Philadelphia, was the famous Uncle Prudent,
Prudent being his family name. There is nothing surprising in America in the
qualificative uncle, for you can there be uncle without having either nephew or
niece. There they speak of uncle as in other places they speak of father, though
the father may have had no children.

Uncle Prudent was a personage of consideration, and in spite of his name
was well known for his audacity. He was very rich, and that is no drawback even
in the United States; and how could it be otherwise when he owned the greater
part of the shares in Niagara Falls? A society of engineers had just been founded
at Buffalo for working the cataract. It seemed to be an excellent speculation. The
seven thousand five hundred cubic meters that pass over Niagara in a second
would produce seven millions of horsepower. This enormous power, distributed
amongst all the workshops within a radius of three hundred miles, would return
an annual income of three hundred million dollars, of which the greater part
would find its way into the pocket of Uncle Prudent. He was a bachelor, he lived
quietly, and for his only servant had his valet Frycollin, who was hardly worthy
of being the servant to so audacious a master.

Uncle Prudent was rich, and therefore he had friends, as was natural; but he
also had enemies, although he was president of the club--among others all those
who envied his position. Amongst his bitterest foes we may mention the
secretary of the Weldon Institute.

This was Phil Evans, who was also very rich, being the manager of the
Wheelton Watch Company, an important manufactory, which makes every day
five hundred movements equal in every respect to the best Swiss workmanship.
Phil Evans would have passed for one of the happiest men in the world, and even
in the United States, if it had not been for Uncle Prudent. Like him he was in his
forty-sixth year; like him of invariable health; like him of undoubted boldness.
They were two men made to understand each other thoroughly, but they did not,
for both were of extreme violence of character. Uncle Prudent was furiously hot;
Phil Evans was abnormally cool.

And why had not Phil Evans been elected president of the club? The votes
were exactly divided between Uncle Prudent and him. Twenty times there had
been a scrutiny, and twenty times the majority had not declared for either one or
the other. The position was embarrassing, and it might have lasted for the
lifetime of the candidates.

One of the members of the club then proposed a way out of the difficulty.
This was Jem Chip, the treasurer of the Weldon Institute. Chip was a confirmed
vegetarian, a proscriber of all animal nourishment, of all fermented liquors, half
a Mussulman, half a Brahman. On this occasion Jem Chip was supported by


another member of the club, William T. Forbes, the manager of a large factory
where they made glucose by treating rags with sulphuric acid. A man of good
standing was this William T. Forbes, the father of two charming girls--Miss
Dorothy, called Doll, and Miss Martha, called Mat, who gave the tone to the best
society in Philadelphia.

It followed, then, on the proposition of Jem Chip, supported by William T.
Forbes and others, that it was decided to elect the president "on the center point."

This mode of election can be applied in all cases when it is desired to elect
the most worthy; and a number of Americans of high intelligence are already
thinking of employing it in the nomination of the President of the Republic of
the United States.

On two boards of perfect whiteness a black line is traced. The length of each
of these lines is mathematically the same, for they have been determined with as
much accuracy as the base of the first triangle in a trigonometrical survey. That
done, the two boards were erected on the same day in the center of the
conference room, and the two candidates, each armed with a fine needle,
marched towards the board that had fallen to his lot. The man who planted his
needle nearest the center of the line would be proclaimed President of the
Weldon Institute.

The operation must be done at once--no guide marks or trial shots allowed;
nothing but sureness of eye. The man must have a compass in his eye, as the
saying goes; that was all.

Uncle Prudent stuck in his needle at the same moment as Phil Evans did his.
Then there began the measurement to discover which of the two competitors had
most nearly approached the center.

Wonderful! Such had been the precision of the shots that the measures gave
no appreciable difference. If they were not exactly in the mathematical center of
the line, the distance between the needles was so small as to be invisible to the
naked eye.

The meeting was much embarrassed.

Fortunately one of the members, Truck Milnor, insisted that the
measurements should be remade by means of a rule graduated by the
micrometrical machine of M. Perreaux, which can divide a millimeter into
fifteen-hundredths of a millimeter with a diamond splinter, was brought to bear
on the lines; and on reading the divisions through a microscope the following
were the results: Uncle Prudent had approached the center within less than six
fifteenth-hundredths of a millimeter. Phil Evans was within nine fifteen-
hundredths.

And that is why Phil Evans was only secretary of the Weldon Institute,


whereas Uncle Prudent was president. A difference of three fifteen-hundredths of
a millimeter! And on account of it Phil Evans vowed against Uncle Prudent one
of those hatreds which are none the less fierce for being latent.


Chapter ITI


A VISITOR IS ANNOUNCED


The many experiments made during this last quarter of the nineteenth
century have given considerable impetus to the question of guidable balloons.
The cars furnished with propellers attached in 1852 to the aerostats of the
elongated form introduced by Henry Giffard, the machines of Dupuy de Lome in
1872, of the Tissandier brothers in 1883, and of Captain Krebs and Renard in
1884, yielded many important results. But if these machines, moving in a
medium heavier than themselves, maneuvering under the propulsion of a screw,
working at an angle to the direction of the wind, and even against the wind, to
return to their point of departure, had been really "guidable," they had only
succeeded under very favorable conditions. In large, covered halls their success
was perfect. In a calm atmosphere they did very well. In a light wind of five or
six yards a second they still moved. But nothing practical had been obtained.
Against a miller's wind--nine yards a second--the machines had remained almost
stationary. Against a fresh breeze--eleven yards a second--they would have
advanced backwards. In a storm--twenty-seven to thirty-three yards a second--
they would have been blown about like a feather. In a hurricane--sixty yards a
second--they would have run the risk of being dashed to pieces. And in one of
those cyclones which exceed a hundred yards a second not a fragment of them
would have been left. It remained, then, even after the striking experiments of
Captains Krebs and Renard, that though guidable aerostats had gained a little
speed, they could not be kept going in a moderate breeze. Hence the
impossibility of making practical use of this mode of aerial locomotion.

With regards to the means employed to give the aerostat its motion a great
deal of progress had been made. For the steam engines of Henry Giffard, and the
muscular force of Dupuy de Lome, electric motors had gradually been
substituted. The batteries of bichromate of potassium of the Tissandier brothers
had given a speed of four yards a second. The dynamo-electric machines of
Captain Krebs and Renard had developed a force of twelve horsepower and
yielded a speed of six and a half yards per second.

With regard to this motor, engineers and electricians had been approaching
more and more to that desideratum which is known as a steam horse in a watch
case. Gradually the results of the pile of which Captains Krebs and Renard had
kept the secret had been surpassed, and aeronauts had become able to avail


themselves of motors whose lightness increased at the same time as their power.

In this there was much to encourage those who believed in the utilization of
guidable balloons. But yet how many good people there are who refuse to admit
the possibility of such a thing! If the aerostat finds support in the air it belongs to
the medium in which it moves; under such conditions, how can its mass, which
offers so much resistance to the currents of the atmosphere, make its way against
the wind?

In this struggle of the inventors after a light and powerful motor, the
Americans had most nearly attained what they sought. A dynamo-electric
apparatus, in which a new pile was employed the composition of which was still
a mystery, had been bought from its inventor, a Boston chemist up to then
unknown. Calculations made with the greatest care, diagrams drawn with the
utmost exactitude, showed that by means of this apparatus driving a screw of
given dimensions a displacement could be obtained of from twenty to twenty-
two yards a second.

Now this was magnificent!

"And it is not dear," said Uncle Prudent, as he handed to the inventor in
return for his formal receipt the last installment of the hundred thousand paper
dollars he had paid for his invention.

Immediately the Weldon Institute set to work. When there comes along a
project of practical utility the money leaps nimbly enough from American
pockets. The funds flowed in even without its being necessary to form a
syndicate. Three hundred thousand dollars came into the club's account at the
first appeal. The work began under the superintendence of the most celebrated
aeronaut of the United States, Harry W. Tinder, immortalized by three of his
ascents out of a thousand, one in which he rose to a height of twelve thousand
yards, higher than Gay Lussac, Coxwell, Sivet, Crocé-Spinelli, Tissandier,
Glaisher; another in which he had crossed America from New York to San
Francisco, exceeding by many hundred leagues the journeys of Nadar, Godard,
and others, to say nothing of that of John Wise, who accomplished eleven
hundred and fifty miles from St. Louis to Jefferson county; the third, which
ended in a frightful fall from fifteen hundred feet at the cost of a slight sprain in
the right thumb, while the less fortunate Pilatre de Rozier fell only seven
hundred feet, and yet killed himself on the spot!

At the time this story begins the Weldon Institute had got their work well in
hand. In the Turner yard at Philadelphia there reposed an enormous aerostat,
whose strength had been tried by highly compressed air. It well merited the name
of the monster balloon.

How large was Nadar's Géant? Six thousand cubic meters. How large was


John Wise's balloon? Twenty thousand cubic meters. How large was the Giffard
balloon at the 1878 Exhibition? Twenty-five thousand cubic meters. Compare
these three aerostats with the aerial machine of the Weldon Institute, whose
volume amounted to forty thousand cubic meters, and you will understand why
Uncle Prudent and his colleagues were so justifiably proud of it.

This balloon not being destined for the exploration of the higher strata of the
atmosphere, was not called the Excelsior, a name which is rather too much held
in honor among the citizens of America. No! It was called, simply, the "Go-
Ahead," and all it had to do was to justify its name by going ahead obediently to
the wishes of its commander.

The dynamo-electric machine, according to the patent purchased by the
Weldon Institute, was nearly ready. In less than six weeks the "Go-Ahead" would
start for its first cruise through space.

But, as we have seen, all the mechanical difficulties had not been overcome.
Many evenings had been devoted to discussing, not the form of its screw nor its
dimensions, but whether it ought to be put behind, as the Tissandier brothers had
done, or before as Captains Krebs and Renard had done. It is unnecessary to add
that the partisans of the two systems had almost come to blows. The group of
"Beforists" were equaled in number by the group of "Behindists." Uncle Prudent,
who ought to have given the casting vote--Uncle Prudent, brought up doubtless
in the school of Professor Buridan--could not bring himself to decide.

Hence the impossibility of getting the screw into place. The dispute might
last for some time, unless the government interfered. But in the United States the
government meddles with private affairs as little as it possibly can. And it is
right.

Things were in this state at this meeting on the 13th of June, which
threatened to end in a riot--insults exchanged, fisticuffs succeeding the insults,
cane thrashings succeeding the fisticuffs, revolver shots succeeding the cane
thrashings--when at thirty-seven minutes past eight there occurred a diversion.

The porter of the Weldon Institute coolly and calmly, like a policeman amid
the storm of the meeting, approached the presidential desk. On it he placed a
card. He awaited the orders that Uncle Prudent found it convenient to give.

Uncle Prudent turned on the steam whistle, which did duty for the
presidential bell, for even the Kremlin clock would have struck in vain! But the
tumult slackened not.

Then the president removed his hat. Thanks to this extreme measure a semi-
silence was obtained.

"A communication!" said Uncle Prudent, after taking a huge pinch from the
snuff-box which never left him.


"Speak up!" answered eighty-nine voices, accidentally in agreement on this
one point.

"A stranger, my dear colleagues, asks to be admitted to the meeting."

"Never!" replied every voice.

"He desires to prove to us, it would appear," continued Uncle Prudent, "that
to believe in guiding balloons is to believe in the absurdest of Utopias!"

"Let him in! Let him in!"

"What is the name of this singular personage?" asked secretary Phil Evans.

"Robur," replied Uncle Prudent.

"Robur! Robur! Robur!" yelled the assembly. And the welcome accorded so
quickly to the curious name was chiefly due to the Weldon Institute hoping to
vent its exasperation on the head of him who bore it!


Chapter IV


IN WHICH A NEW CHARACTER APPEARS


"Citizens of the United States! My name is Robur. I am worthy of the name!
I am forty years old, although I look but thirty, and I have a constitution of iron,
a healthy vigor that nothing can shake, a muscular strength that few can equal,
and a digestion that would be thought first class even in an ostrich!"

They were listening! Yes! The riot was quelled at once by the totally
unexpected fashion of the speech. Was this fellow a madman or a hoaxer?
Whoever he was, he kept his audience in hand. There was not a whisper in the
meeting in which but a few minutes ago the storm was in full fury.

And Robur looked the man he said he was. Of middle height and geometric
breadth, his figure was a regular trapezium with the greatest of its parallel sides
formed by the line of his shoulders. On this line attached by a robust neck there
rose an enormous spheroidal head. The head of what animal did it resemble from
the point of view of passional analogy? The head of a bull; but a bull with an
intelligent face. Eyes which at the least opposition would glow like coals of fire;
and above them a permanent contraction of the superciliary muscle, an
invariable sign of extreme energy. Short hair, slightly woolly, with metallic
reflections; large chest rising and falling like a smith's bellows; arms, hands,
legs, feet, all worthy of the trunk. No mustaches, no whiskers, but a large
American goatee, revealing the attachments of the jaw whose masseter muscles
were evidently of formidable strength. It has been calculated--what has not been
calculated?--that the pressure of the jaw of an ordinary crocodile can reach four
hundred atmospheres, while that of a hound can only amount to one hundred.
From this the following curious formula has been deduced: If a kilogram of dog
produces eight kilograms of masseteric force, a kilogram of crocodile could
produce twelve. Now, a kilogram of, the aforesaid Robur would not produce less
than ten, so that he came between the dog and the crocodile.

From what country did this remarkable specimen come? It was difficult to
say. One thing was noticeable, and that was that he expressed himself fluently in
English without a trace of the drawling twang that distinguishes the Yankees of
New England.

He continued: "And now, honorable citizens, for my mental faculties. You
see before you an engineer whose nerves are in no way inferior to his muscles. I
have no fear of anything or anybody. I have a strength of will that has never had


to yield. When I have decided on a thing, all America, all the world, may strive
in vain to keep me from it. When I have an idea, I allow no one to share it, and I
do not permit any contradiction. I insist on these details, honorable citizens,
because it is necessary you should quite understand me. Perhaps you think I am
talking too much about myself? It does not matter if you do! And now consider a
little before you interrupt me, as I have come to tell you something that you may
not be particularly pleased to hear."

A sound as of the surf on the beach began to rise along the first row of seats--
a sign that the sea would not be long in getting stormy again.

"Speak, stranger!" said Uncle Prudent, who had some difficulty in restraining
himself.

And Robur spoke as follows, without troubling himself any more about his
audience.

"Yes! I know it well! After a century of experiments that have led to nothing,
and trials giving no results, there still exist ill-balanced minds who believe in
guiding balloons. They imagine that a motor of some sort, electric or otherwise,
might be applied to their pretentious skin bags which are at the mercy of every
current in the atmosphere. They persuade themselves that they can be masters of
an aerostat as they can be masters of a ship on the surface of the sea. Because a
few inventors in calm or nearly calm weather have succeeded in working an
angle with the wind, or even beating to windward in a gentle breeze, they think
that the steering of aerial apparatus lighter than the air is a practical matter. Well,
now, look here; You hundred, who believe in the realization of your dreams, are
throwing your thousands of dollars not into water but into space! You are
fighting the impossible!"

Strange as it was that at this affirmation the members of the Weldon Institute
did not move. Had they become as deaf as they were patient? Or were they
reserving themselves to see how far this audacious contradictor would dare to
go?

Robur continued: "What? A balloon! When to obtain the raising of a couple
of pounds you require a cubic yard of gas. A balloon pretending to resist the
wind by aid of its mechanism, when the pressure of a light breeze on a vessel's
sails is not less than that of four hundred horsepower; when in the accident at the
Tay Bridge you saw the storm produce a pressure of eight and a half
hundredweight on a square yard. A balloon, when on such a system nature has
never constructed anything flying, whether furnished with wings like birds, or
membranes like certain fish, or certain mammalia--"

"Mammalia?" exclaimed one of the members.

"Yes! Mammalia! The bat, which flies, if I am not mistaken! Is the


gentleman unaware that this flyer is a mammal? Did he ever see an omelette
made of bat's eggs?"

The interrupter reserved himself for future interruption, and Robur resumed:
"But does that mean that man is to give up the conquest of the air, and the
transformation of the domestic and political manners of the old world, by the use
of this admirable means of locomotion? By no means. As he has become master
of the seas with the ship, by the oar, the sail, the wheel and the screw, so shall he
become master of atmospherical space by apparatus heavier than the air--for it
must be heavier to be stronger than the air!"

And then the assembly exploded. What a broadside of yells escaped from all
these mouths, aimed at Robur like the muzzles of so many guns! Was not this
hurling a declaration of war into the very camp of the balloonists? Was not this a
Stirring up of strife between 'the lighter’ and 'the heavier’ than air?

Robur did not even frown. With folded arms he waited bravely till silence
was obtained.

By a gesture Uncle Prudent ordered the firing to cease.

"Yes," continued Robur, "the future is for the flying machine. The air affords
a solid fulcrum. If you will give a column of air an ascensional movement of
forty-five meters a second, a man can support himself on the top of it if the soles
of his boots have a superficies of only the eighth of a square meter. And if the
speed be increased to ninety meters, he can walk on it with naked feet. Or if, by
means of a screw, you drive a mass of air at this speed, you get the same result."

What Robur said had been said before by all the partisans of aviation, whose
work slowly but surely is leading on to the solution of the problem. To Ponton
d'Amécourt, La Landelle, Nadar, De Luzy, De Louvrié, Liais, Beleguir, Moreau,
the brothers Richard, Babinet, Jobert, Du Temple, Salives, Penaud, De
Villeneuve, Gauchot and Tatin, Michael Loup, Edison, Planavergne, and so
many others, belongs the honor of having brought forward ideas of such
simplicity. Abandoned and resumed times without number, they are sure, some
day to triumph. To the enemies of aviation, who urge that the bird only sustains
himself by warming the air he strikes, their answer is ready. Have they not
proved that an eagle weighing five kilograms would have to fill fifty cubic
meters with his warm fluid merely to sustain himself in space?

This is what Robur demonstrated with undeniable logic amid the uproar that
arose on all sides. And in conclusion these are the words he hurled in the faces
of the balloonists: "With your aerostats you can do nothing--you will arrive at
nothing--you dare do nothing! The boldest of your aeronauts, John Wise,
although he has made an aerial voyage of twelve hundred miles above the
American continent, has had to give up his project of crossing the Atlantic! And


you have not advanced one step--not one step--towards your end."

"Sir," said the president, who in vain endeavored to keep himself cool, "you
forget what was said by our immortal Franklin at the first appearance of the fire
balloon, ‘It is but a child, but it will grow!’ It was but a child, and it has grown."

"No, Mr. President, it has not grown! It has got fatter--and this is not the
same thing!"

This was a direct attack on the Weldon Institute, which had decreed, helped,
and paid for the making of a monster balloon. And so propositions of the
following kind began to fly about the room: "Turn him out!" "Throw him off the
platform!" "Prove that he is heavier than the air!"

But these were only words, not means to an end.

Robur remained impassible, and continued: "There is no progress for your
aerostats, my citizen balloonists; progress is for flying machines. The bird flies,
and he is not a balloon, he is a piece of mechanism!"

"Yes, he flies!" exclaimed the fiery Bat T. Fynn; "but he flies against all the
laws of mechanics."

"Indeed!" said Robur, shrugging his shoulders, and resuming, "Since we
have begun the study of the flight of large and small birds one simple idea has
prevailed--to imitate nature, which never makes mistakes. Between the albatross,
which gives hardly ten beats of the wing per minute, between the pelican, which
gives seventy--"

"Seventy-one," said the voice of a scoffer.

"And the bee, which gives one hundred and ninety-two per second--"

"One hundred and ninety-three!" said the facetious individual.

"And, the common house fly, which gives three hundred and thirty--"

"And a half!"

"And the mosquito, which gives millions--"

"No, milliards!"

But Robur, the interrupted, interrupted not his demonstration. "Between
these different rates--" he continued.

"There is a difference," said a voice.

"There is a possibility of finding a practical solution. When De Lucy showed
that the stag beetle, an insect weighing only two grammes, could lift a weight of
four hundred grammes, or two hundred times its own weight, the problem of
aviation was solved. Besides, it has been shown that the wing surface decreases
in proportion to the increase of the size and weight of the animal. Hence we can
look forward to such contrivances--"

"Which would never fly!" said secretary Phil Evans.

"Which have flown, and which will fly," said Robur, without being in the


least disconcerted, "and which we can call streophores, helicopters, orthopters--
or, in imitation of the word 'nef,' which comes from 'navis,' call them from 'avis,'
'efs,'--by means of which man will become the master of space. The helix--"

"Ah, the helix!" replied Phil Evans. "But the bird has no helix; that we
know!"

"So," said Robur; "but Penaud has shown that in reality the bird makes a
helix, and its flight is helicopteral. And the motor of the future is the screw--"

"From such a maladee Saint Helix keep us free!" sung out one of the
members, who had accidentally hit upon the air from Herold's "Zampa."

And they all took up the chorus: "From such a maladee Saint Helix keep us
free!" with such intonations and variations as would have made the French
composer groan in his grave.

As the last notes died away in a frightful discord Uncle Prudent took
advantage of the momentary calm to say, "Stranger, up to now, we let you speak
without interruption." It seemed that for the president of the Weldon Institute
shouts, yells, and catcalls were not interruptions, but only an exchange of
arguments.

"But I may remind you, all the same, that the theory of aviation is
condemned beforehand, and rejected by the majority of American and foreign
engineers. It is a system which was the cause of the death of the Flying Saracen
at Constantinople, of the monk Volador at Lisbon, of De Leturn in 1852, of De
Groof in 1864, besides the victims I forget since the mythological Icarus--"

"A system," replied Robur, "no more to be condemned than that whose
martyrology contains the names of Pilatre de Rozier at Calais, of Blanchard at
Paris, of Donaldson and Grimwood in Lake Michigan, of Sivel and of Crocé-
Spinelli, and others whom it takes good care, to forget."

This was a counter-thrust with a vengeance.

"Besides," continued Robur, "With your balloons as good as you can make
them you will never obtain any speed worth mentioning. It would take you ten
years to go round the world--and a flying machine could do it in a week!"

Here arose a new tempest of protests and denials which lasted for three long
minutes. And then Phil Evans look up the word.

"Mr. Aviator," he said "you who talk so much of the benefits of aviation,
have you ever aviated?"

"T have."

"And made the conquest of the air?"

"Not unlikely."

"Hooray for Robur the Conqueror!" shouted an ironical voice.

"Well, yes! Robur the Conqueror! I accept the name and I will bear it, for I


have a right to it!"

"We beg to doubt it!" said Jem Chip.

"Gentlemen," said Robur, and his brows knit, "when I have just seriously
stated a serious thing I do not permit anyone to reply to me by a flat denial, and I
shall be glad to know the name of the interrupter."

"My name is Chip, and I am a vegetarian."

"Citizen Chip," said Robur, "I knew that vegetarians had longer alimentary
canals than other men--a good foot longer at the least. That is quite long enough;
and so do not compel me to make you any longer by beginning at your ears and--

"Throw him out."

"Into the street with him!"

"Lynch him!"

"Helix him!"

The rage of the balloonists burst forth at last. They rushed at the platform.
Robur disappeared amid a sheaf of hands that were thrown about as if caught in
a storm. In vain the steam whistle screamed its fanfares on to the assembly.
Philadelphia might well think that a fire was devouring one of its quarters and
that all the waters of the Schuyllkill could not put it out.

Suddenly there was a recoil in the tumult. Robur had put his hands into his
pockets and now held them out at the front ranks of the infuriated mob.

In each hand was one of those American institutions known as revolvers
which the mere pressure of the fingers is enough to fire--pocket mitrailleuses in
fact.

And taking advantage not only of the recoil of his assailants but also of the
silence which accompanied it.

"Decidedly," said he, "it was not Amerigo that discovered the New World, it
was Cabot! You are not Americans, citizen balloonists! You are only Cabo--"

Four or five shots cracked out, fired into space. They hurt nobody. Amid the
smoke, the engineer vanished; and when it had thinned away there was no trace
of him. Robur the Conqueror had flown, as if some apparatus of aviation had
borne him into the air.


Chapter V


ANOTHER DISAPPEARANCE


This was not the first occasion on which, at the end of their stormy
discussions, the members of the Weldon Institute had filled Walnut Street and its
neighborhood with their tumult. Several times had the inhabitants complained of
the noisy way in which the proceedings ended, and more than once had the
policemen had to interfere to clear the thoroughfare for the passersby, who for
the most part were supremely indifferent on the question of aerial navigation.
But never before had the tumult attained such proportions, never had the
complaints been better founded, never had the intervention of the police been
more necessary.

But there was some excuse for the members of the Weldon Institute. They
had been attacked in their own house. To these enthusiasts for "lighter than air" a
no less enthusiast for "heavier than air" had said things absolutely abhorrent.
And at the moment they were about to treat him as he deserved, he had
disappeared.

So they cried aloud for vengeance. To leave such insults unpunished was
impossible to all with American blood in their veins. Had not the sons of
Amerigo been called the sons of Cabot? Was not that an insult as unpardonable
as it happened to be just--historically?

The members of the club in several groups rushed down Walnut Street, then
into the adjoining streets, and then all over the neighborhood. They woke up the
householders; they compelled them to search their houses, prepared to indemnify
them later on for the outrage on their privacy. Vain were all their trouble and
searching. Robur was nowhere to be found; there was no trace of him. He might
have gone off in the "Go-Ahead," the balloon of the Institute, for all they could
tell. After an hour's hunt the members had to give in and separate, not before
they had agreed to extend their search over the whole territory of the twin
Americas that form the new continent.

By eleven o'clock quiet had been restored in the neighborhood of Walnut
Street. Philadelphia was able to sink again into that sound sleep which is the
privilege of non-manufacturing towns. The different members of the club parted
to seek their respective houses. To mention the most distinguished amongst
them, William T. Forbes sought his large sugar establishment, where Miss Doll
and Miss Mat had prepared for him his evening tea, sweetened with his own


glucose. Truck Milnor took the road to his factory in the distant suburb, where
the engines worked day and night. Treasurer Jim Chip, publicly accused of
possessing an alimentary canal twelve inches longer than that of other men,
returned to the vegetable soup that was waiting for him.

Two of the most important balloonists--two only--did not seem to think of
returning so soon to their domicile. They availed themselves of the opportunity
to discuss the question with more than usual acrimony. These were the
irreconcilables, Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans, the president and secretary of the
Weldon Institute.

At the door of the club the valet Frycollin waited for Uncle Prudent, his
master, and at last he went after him, though he cared but little for the subject
which had set the two colleagues at loggerheads.

It is only an euphemism that the verb "discuss" can be used to express the
way in which the duet between the president and secretary was being performed.
As a matter of fact they were in full wrangle with an energy born of their old
rivalry.

"No, Sir, no," said Phil Evans. "If I had had the honor of being president of
the Weldon Institute, there never, no, never, would have been such a scandal."

"And what would you have done, if you had had the honor?" demanded
Uncle Prudent.

"I would have stopped the insulter before he had opened his mouth."

"It seems to me it would have been impossible to stop him until he had
opened his mouth," replied Uncle Prudent.

"Not in America, Sir; not in America."

And exchanging such observations, increasing in bitterness as they went,
they walked on through the streets farther and farther from their homes, until
they reached a part of the city whence they had to go a long way round to get
back.

Frycollin followed, by no means at ease to see his master plunging into such
deserted spots. He did not like deserted spots, particularly after midnight. In fact
the darkness was profound, and the moon was only a thin crescent just beginning
its monthly life. Frycollin kept a lookout to the left and right of him to see if he
was followed. And he fancied he could see five or six hulking follows dogging
his footsteps. Instinctively he drew nearer to his master, but not for the world
would he have dared to break in on the conversation of which the fragments
reached him.

In short it so chanced that the president and secretary of the Weldon Institute
found themselves on the road to Fairmount Park. In the full heat of their dispute
they crossed the Schuyllkill river by the famous iron bridge. They met only a


few belated wayfarers, and pressed on across a wide open tract where the
immense prairie was broken every now and then by the patches of thick
woodland--which make the park different to any other in the world.

There Frycollin's terror became acute, particularly as he saw the five or six
shadows gliding after him across the Schuyllkill bridge. The pupils of his eyes
broadened out to the circumference of his iris, and his limbs seemed to diminish
as if endowed with the contractility peculiar to the mollusca and certain of the
articulate; for Frycollin, the valet, was an egregious coward.

He was a pure South Carolina Negro, with the head of a fool and the carcass
of an imbecile. Being only one and twenty, he had never been a slave, not even
by birth, but that made no difference to him. Grinning and greedy and idle, and a
magnificent poltroon, he had been the servant of Uncle Prudent for about three
years. Over and over again had his master threatened to kick him out, but had
kept him on for fear of doing worse. With a master ever ready to venture on the
most audacious enterprises, Frycollin's cowardice had brought him many
arduous trials. But he had some compensation. Very little had been said about his
gluttony, and still less about his laziness.

Ah, Valet Frycollin, if you could only have read the future! Why, oh why,
Frycollin, did you not remain at Boston with the Sneffels, and not have given
them up when they talked of going to Switzerland? Was not that a much more
suitable place for you than this of Uncle Prudent's, where danger was daily
welcomed?

But here he was, and his master had become used to his faults. He had one
advantage, and that was a consideration. Although he was a Negro by birth he
did not speak like a Negro, and nothing is so irritating as that hateful jargon in
which all the pronouns are possessive and all the verbs infinitive. Let it be
understood, then, that Frycollin was a thorough coward.

And now it was midnight, and the pale crescent of the moon began to sink in
the west behind the trees in the park. The rays streaming fitfully through the
branches made the shadows darker than ever. Frycollin looked around him
anxiously. "Brrr!" he said, "There are those fellows there all the time. Positively
they are getting nearer! Master Uncle!" he shouted.

It was thus he called the president of the Weldon Institute, and thus did the
president desire to be called.

At the moment the dispute of the rivals had reached its maximum, and as
they hurled their epithets at each other they walked faster and faster, and drew
farther and farther away from the Schuyllkill bridge. They had reached the
center of a wide clump of trees, whose summits were just tipped by the parting
rays of the moon. Beyond the trees was a very large clearing--an oval field, a


complete amphitheater. Not a hillock was there to hinder the gallop of the
horses, not a bush to stop the view of the spectators.

And if Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans had not been so deep in their dispute,
and had used their eyes as they were accustomed to, they would have found the
clearing was not in its usual state. Was it a flour mill that had anchored on it
during the night? It looked like it, with its wings and sails--motionless and
mysterious in the gathering gloom.

But neither the president nor the secretary of the Weldon Institute noticed the
strange modification in the landscape of Fairmount Park; and neither did
Frycollin. It seemed to him that the thieves were approaching, and preparing for
their attack; and he was seized with convulsive fear, paralyzed in his limbs, with
every hair he could boast of on the bristle. His terror was extreme. His knees
bent under him, but he had just strength enough to exclaim for the last time,
"Master Uncle! Master Uncle!"

"What is the matter with you?" asked Uncle Prudent.

Perhaps the disputants would not have been sorry to have relieved their fury
at the expense of the unfortunate valet. But they had no time; and neither even
had he time to answer.

A whistle was heard. A flash of electric light shot across the clearing.

A signal, doubtless? The moment had come for the deed of violence. In less
time that it takes to tell, six men came leaping across from under the trees, two
onto Uncle Prudent, two onto Phil Evans, two onto Frycollin--there was no need
for the last two, for the Negro was incapable of defending himself. The president
and secretary of the Weldon Institute, although taken by surprise, would have
resisted.

They had neither time nor strength to do so. In a second they were rendered
speechless by a gag, blind by a bandage, thrown down, pinioned and carried
bodily off across the clearing. What could they think except that they had fallen
into the hands of people who intended to rob them? The people did nothing of
the sort, however. They did not even touch Uncle Prudent's pockets, although,
according to his custom, they were full of paper dollars.

Within a minute of the attack, without a word being passed, Uncle Prudent,
Phil Evans, and Frycollin felt themselves laid gently down, not on the grass, but
on a sort of plank that creaked beneath them. They were laid down side by side.

A door was shut; and the grating of a bolt in a staple told them that they were
prisoners.

Then there came a continuous buzzing, a quivering, a frrrr, with the mr
unending.

And that was the only sound that broke the quiet of the night.


Great was the excitement next morning in Philadelphia Very early was it
known what had passed at the meeting of the Institute. Everyone knew of the
appearance of the mysterious engineer named Robur--Robur the Conqueror--and
the tumult among the balloonists, and his inexplicable disappearance. But it was
quite another thing when all the town heard that the president and secretary of
the club had also disappeared during the night.

Long and keen was the search in the city and neighborhood! Useless! The
newspapers of Philadelphia, the newspapers of Pennsylvania, the newspapers of
the United States reported the facts and explained them in a hundred ways, not
one of which was the right one. Heavy rewards were offered, and placards were
pasted up, but all to no purpose. The earth seemed to have opened and bodily
swallowed the president and secretary of the Weldon Institute.


Chapter VI


THE PRESIDENT AND SECRETARY SUSPEND
HOSTILITIES


A bandage over the eyes, a gag in the mouth, a cord round the wrists, a cord
round the ankles, unable to see, to speak, or to move, Uncle Prudent, Phil Evans,
and Frycollin were anything but pleased with their position. Knowing not who
had seized them, nor in what they had been thrown like parcels in a goods
wagon, nor where they were, nor what was reserved for them--it was enough to
exasperate even the most patient of the ovine race, and we know that the
members of the Weldon Institute were not precisely sheep as far as patience
went. With his violence of character we can easily imagine how Uncle Prudent
felt. One thing was evident, that Phil Evans and he would find it difficult to
attend the club next evening.

As to Frycollin, with his eyes shut and his mouth closed, it was impossible
for him to think of anything. He was more dead than alive.

For an hour the position of the prisoners remained unchanged. No one came
to visit them, or to give them that liberty of movement and speech of which they
lay in such need. They were reduced to stifled sighs, to grunts emitted over and
under their gags, to everything that betrayed anger kept dumb and fury
imprisoned, or rather bound down. Then after many fruitless efforts they
remained for some time as though lifeless. Then as the sense of sight was denied
them they tried by their sense of hearing to obtain some indication of the nature
of this disquieting state of things. But in vain did they seek for any other sound
than an interminable and inexplicable f-r-r-r which seemed to envelop them in a
quivering atmosphere.

At last something happened. Phil Evans, regaining his coolness, managed to
slacken the cord which bound his wrists. Little by little the knot slipped, his
fingers slipped over each other, and his hands regained their usual freedom.

A vigorous rubbing restored the circulation. A moment after he had slipped
off the bandage which bound his eyes, taken the gag out of his mouth, and cut
the cords round his ankles with his knife. An American who has not a bowie-
knife in his pocket is no longer an American.

But if Phil Evans had regained the power of moving and speaking, that was
all. His eyes were useless to him--at present at any rate. The prison was quite
dark, though about six feet above him a feeble gleam of light came in through a


kind of loophole.

As may be imagined, Phil Evans did not hesitate to at once set free his rival.
A few cuts with the bowie settled the knots which bound him foot and hand.

Immediately Uncle Prudent rose to his knees and snatched away his bandage
and gag.

"Thanks," said he, in stifled voice.

"Phil Evans?"

"Uncle Prudent?"

"Here we are no longer the president and secretary of the Weldon Institute.
We are adversaries no more."

"You are right," answered Evans. "We are now only two men agreed to
avenge ourselves on a third whose attempt deserves severe reprisals. And this
third is--"

"Robur!"

"Tt is Robur!"

On this point both were absolutely in accord. On this subject there was no
fear of dispute.

"And your servant?" said Phil Evans, pointing to Frycollin, who was puffing
like a grampus. "We must set him free."

"Not yet," said Uncle Prudent. "He would overwhelm us with his jeremiads,
and we have something else to do than abuse each other."

"What is that, Uncle Prudent?"

"To save ourselves if possible."

"You are right, even if it is impossible."

"And even if it is impossible."

There could be no doubt that this kidnapping was due to Robur, for an
ordinary thief would have relieved them of their watches, jewelry, and purses,
and thrown their bodies into the Schuyllkill with a good gash in their throats
instead of throwing them to the bottom of--Of what? That was a serious
question, which would have to be answered before attempting an escape with
any chance of success.

"Phil Evans," began Uncle Prudent, "if, when we came away from our
meeting, instead of indulging in amenities to which we need not recur, we had
kept our eyes more open, this would not have happened. Had we remained in the
streets of Philadelphia there would have been none of this. Evidently Robur
foresaw what would happen at the club, and had placed some of his bandits on
guard at the door. When we left Walnut Street these fellows must have watched
us and followed us, and when we imprudently ventured into Fairmount Park they
went in for their little game."


"Agreed," said Evans. "We were wrong not to go straight home."

"It is always wrong not to be right," said Prudent.

Here a long-drawn sigh escaped from the darkest corner of the prison. "What
is that?" asked Evans.

"Nothing! Frycollin is dreaming."

"Between the moment we were seized a few steps out into the clearing and
the moment we were thrown in here only two minutes elapsed. It is thus evident
that those people did not take us out of Fairmount Park."

"And if they had done so we should have felt we were being moved."

"Undoubtedly; and consequently we must be in some vehicle, perhaps some
of those long prairie wagons, or some show-caravan--"

"Evidently! For if we were in a boat moored on the Schuyllkill we should
have noticed the movement due to the current--"

"That is so; and as we are still in the clearing, I think that now is the time to
get away, and we can return later to settle with this Robur--"

"And make him pay for this attempt on the liberty of two citizens of the
United States."

"And he shall pay pretty dearly!"

"But who is this man? Where does he come from? Is he English, or German,
or French--"

"He is a scoundrel, that is enough!" said Uncle Prudent. "Now to work." And
then the two men, with their hands stretched out and their fingers wide apart,
began to feel round the walls to find a joint or crack.

Nothing. Nothing; not even at the door. It was closely shut and it was
impossible to shoot back the lock. All that could be done was to make a hole,
and escape through the hole. It remained to be seen if the knives could cut into
the walls.

"But whence comes this never-ending rustling?" asked Evans, who was
much impressed at the continuous f-r-r-r.

"The wind, doubtless," said Uncle Prudent.

"The wind! But I thought the night was quite calm."

"So it was. But if it isn't the wind, what can it be?"

Phil Evans got out the best blade of his knife and set to work on the wall near
the door. Perhaps he might make a hole which would enable him to open it from
the outside should it be only bolted or should the key have been left in the lock.
He worked away for some minutes. The only result was to nip up his knife, to
snip off its point, and transform what was left of the blade into a saw.

"Doesn't it cut?" asked Uncle Prudent.

"No."


"Is the wall made of sheet iron?"

"No; it gives no metallic sound when you hit it."

"Is it of ironwood?"

"No; it isn't iron and it isn't wood."

"What is it then?"

"Impossible to say. But, anyhow, steel doesn't touch it." Uncle Prudent, in a
sudden outburst of fury, began to rave and stamp on the sonorous planks, while
his hands sought to strangle an imaginary Robur.

"Be calm, Prudent, be calm! You have a try."

Uncle Prudent had a try, but the bowie-knife could do nothing against a wall
which its best blades could not even scratch. The wall seemed to be made of
crystal.

So it became evident that all flight was impracticable except through the
door, and for a time they must resign themselves to their fate--not a very pleasant
thing for the Yankee temperament, and very much to the disgust of these
eminently practical men. But this conclusion was not arrived at without many
objurgations and loud-sounding phrases hurled at this Robur--who, from what
had been seen of him at the Weldon Institute, was not the sort of man to trouble
himself much about them.

Suddenly Frycollin began to give unequivocal signs of being unwell. He
began to writhe in a most lamentable fashion, either with cramp in his stomach
or in his limbs; and Uncle Prudent, thinking it his duty to put an end to these
gymnastics, cut the cords that bound him.

He had cause to be sorry for it. Immediately there was poured forth an
interminable litany, in which the terrors of fear were mingled with the tortures of
hunger. Frycollin was no worse in his brain than in his stomach, and it would
have been difficult to decide to which organ the chief cause of the trouble should
be assigned.

"Frycollin!" said Uncle Prudent.

"Master Uncle! Master Uncle!" answered the Negro between two of his
lugubrious howls.

"It is possible that we are doomed to die of hunger in this prison, but we have
made up our minds not to succumb until we have availed ourselves of every
means of alimentation to prolong our lives."

"To eat me?" exclaimed Frycollin.

"As is always done with a Negro under such circumstances! So you had
better not make yourself too obvious--"

"Or you'll have your bones picked!" said Evans.

And as Frycollin saw he might be used to prolong two existences more


precious than his own, he contented himself thenceforth with groaning in quiet.

The time went on and all attempts to force the door or get through the wall
proved fruitless. What the wall was made of was impossible to say. It was not
metal; it was not wood; it was not stone, And all the cell seemed to be made of
the same stuff. When they stamped on the floor it gave a peculiar sound that
Uncle Prudent found it difficult to describe; the floor seemed to sound hollow, as
if it was not resting directly on the ground of the clearing. And the inexplicable
f-r-r-r-r seemed to sweep along below it. All of which was rather alarming.

"Uncle Prudent," said Phil Evans.

"Well?"

"Do you think our prison has been moved at all?"

"Not that I know of."

"Because when we were first caught I distinctly remember the fresh
fragrance of the grass and the resinous odor of the park trees. While now, when I
take in a good sniff of the air, it seems as though all that had gone."

"So it has."

"Why?"

"We cannot say why unless we admit that the prison has moved; and I say
again that if the prison had moved, either as a vehicle on the road or a boat on
the stream, we should have felt it."

Here Frycollin gave vent to a long groan, which might have been taken for
his last had he not followed it up with several more.

"I expect Robur will soon have us brought before him," said Phil Evans.

"I hope so," said Uncle Prudent. "And I shall tell him--"

"What?"

"That he began by being rude and ended in being unbearable."

Here Phil Evans noticed that day was beginning to break. A gleam, still faint,
filtered through the narrow window opposite the door. It ought thus to be about
four o'clock in the morning for it is at that hour in the month of June in this
latitude that the horizon of Philadelphia is tinged by the first rays of the dawn.

But when Uncle Prudent sounded his repeater--which was a masterpiece
from his colleague's factory--the tiny gong only gave a quarter to three, and the
watch had not stopped.

"That is strange!" said Phil Evans. "At a quarter to three it ought still to be
night."

"Perhaps my watch has got slow," answered Uncle Prudent.

"A watch of the Wheelton Watch Company!" exclaimed Phil Evans.

Whatever might be the reason, there was no doubt that the day was breaking.
Gradually the window became white in the deep darkness of the cell. However,


if the dawn appeared sooner than the fortieth parallel permitted, it did not
advance with the rapidity peculiar to lower latitudes. This was another
observation--of Uncle Prudent's--a new inexplicable phenomenon.

"Couldn't we get up to the window and see where we are?"

"We might," said Uncle Prudent. "Frycollin, get up!"

The Negro arose.

"Put your back against the wall," continued Prudent, "and you, Evans, get on
his shoulders while I buttress him up."

"Right!" said Evans.

An instant afterwards his knees were on Frycollin's shoulders, and his eyes
were level with the window. The window was not of lenticular glass like those
on shipboard, but was a simple flat pane. It was small, and Phil Evans found his
range of view was much limited.

"Break the glass," said Prudent, "and perhaps you will be able to see better."

Phil Evans gave it a sharp knock with the handle of his bowie-knife. It gave
back a silvery sound, but it did not break.

Another and more violent blow. The same result.

"It is unbreakable glass!" said Evans.

It appeared as though the pane was made of glass toughened on the Siemens
system--as after several blows it remained intact.

The light had now increased, and Phil Evans could see for some distance
within the radius allowed by the frame.

"What do you see?” asked Uncle Prudent.

"Nothing."

"What? Not any trees?"

"No."

"Not even the top branches?"

"No."

"Then we are not in the clearing?"

"Neither in the clearing nor in the park."

"Don't you see any roofs of houses or monuments?" said Prudent, whose
disappointment and anger were increasing rapidly.

"No."

"What! Not a flagstaff, nor a church tower, nor a chimney?"

"Nothing but space."

As he uttered the words the door opened. A man appeared on the threshold. It
was Robur.

"Honorable balloonists" he said, in a serious voice, "you are now free to go
and come as you like."


"Free!" exclaimed Uncle Prudent.

"Yes--within the limits of the "Albatross!"

Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans rushed out of their prison. And what did they
see?

Four thousand feet below them the face of a country they sought in vain to
recognize.


Chapter VII


ON BOARD THE ALBATROSS


"When will man cease to crawl in the depths to live in the azure and quiet of
the sky?"

To this question of Camille Flammarion's the answer is easy. It will be when
the progress of mechanics has enabled us to solve the problem of aviation. And
in a few years--as we can foresee--a more practical utilization of electricity will
do much towards that solution.

In 1783, before the Montgolfier brothers had built their fire-balloon, and
Charles, the physician, had devised his first aerostat, a few adventurous spirits
had dreamt of the conquest of space by mechanical means. The first inventors
did not think of apparatus lighter than air, for that the science of their time did
not allow them to imagine. It was to contrivances heavier than air, to flying
machines in imitation of the birds, that they trusted to realize aerial locomotion.

This was exactly what had been done by that madman Icarus, the son of
Daedalus, whose wings, fixed together with wax, had melted as they approached
the sun.

But without going back to mythological times, without dwelling on Archytas
of Tarentum, we find, in the works of Dante of Perugia, of Leonardo da Vinci
and Guidotti, the idea of machines made to move through the air. Two centuries
and a half afterwards inventors began to multiply. In 1742 the Marquis de
Bacqueville designed a system of wings, tried it over the Seine, and fell and
broke his arm. In 1768 Paucton conceived the idea of an apparatus with two
screws, suspensive and propulsive. In 1781 Meerwein, the architect of the Prince
of Baden, built an orthopteric machine, and protested against the tendency of the
aerostats which had just been invented. In 1784 Launoy and Bienvenu had
maneuvered a helicopter worked by springs. In 1808 there were the attempts at
flight by the Austrian Jacques Degen. In 1810 came the pamphlet by Denian of
Nantes, in which the principles of "heavier than air" are laid down. From 1811 to
1840 came the inventions and researches of Derblinger, Vigual, Sarti, Dubochet,
and Cagniard de Latour. In 1842 we have the Englishman Henson, with his
system of inclined planes and screws worked by steam. In 1845 came Cossus
and his ascensional screws. In 1847 came Camille Vert and his helicopter made
of birds' wings. In 1852 came Letur with his system of guidable parachutes,
whose trial cost him his life; and in the same year came Michel Loup with his


plan of gliding through the air on four revolving wings. In 1853 came Béléguic
and his aeroplane with the traction screws, Vaussin-Chardannes with his
guidable kite, and George Cauley with his flying machines driven by gas. From
1854 to 1863 appeared Joseph Pline with several patents for aerial systems.
Bréant, Carlingford, Le Bris, Du Temple, Bright, whose ascensional screws were
left-handed; Smythies, Panafieu, Crosnier, &c. At length, in 1863, thanks to the
efforts of Nadar, a society of "heavier than air" was founded in Paris. There the
inventors could experiment with the machines, of which many were patented.
Ponton d'Amécourt and his steam helicopter, La Landelle and his system of
combining screws with inclined planes and parachutes, Louvrié and his
aeroscape, Esterno and his mechanical bird, Groof and his apparatus with wings
worked by levers. The impetus was given, inventors invented, calculators
calculated all that could render aerial locomotion practicable. Bourcart, Le Bris,
Kaufmann, Smyth, Stringfellow, Prigent, Danjard, Pomés and De la Pauze, Moy,
Pénaud, Jobert, Haureau de Villeneuve, Achenbach, Garapon, Duchesne,
Danduran, Pariesel, Dieuaide, Melkiseff, Forlanini, Bearey, Tatin, Dandrieux,
Edison, some with wings or screws, others with inclined planes, imagined,
created, constructed, perfected, their flying machines, ready to do their work,
once there came to be applied to thereby some inventor a motor of adequate
power and excessive lightness.

This list may be a little long, but that will be forgiven, for it is necessary to
give the various steps in the ladder of aerial locomotion, on the top of which
appeared Robur the Conqueror. Without these attempts, these experiments of his
predecessors, how could the inquirer have conceived so perfect an apparatus?
And though he had but contempt for those who obstinately worked away in the
direction of balloons, he held in high esteem all those partisans of "heavier than
air," English, American, Italian, Austrian, French--and particularly French--
whose work had been perfected by him, and led him to design and then to build
this flying engine known as the "Albatross," which he was guiding through the
currents of the atmosphere.

"The pigeon flies!" had exclaimed one of the most persistent adepts at
aviation.

"They will crowd the air as they crowd the earth!" said one of his most
excited partisans.

"From the locomotive to the aeromotive!" shouted the noisiest of all, who
had turned on the trumpet of publicity to awaken the Old and New Worlds.

Nothing, in fact, is better established, by experiment and calculation, than
that the air is highly resistant. A circumference of only a yard in diameter in the
shape of a parachute can not only impede descent in air, but can render it


isochronous. That is a fact.

It is equally well known that when the speed is great the work of the weight
varies in almost inverse ratio to the square of the speed, and therefore becomes
almost insignificant.

It is also known that as the weight of a flying animal increases, the less is the
proportional increase in the surface beaten by the wings in order to sustain it,
although the motion of the wings becomes slower.

A flying machine must therefore be constructed to take advantage of these
natural laws, to imitate the bird, "that admirable type of aerial locomotion,"
according to Dr. Marcy, of the Institute of France.

In short the contrivances likely to solve the problem are of three kinds:--

1. Helicopters or spiralifers, which are simply screws with vertical axes.

2. Ormnithopters, machines which endeavour to reproduce the natural flight of
birds.

3. Aeroplanes, which are merely inclined planes like kites, but towed or
driven by screws.

Each of these systems has had and still has it partisans obstinately resolved
to give way in not the slightest particular. However, Robur, for many reasons,
had rejected the two first.

The ornithopter, or mechanical bird, offers certain advantages, no doubt.
That the work and experiments of M. Renard in 1884 have sufficiently proved.
But, as has been said, it is not necessary to copy Nature servilely. Locomotives
are not copied from the hare, nor are ships copied from the fish. To the first we
have put wheels which are not legs; to the second we have put screws which are
not fins. And they do not do so badly. Besides, what is this mechanical
movement in the flight of birds, whose action is so complex? Has not Doctor
Marcy suspected that the feathers open during the return of the wings so as to let
the air through them? And is not that rather a difficult operation for an artificial
machine?

On the other hand, aeroplanes have given many good results. Screws
opposing a slanting plane to the bed of air will produce an ascensional
movement, and the models experimented on have shown that the disposable
weight, that is to say the weight it is possible to deal with as distinct from that of
the apparatus, increases with the square of the speed. Herein the aeroplane has
the advantage over the aerostat even when the aerostat is furnished with the
means of locomotion.

Nevertheless Robur had thought that the simpler his contrivance the better.
And the screws--the Saint Helices that had been thrown in his teeth at the
Weldon Institute--had sufficed for all the needs of his flying machine. One series


could hold it suspended in the air, the other could drive it along under conditions
that were marvelously adapted for speed and safety.

If the ornithopter--striking like the wings of a bird--raised itself by beating
the air, the helicopter raised itself by striking the air obliquely, with the fins of
the screw as it mounted on an inclined plane. These fins, or arms, are in reality
wings, but wings disposed as a helix instead of as a paddle wheel. The helix
advances in the direction of its axis. Is the axis vertical? Then it moves
vertically. Is the axis horizontal? Then it moves horizontally.

The whole of Robur's flying apparatus depended on these two movements, as
will be seen from the following detailed description, which can be divided under
three heads--the platform, the engines of suspension and propulsion, and the
machinery.

Platform.--This was a framework a hundred feet long and twelve wide, a
ship's deck in fact, with a projecting prow. Beneath was a hull solidly built,
enclosing the engines, stores, and provisions of all sorts, including the
watertanks. Round the deck a few light uprights supported a wire trellis that did
duty for bulwarks. On the deck were three houses, whose compartments were
used as cabins for the crew, or as machine rooms. In the center house was the
machine which drove the suspensory helices, in that forward was the machine
that drove the bow screw, in that aft was the machine that drove the stern screw.
In the bow were the cook's galley and the crew's quarters; in the stern were
several cabins, including that of the engineer, the saloon, and above them all a
glass house in which stood the helmsman, who steered the vessel by means of a
powerful rudder. All these cabins were lighted by port-holes filled with
toughened glass, which has ten times the resistance of ordinary glass. Beneath
the hull was a system of flexible springs to ease off the concussion when it
became advisable to land.

Engines of suspension and propulsion.--Above the deck rose thirty-seven
vertical axes, fifteen along each side, and seven, more elevated, in the centre.
The "Albatross" might be called a clipper with thirty-seven masts. But these
masts instead of sails bore each two horizontal screws, not very large in spread
or diameter, but driven at prodigious speed. Each of these axes had its own
movement independent of the rest, and each alternate one spun round in a
different direction from the others, so as to avoid any tendency to gyration.
Hence the screws as they rose on the vertical column of air retained their
equilibrium by their horizontal resistance. Consequently the apparatus was
furnished with seventy-four suspensory screws, whose three branches were
connected by a metallic circle which economized their motive force. In front and
behind, mounted on horizontal axes, were two propelling screws, each with four


arms. These screws were of much larger diameter than the suspensory ones, but
could be worked at quite their speed. In fact, the vessel combined the systems of
Cossus, La Landelle, and Ponton d'Amécourt, as perfected by Robur. But it was
in the choice and application of his motive force that he could claim to be an
inventor.

Machinery.--Robur had not availed himself of the vapor of water or other
liquids, nor compressed air and other mechanical motion. He employed
electricity, that agent which one day will be the soul of the industrial world. But
he required no electro-motor to produce it. All he trusted to was piles and
accumulators. What were the elements of these piles, and what were the acids he
used, Robur only knew. And the construction of the accumulators was kept
equally secret. Of what were their positive and negative plates? None can say.
The engineer took good care--and not unreasonably--to keep his secret
unpatented. One thing was unmistakable, and that was that the piles were of
extraordinary strength; and the accumulators left those of Faure-Sellon-
Volckmar very far behind in yielding currents whose amperes ran into figures up
to then unknown. Thus there was obtained a power to drive the screws and
communicate a suspending and propelling force in excess of all his requirements
under any circumstances.

But--it is as well to repeat it--this belonged entirely to Robur. He kept it a
close secret. And, if the president and secretary of the Weldon Institute did not
happen to discover it, it would probably be lost to humanity.

It need not be shown that the apparatus possessed sufficient stability. Its
center of gravity proved that at once. There was no danger of its making
alarming angles with the horizontal, still less of its capsizing.

And now for the metal used by Robur in the construction of his aeronef--a
name which can be exactly applied to the "Albatross." What was this material, so
hard that the bowie-knife of Phil Evans could not scratch it, and Uncle Prudent
could not explain its nature? Simply paper!

For some years this fabrication had been making considerable progress.
Unsized paper, with the sheets impregnated with dextrin and starch and squeezed
in hydraulic presses, will form a material as hard as steel. There are made of it
pulleys, rails, and wagon-wheels, much more solid than metal wheels, and far
lighter. And it was this lightness and solidity which Robur availed himself of in
building his aerial locomotive. Everything--framework, hull, houses, cabins--
were made of straw-paper turned hard as metal by compression, and--what was
not to be despised in an apparatus flying at great heights--incombustible. The
different parts of the engines and the screws were made of gelatinized fiber,
which combined in sufficient degree flexibility with resistance. This material


could be used in every form. It was insoluble in most gases and liquids, acids or
essences, to say nothing of its insulating properties, and it proved most valuable
in the electric machinery of the "Albatross."

Robur, his mate Tom Turner, an engineer and two assistants, two steersman
and a cook--eight men all told--formed the crew of the aeronef, and proved
ample for all the maneuvers required in aerial navigation. There were arms of the
chase and of war; fishing appliances; electric lights; instruments of observation,
compasses, and sextants for checking the course, thermometers for studying the
temperature, different barometers, some for estimating the heights attained,
others for indicating the variations of atmospheric pressure; a storm-glass for
forecasting tempests; a small library; a portable printing press; a field-piece
mounted on a pivot; breech loading and throwing a three-inch shell; a supply of
powder, bullets, dynamite cartridges; a cooking-stove, warmed by currents from
the accumulators; a stock of preserves, meats and vegetables sufficient to last for
months. Such were the outfit and stores of the aeronef--in addition to the famous
trumpet.

There was besides a light india-rubber boat, insubmersible, which could
carry eight men on the surface of a river, a lake, or a calm sea.

But were there any parachutes in case of accident? No. Robur did not believe
in accidents of that kind. The axes of the screws were independent. The stoppage
of a few would not affect the motion of the others; and if only half were
working, the "Albatross" could still keep afloat in her natural element.

"And with her," said Robur to his guests--guests in spite of themselves--"I
am master of the seventh part of the world, larger than Africa, Oceania, Asia,
America, and Europe, this aerial Icarian sea, which millions of Icarians will one
day people."


Chapter VIII


THE BALLOONISTS REFUSE TO BE CONVINCED


The President of the Weldon Institute was stupefied; his companion was
astonished. But neither of them would allow any of their very natural amazement
to be visible.

The valet Frycollin did not conceal his terror at finding himself borne
through space on such a machine, and he took no pains whatever to hide it.

The suspensory screws were rapidly spinning overhead. Fast as they were
going, they would have to triple their speed if the "Albatross" was to ascend to
higher zones. The two propellers were running very easily and driving the ship at
about eleven knots an hour.

As they leaned over the rail the passengers of the "Albatross" could perceive
a long sinuous liquid ribbon which meandered like a mere brook through a
varied country amid the gleaming of many lagoons obliquely struck by the rays
of the sun. The brook was a river, one of the most important in that district.
Along its left bank was a chain of mountains extending out of sight.

"And will you tell us where we are?" asked Uncle Prudent, in a voice
tremulous with anger.

"I have nothing to teach you," answered Robur.

"And will you tell us where we are going?" asked Phil Evans.

"Through space.”

"And how long will that last?"

"Until it ends."

"Are we going round the world?" asked Phil Evans ironically.

"Further than that," said Robur.

"And if this voyage does not suit us?" asked Uncle Prudent.

"Tt will have to suit you."

That is a foretaste of the nature of the relations that were to obtain between
the master of the "Albatross" and his guests, not to say his prisoners. Manifestly
he wished to give them time to cool down, to admire the marvelous apparatus
which was bearing them through the air, and doubtless to compliment the
inventor. And so he went off to the other end of the deck, leaving them to
examine the arrangement of the machinery and the management of the ship or to
give their whole attention to the landscape which was unrolling beneath them.

"Uncle Prudent," said Evans, "unless I am mistaken we are flying over


Central Canada. That river in the northwest is the St. Lawrence. That town we
are leaving behind is Quebec."

It was indeed the old city of Champlain, whose zinc roofs were shining like
reflectors in the sun. The "Albatross" must thus have reached the forty-sixth
degree of north latitude, and thus was explained the premature advance of the
day with the abnormal prolongation of the dawn.

"Yes," said Phil Evans, "There is the town in its amphitheater, the hill with its
citadel, the Gibraltar of North America. There are the cathedrals. There is the
Custom House with its dome surmounted by the British flag!"

Phil Evans had not finished before the Canadian city began to slip into the
distance.

The clipper entered a zone of light clouds, which gradually shut off a view of
the ground.

Robur, seeing that the president and secretary of the Weldon Institute had
directed their attention to the external arrangements of the "Albatross," walked
up to them and said: "Well, gentlemen, do you believe in the possibility of aerial
locomotion by machines heavier than air?"

It would have been difficult not to succumb to the evidence. But Uncle
Prudent and Phil Evans did not reply.

"You are silent," continued the engineer. "Doubtless hunger makes you
dumb! But if I undertook to carry you through the air, I did not think of feeding
you on such a poorly nutritive fluid. Your first breakfast is waiting for you."

As Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans were feeling the pangs of hunger
somewhat keenly they did not care to stand upon ceremony. A meal would
commit them to nothing; and when Robur put them back on the ground they
could resume full liberty of action.

And so they followed into a small dining-room in the aftermost house. There
they found a well-laid table at which they could take their meals during the
voyage. There were different preserves; and, among other things, was a sort of
bread made of equal parts of flour and meat reduced to powder and worked
together with a little lard, which boiled in water made excellent soup; and there
were rashers of fried ham, and for drink there was tea.

Neither had Frycollin been forgotten. He was taken forward and there found
some strong soup made of this bread. In truth he had to be very hungry to eat at
all, for his jaws shook with fear, and almost refused to work. "If it was to break!
If it was to break!" said the unfortunate Negro. Hence continual faintings. Only
think! A fall of over four thousand feet, which would smash him to a jelly!

An hour afterwards Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans appeared on the deck.
Robur was no longer there. At the stem the man at the wheel in his glass cage,


his eyes fixed on the compass, followed imperturbably without hesitation the
route given by the engineer.

As for the rest of the crew, breakfast probably kept them from their posts. An
assistant engineer, examining the machinery, went from one house to the other.

If the speed of the ship was great the two colleagues could only estimate it
imperfectly, for the "Albatross" had passed through the cloud zone which the sun
showed some four thousand feet below.

"I can hardly believe it," said Phil Evans.

"Don't believe it!" said Uncle Prudent. And going to the bow they looked out
towards the western horizon.

"Another town," said Phil Evans.

"Do you recognize it?"

"Yes! It seems to me to be Montreal."

"Montreal? But we only left Quebec two hours ago!"

"That proves that we must be going at a speed of seventy-five miles an hour."

Such was the speed of the aeronef; and if the passengers were not
inconvenienced by it, it was because they were going with the wind. In a calm
such speed would have been difficult and the rate would have sunk to that of an
express. In a head-wind the speed would have been unbearable.

Phil Evans was not mistaken. Below the "Albatross" appeared Montreal,
easily recognizable by the Victoria Bridge, a tubular bridge thrown over the St.
Lawrence like the railway viaduct over the Venice lagoon. Soon they could
distinguish the town's wide streets, its huge shops, its palatial banks, its
cathedral, recently built on the model of St. Peter's at Rome, and then Mount
Royal, which commands the city and forms a magnificent park.

Luckily Phil Evans had visited the chief towns of Canada, and could
recognize them without asking Robur. After Montreal they passed Ottawa,
whose falls, seen from above, looked like a vast cauldron in ebullition, throwing
off masses of steam with grand effect.

"There is the Parliament House."

And he pointed out a sort of Nuremburg toy planted on a hill top. This toy
with its polychrome architecture resembled the House of Parliament in London
much as the Montreal cathedral resembles St. Peter's at Rome. But that was of no
consequence; there could be no doubt it was Ottawa.

Soon the city faded off towards the horizon, and formed but a luminous spot
on the ground.

It was almost two hours before Robur appeared. His mate, Tom Turner,
accompanied him. He said only three words. These were transmitted to the two
assistant engineers in the fore and aft engine-houses. At a sign the helmsman


changed the-direction of the "Albatross" a couple of points to the southwest; at
the same time Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans felt that a greater speed had been
given to the propellers.

In fact, the speed had been doubled, and now surpassed anything that had
ever been attained by terrestrial Engines. Torpedo-boats do their twenty-two
knots an hour; railway trains do their sixty miles an hour; the ice-boats on the
frozen Hudson do their sixty-five miles an hour; a machine built by the Patterson
company, with a cogged wheel, has done its eighty miles; and another
locomotive between Trenton and Jersey City has done its eighty-four.

But the "Albatross," at full speed, could do her hundred and twenty miles an
hour, or 176 feet per second. This speed is that of the storm which tears up trees
by the roots. It is the mean speed of the carrier pigeon, and is only surpassed by
the flight of the swallow (220 feet per second) and that of the swift (274 feet per
second).

In a word, as Robur had said, the "Albatross," by using the whole force of
her screws, could make the tour of the globe in two hundred hours, or less than
eight days.

Is it necessary to say so? The phenomenon whose appearance had so much
puzzled the people of both worlds was the aeronef of the engineer. The trumpet
which blared its startling fanfares through the air was that of the mate, Tom
Turner. The flag planted on the chief monuments of Europe, Asia, America, was
the flag of Robur the Conqueror and his "Albatross."

And if up to then the engineer had taken many precautions against being
recognized, if by preference he traveled at night, clearing the way with his
electric lights, and during the day vanishing into the zones above the clouds, he
seemed now to have no wish to keep his secret hidden. And if he had come to
Philadelphia and presented himself at the meeting of the Weldon Institute, was it
not that they might share in his prodigious discovery, and convince "ipso facto"
the most incredulous? We know how he had been received, and we see what
reprisals he had taken on the president and secretary of the club.

Again did Robur approach his prisoners, who affected to be in no way
surprised at what they saw, of what had succeeded in spite of them. Evidently
beneath the cranium of these two Anglo-Saxon heads there was a thick crust of
obstinacy, which would not be easy to remove.

On his part, Robur did not seem to notice anything particular, and coolly
continued the conversation which he had begun two hours before.

"Gentlemen," said he, "you ask yourselves doubtless if this apparatus, so
marvelously adapted for aerial locomotion, is susceptible of receiving greater
speed. It is not worth while to conquer space if we cannot devour it. I wanted the


air to be a solid support to me, and it is. I saw that to struggle against the wind I
must be stronger than the wind, and I am. I had no need of sails to drive me, nor
oars nor wheels to push me, nor rails to give me a faster road. Air is what I
wanted, that was all. Air surrounds me as it surrounds the submarine boat, and in
it my propellers act like the screws of a steamer. That is how I solved the
problem of aviation. That is what a balloon will never do, nor will any machine
that is lighter than air."

Silence, absolute, on the part of the colleagues, which did not for a moment
disconcert the engineer. He contented himself with a half-smile, and continued in
his interrogative style, "Perhaps you ask if to this power of the "Albatross" to
move horizontally there is added an equal power of vertical movement--in a
word, if, when, we visit the higher zones of the atmosphere, we can compete
with an aerostat? Well, I should not advise you to enter the "Go-Ahead" against
her!"

The two colleagues shrugged their shoulders. That was probably what the
engineer was waiting for.

Robur made a sign. The propelling screws immediately stopped, and after
running for a mile the "Albatross" pulled up motionless.

At a second gesture from Robur the suspensory helices revolved at a speed
that can only be compared to that of a siren in acoustical experiments. Their f-r-
r-r-r rose nearly an octave in the scale of sound, diminishing gradually in
intensity as the air became more rarified, and the machine rose vertically, like a
lark singing his song in space.

"Master! Master!" shouted Frycollin. "See that it doesn't break!"

A smile of disdain was Robur's only reply. In a few minutes the "Albatross"
had attained the height of 8,700 feet, and extended the range of vision by seventy
miles, the barometer having fallen 480 millimeters.

Then the "Albatross" descended. The diminution of the pressure in high
altitudes leads to the diminution of oxygen in the air, and consequently in the
blood. This has been the cause of several serious accidents which have happened
to aeronauts, and Robur saw no reason to run any risk.

The "Albatross" thus returned to the height she seemed to prefer, and her
propellers beginning again, drove her off to the southwest.

"Now, sirs, if that is what you wanted you can reply." Then, leaning over the
rail, he remained absorbed in contemplation.

When he raised his head the president and secretary of the Weldon Institute
stood by his side.

"Engineer Robur," said Uncle Prudent, in vain endeavoring to control
himself, "we have nothing to ask about what you seem to believe, but we wish to


ask you a question which we think you would do well to answer."

"Speak."

"By what right did you attack us in Philadelphia in Fairmount Park? By what
right did you shut us up in that prison? By what right have you brought us
against our will on board this flying machine?"

"And by what right, Messieurs Balloonists, did you insult and threaten me in
your club in such a way that I am astonished I came out of it alive?"

"To ask is not to answer," said Phil Evans, "and I repeat, by what right?"

"Do you wish to know?"

"If you please."

"Well, by the right of the strongest!"

"That is cynical."

"But it is true."

"And for how long, citizen engineer,” asked Uncle Prudent, who was nearly
exploding, "for how long do you intend to exercise that right?"

"How can you?" said Robur, ironically, "how can you ask me such a question
when you have only to cast down your eyes to enjoy a spectacle unparalleled in
the world?"

The "Albatross" was then sweeping across the immense expanse of Lake
Ontario. She had just crossed the country so poetically described by Cooper.
Then she followed the southern shore and headed for the celebrated river which
pours into it the waters of Lake Erie, breaking them to powder in its cataracts.

In an instant a majestic sound, a roar as of the tempest, mounted towards
them and, as if a humid fog had been projected into the air, the atmosphere
sensibly freshened. Below were the liquid masses. They seemed like an
enormous flowing sheet of crystal amid a thousand rainbows due to refraction as
it decomposed the solar rays. The sight was sublime.

Before the falls a foot-bridge, stretching like a thread, united one bank to the
other. Three miles below was a suspension-bridge, across which a train was
crawling from the Canadian to the American bank.

"The falls of Niagara!" exclaimed Phil Evans. And as the exclamation
escaped him, Uncle Prudent was doing all could do to admire nothing of these
wonders.

A minute afterwards the "Albatross" had crossed the river which separates
the United States from Canada, and was flying over the vast territories of the
West.


Chapter IX


ACROSS THE PRAIRIE


In one, of the cabins of the after-house Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans had
found two excellent berths, with clean linen, change of clothes, and traveling-
cloaks and rugs. No Atlantic liner could have offered them more comfort. If they
did not sleep soundly it was that they did not wish to do so, or rather that their
very real anxiety prevented them. In what adventure had they embarked? To
what series of experiments had they been invited? How would the business end?
And above all, what was Robur going to do with them?

Frycollin, the valet, was quartered forward in a cabin adjoining that of the
cook. The neighborhood did not displease him; he liked to rub shoulders with the
great in this world. But if he finally went to sleep it was to dream of fall after
fall, of projections through space, which made his sleep a horrible nightmare.

However, nothing could be quieter than this journey through the atmosphere,
whose currents had grown weaker with the evening. Beyond the rustling of the
blades of the screws there was not a sound, except now and then the whistle
from some terrestrial locomotive, or the calling of some animal. Strange instinct!
These terrestrial beings felt the aeronef glide over them, and uttered cries of
terror as it passed. On the morrow, the 14th of June, at five o'clock, Uncle
Prudent and Phil Evans were walking on the deck of the "Albatross."

Nothing had changed since the evening; there was a lookout forward, and the
helmsman was in his glass cage. Why was there a lookout? Was there any
chance of collision with another such machine? Certainly not. Robur had not yet
found imitators. The chance of encountering an aerostat gliding through the air
was too remote to be regarded. In any case it would be all the worse for the
aerostat--the earthen pot and the iron pot. The "Albatross" had nothing to fear
from the collision.

But what could happen? The aeronef might find herself like a ship on a lee
shore if a mountain that could not be outflanked or passed barred the way. These
are the reefs of the air, and they have to be avoided as a ship avoids the reefs of
the sea. The engineer, it is true, had given the course, and in doing so had taken
into account the altitude necessary to clear the summits of the high lands in the
district. But as the aeronef was rapidly nearing a mountainous country, it was
only prudent to keep a good lookout, in case some slight deviation from the
course became necessary.


Looking at the country beneath them, Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans noticed
a large lake, whose lower southern end the "Albatross" had just reached. They
concluded, therefore, that during the night the whole length of Lake Erie had
been traversed, and that, as they were going due west, they would soon be over
Lake Michigan. "There can be no doubt of it," said Phil Evans, "and that group
of roofs on the horizon is Chicago."

He was right. It was indeed the city from which the seventeen railways
diverge, the Queen of the West, the vast reservoir into which flow the products
of Indiana, Ohio, Wisconsin, Missouri, and all the States which form the western
half of the Union.

Uncle Prudent, through an excellent telescope he had found in his cabin,
easily recognized the principal buildings. His colleague pointed out to him the
churches and public edifices, the numerous "elevators" or mechanical, granaries,
and the huge Sherman Hotel, whose windows seemed like a hundred glittering
points on each of its faces.

"If that is Chicago," said Uncle Prudent, "it is obvious that we are going
farther west than is convenient for us if we are to return to our starting-place."

And, in fact, the "Albatross" was traveling in a straight line from the
Pennsylvania capital.

But if Uncle Prudent wished to ask Robur to take him eastwards he could not
then do so. That morning the engineer did not leave his cabin. Either he was
occupied in some work, or else he was asleep, and the two colleagues sat down
to breakfast without seeing him.

The speed was the same as that during last evening. The wind being easterly
the rate was not interfered with at all, and as the thermometer only falls a degree
centigrade for every seventy meters of elevation the temperature was not
insupportable. And so, in chatting and thinking and waiting for the engineer,
Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans walked about beneath the forest of screws, whose
gyratory movement gave their arms the appearance of semi-diaphanous disks.

The State of Illinois was left by its northern frontier in less than two hours
and a half; and they crossed the Father of Waters, the Mississippi, whose double-
decked steam-boats seemed no bigger than canoes. Then the "Albatross" flew
over Iowa after having sighted Iowa City about eleven o'clock in the morning.

A few chains of hills, "bluffs" as they are called, curved across the face of the
country trending from the south to the northwest, whose moderate height
necessitated no rise in the course of the aeronef. Soon the bluffs gave place to
the large plains of western Iowa and Nebraska--immense prairies extending all
the way to the foot of the Rocky Mountains. Here and there were many rios,
affluents or minor affluents of the Missouri. On their banks were towns and


villages, growing more scattered as the "Albatross" sped farther west.

Nothing particular happened during this day. Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans
were left entirely to themselves. They hardly noticed Frycollin sprawling at full
length in the bow, keeping his eyes shut so that he could see nothing. And they
were not attacked by vertigo, as might have been expected. There was no
guiding mark, and there was nothing to cause the vertigo, as there would have
been on the top of a lofty building. The abyss has no attractive power when it is
gazed at from the car of a balloon or deck of an aeronef. It is not an abyss that
opens beneath the aeronaut, but an horizon that rises round him on all sides like
a cup.

In a couple of hours the "Albatross" was over Omaha, on the Nebraskan
frontier--Omaha City, the real head of the Pacific Railway, that long line of rails,
four thousand five hundred miles in length, stretching from New York to San
Francisco. For a moment they could see the yellow waters of the Missouri, then
the town, with its houses of wood and brick in the center of a rich basin, like a
buckle in the iron belt which clasps North America round the waist. Doubtless,
also, as the passengers in the aeronef could observe all these details, the
inhabitants of Omaha noticed the strange machine. Their astonishment at seeing
it gliding overhead could be no greater than that of the president and secretary of
the Weldon Institute at finding themselves on board.

Anyhow, the journals of the Union would be certain to notice the fact. It
would be the explanation of the astonishing phenomenon which the whole world
had been wondering over for some time.

In an hour the "Albatross" had left Omaha and crossed the Platte River,
whose valley is followed by the Pacific Railway in its route across the prairie.
Things looked serious for Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans.

"It is serious, then, this absurd project of taking us to the Antipodes."

"And whether we like it or not!" exclaimed the other.

"Robur had better take care! I am not the man to stand that sort of thing."

"Nor am I!" replied Phil Evans. "But be calm, Uncle Prudent, be calm."

"Be calm!"

"And keep your temper until it is wanted."

By five o'clock they had crossed the Black Mountains covered with pines
and cedars, and the "Albatross" was over the appropriately named Bad Lands of
Nebraska--a chaos of ochre-colored hills, of mountainous fragments fallen on
the soil and broken in their fall. At a distance these blocks take the most fantastic
shapes. Here and there amid this enormous game of knucklebones there could be
traced the imaginary ruins of medieval cities with forts and dungeons, pepper-
box turrets, and machicolated towers. And in truth these Bad Lands are an


immense ossuary where lie bleaching in the sun myriads of fragments of
pachyderms, chelonians, and even, some would have us believe, fossil men,
overwhelmed by unknown cataclysms ages and ages ago.

When evening came the whole basin of the Platte River had been crossed,
and the plain extended to the extreme limits of the horizon, which rose high
owing to the altitude of the "Albatross."

During the night there were no more shrill whistles of locomotives or deeper
notes of the river steamers to trouble the quiet of the starry firmament. Long
bellowing occasionally reached the aeronef from the herds of buffalo that
roamed over the prairie in search of water and pasturage. And when they ceased,
the trampling of the grass under their feet produced a dull roaring similar to the
rushing of a flood, and very different from the continuous f-r-r-r-r of the screws.

Then from time to time came the howl of a wolf, a fox, a wild cat, or a
coyote, the "Canis latrans," whose name is justified by his sonorous bark.

Occasionally came penetrating odors of mint, and sage, and absinthe,
mingled with the more powerful fragrance of the conifers which rose floating
through the night air.

At last came a menacing yell, which was not due to the coyote. It was the
shout of a Redskin, which no Tenderfoot would confound with the cry of a wild
beast.


Chapter X


WESTWARD--BUT WHITHER?


The next day, the 15th of June, about five o'clock in the morning, Phil Evans
left his cabin. Perhaps he would today have a chance of speaking to Robur?
Desirous of knowing why he had not appeared the day before, Evans addressed
himself to the mate, Tom Turner.

Tom Tumer was an Englishman of about forty-five, broad in the shoulders
and short in the legs, a man of iron, with one of those enormous characteristic
heads that Hogarth rejoiced in.

"Shall we see Mr. Robur to-day?" asked Phil Evans.

"T don't know," said Turner.

"T need not ask if he has gone out."

"Perhaps he has."

"And when will he come back?"

"When he has finished his cruise."

And Tom went into his cabin.

With this reply they had to be contented. Matters did not look promising,
particularly as on reference to the compass it appeared that the "Albatross" was
still steering southwest.

Great was the contrast between the barren tract of the Bad Lands passed over
during the night and the landscape then unrolling beneath them.

The aeronef was now more than six hundred miles from Omaha, and over a
country which Phil Evans could not recognize because he had never been there
before. A few forts to keep the Indians in order crowned the bluffs with their
geometric lines, formed oftener of palisades than walls. There were few villages,
and few inhabitants, the country differing widely from the auriferous lands of
Colorado many leagues to the south.

In the distance a long line of mountain crests, in great confusion as yet,
began to appear. They were the Rocky Mountains.

For the first time that morning Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans were sensible
of a certain lowness of temperature which was not due to a change in the
weather, for the sun shone in superb splendor.

"It is because of the "Albatross" being higher in the air," said Phil Evans.

In fact the barometer outside the central deck-house had fallen 540
millimeters, thus indicating an elevation of about 10,000 feet above the sea. The


aeronef was at this altitude owing to the elevation of the ground. An hour before
she had been at a height of 13,000 feet, and behind her were mountains covered
with perpetual snow.

There was nothing Uncle Prudent and his companion could remember which
would lead them to discover where they were. During the night the "Albatross"
had made several stretches north and south at tremendous speed, and that was
what had put them out of their reckoning.

After talking over several hypotheses more or less plausible they came to the
conclusion that this country encircled with mountains must be the district
declared by an Act of Congress in March, 1872, to be the National Park of the
United States. A strange region it was. It well merited the name of a park--a park
with mountains for hills, with lakes for ponds, with rivers for streamlets, and
with geysers of marvelous power instead of fountains.

In a few minutes the "Albatross" glided across the Yellowstone River,
leaving Mount Stevenson on the right, and coasting the large lake which bears
the name of the stream. Great was the variety on the banks of this basin, ribbed
as they were with obsidian and tiny crystals, reflecting the sunlight on their
myriad facets. Wonderful was the arrangement of the islands on its surface;
magnificent were the blue reflections of the gigantic mirror. And around the
lake, one of the highest in the globe, were multitudes of pelicans, swans, gulls
and geese, bernicles and divers. In places the steep banks were clothed with
green trees, pines and larches, and at the foot of the escarpments there shot
upwards innumerable white fumaroles, the vapor escaping from the soil as from
an enormous reservoir in which the water is kept in permanent ebullition by
subterranean fire.

The cook might have seized the opportunity of securing an ample supply of
trout, the only fish the Yellowstone Lake contains in myriads. But the
"Albatross" kept on at such a height that there was no chance of indulging in a
catch which assuredly would have been miraculous.

In three quarters of an hour the lake was overpassed, and a little farther on
the last was seen of the geyser region, which rivals the finest in Iceland. Leaning
over the rail, Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans watched the liquid columns which
leaped up as though to furnish the aeronef with a new element. There were the
Fan, with the jets shot forth in rays, the Fortress, which seemed to be defended
by waterspouts, the Faithful Friend, with her plume crowned with the rainbows,
the Giant, spurting forth a vertical torrent twenty feet round and more than two
hundred feet high.

Robur must evidently have been familiar with this incomparable spectacle,
unique in the world, for he did not appear on deck. Was it, then, for the sole


pleasure of his guests that he had brought the aeronef above the national
domain? If so, he came not to receive their thanks. He did not even trouble
himself during the daring passage of the Rocky Mountains, which the
"Albatross" approached at about seven o'clock.

By increasing the speed of her wings, as a bird rising in its flight, the
"Albatross" would clear the highest ridges of the chain, and sink again over
Oregon or Utah, But the maneuver was unnecessary. The passes allowed the
barrier to be crossed without ascending for the higher ridges. There are many of
these canyons, or steep valleys, more or less narrow, through which they could
glide, such as Bridger Gap, through which runs the Pacific Railway into the
Mormon territory, and others to the north and south of it.

It was through one of these that the "Albatross" headed, after slackening
speed so as not to dash against the walls of the canyon. The steersman, with a
sureness of hand rendered more effective by the sensitiveness of the rudder,
maneuvered his craft as if she were a crack racer in a Royal Victoria match. It
was really extraordinary. In spite of all the jealousy of the two enemies of
"lighter than air," they could not help being surprised at the perfection of this
engine of aerial locomotion.

In less than two hours and a half they were through the Rockies, and the
"Albatross" resumed her former speed of sixty-two miles an hour. She was
steering southwest so as to cut across Utah diagonally as she neared the ground.
She had even dropped several hundred yards when the sound of a whistle
attracted the attention of Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans. It was a train on the
Pacific Railway on the road to Salt Lake City.

And then, in obedience to an order secretly given, the "Albatross" dropped
still lower so as to chase the train, which was going at full speed. She was
immediately sighted. A few heads showed themselves at the doors of the cars.
Then numerous passengers crowded the gangways. Some did not hesitate to
climb on the roof to get a better view of the flying machine. Cheers came
floating up through the air; but no Robur appeared in answer to them.

The "Albatross" continued her descent, slowing her suspensory screws and
moderating her speed so as not to leave the train behind. She flew about it like
an enormous beetle or a gigantic bird of prey. She headed off, to the right and
left, and swept on in front, and hung behind, and proudly displayed her flag with
the golden sun, to which the conductor of the train replied by waving the Stars
and Stripes.

In vain the prisoners, in their desire to take advantage of the opportunity,
endeavored to make themselves known to those below. In vain the president of
the Weldon Institute roared forth at the top of his voice, "I am Uncle Prudent of


Philadelphia!" And the secretary followed suit with, "I am Phil Evans, his
colleague!" Their shouts were lost in the thousand cheers with which the
passengers greeted the aeronef.

Three or four of the crew of the "Albatross" had appeared on the deck, and
one of them, like sailors when passing a ship less speedy than their own, held out
a rope, an ironical way of offering to tow them.

And then the "Albatross" resumed her original speed, and in half an hour the
express was out of sight. About one o'clock there appeared a vast disk, which
reflected the solar rays as if it were an immense mirror.

"That ought to be the Mormon capital, Salt Lake City," said Uncle Prudent.
And so it was, and the disk was the roof of the Tabernacle, where ten thousand
saints can worship at their ease. This vast dome, like a convex mirror, threw off
the rays of the sun in all directions.

It vanished like a shadow, and the "Albatross" sped on her way to the
southwest with a speed that was not felt, because it surpassed that of the chasing
wind. Soon she was in Nevada over the silver regions, which the Sierra separates
from the golden lands of California.

"We shall certainly reach San Francisco before night," said Phil Evans.

"And then?" asked Uncle Prudent.

It was six o'clock precisely when the Sierra Nevada was crossed by the same
pass as that taken by the railway. Only a hundred and eighty miles then separated
them from San Francisco, the Californian capital.

At the speed the "Albatross" was going she would be over the dome by eight
o'clock.

At this moment Robur appeared on deck. The colleagues walked up to him.

"Engineer Robur," said Uncle Prudent, "we are now on the very confines of
America! We think the time has come for this joke to end."

"TI never joke," said Robur.

He raised his hand. The "Albatross" swiftly dropped towards the ground, and
at the same time such speed was given her as to drive the prisoners into their
cabin. As soon as the door was shut, Uncle Prudent exclaimed,

"I could strangle him!"

"We must try to escape." said Phil Evans.

"Yes; cost what it may!"

A long murmur greeted their ears. It was the beating of the surf on the
seashore. It was the Pacific Ocean!


Chapter XI


THE WIDE PACIFIC


Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans had quite made up their minds to escape. If
they had not had to deal with the eight particularly vigorous men who composed
the crew of the aeronef they might have tried to succeed by main force. But as
they were only two--for Frycollin could only be considered as a quantity of no
importance--force was not to be thought of. Hence recourse must be had to
strategy as soon as the "Albatross" again took the ground. Such was what Phil
Evans endeavored to impress on his irascible colleague, though he was in
constant fear of Prudent aggravating matters by some premature outbreak.

In any case the present was not the time to attempt anything of the sort. The
aeronef was sweeping along over the North Pacific. On the following morning,
that of June 16th, the coast was out of sight. And as the coast curves off from
Vancouver Island up to the Aleutians--belonging to that portion of America
ceded by Russia to the United States in 1867--it was highly probable that the
"Albatross" would cross it at the end of the curve, if her course remained
unchanged.

How long the night appeared to be to the two friends! How eager they were
to get out of their cabins! When they came on deck in the morning the dawn had
for some hours been silvering the eastern horizon. They were nearing the June
solstice, the longest day of the year in the northern hemisphere, when there is
hardly any night along the sixtieth parallel.

Either from custom or intention Robur was in no hurry to leave his deck-
house, When he came out this morning be contented himself with bowing to his
two guests as he passed them in the stern of the aeronef.

And now Frycollin ventured out of his cabin. His eyes red with
sleeplessness, and dazed in their look, he tottered along, like a man whose foot
feels it is not on solid ground. His first glance was at the suspensory screws,
which were working with gratifying regularity without any signs of haste. That
done, the Negro stumbled along to the rail, and grasped it with both hands, so as
to make sure of his balance. Evidently he wished to view the country over which
the "Albatross" was flying at the height of seven hundred feet or more.

At first he kept himself well back behind the rail. Then he shook it to make
sure it was firm; then he drew himself up; then he bent forward; then he
stretched out his head. It need not be said that while he was executing these


different maneuvers he kept his eyes shut. At last he opened them.

What a shout! And how quickly he fled! And how deeply his head sank back
into his shoulders! At the bottom of the abyss he had seen the immense ocean.
His hair would have risen on end--if it had not been wool.

"The sea! The sea!" he cried. And Frycollin would have fallen on the deck
had not the cook opened his arms to receive him.

This cook was a Frenchman, and probably a Gascon, his name being
Francois Tapage. If he was not a Gascon he must in his infancy have inhaled the
breezes of the Garonne. How did this Francois Tapage find himself in the service
of the engineer? By what chain of accidents had he become one of the crew of
the "Albatross?" We can hardly say; but in any case be spoke English like a
Yankee. "Eh, stand up!" he said, lifting the Negro by a vigorous clutch at the
waist.

"Master Tapage!" said the poor fellow, giving a despairing look at the
screws.

"At your service, Frycollin."

"Did this thing ever smash?"

"No, but it will end by smashing."

"Why? Why?"

"Because everything must end.

"And the sea is beneath us!"

"Tf we are to fall, it is better to fall in the sea."

"We shall be drowned."

"We shall be drowned, but we shall not be smashed to a jelly."

The next moment Frycollin was on all fours, creeping to the back of his
cabin.

During this day the aeronef was only driven at moderate speed. She seemed
to skim the placid surface of the sea, which lay beneath. Uncle Prudent and his
companion remained in their cabin, so that they did not meet with Robur, who
walked about smoking alone or talking to the mate. Only half the screws were
working, yet that was enough to keep the apparatus afloat in the lower zones of
the atmosphere.

The crew, as a change from the ordinary routine, would have endeavored to
catch a few fish had there been any sign of them; but all that could be seen on
the surface of the sea were a few of those yellow-bellied whales which measure
about eighty feet in length. These are the most formidable cetaceans in the
northern seas, and whalers are very careful in attacking them, for their strength is
prodigious. However, in harpooning one of these whales, either with the ordinary
harpoon, the Fletcher fuse, or the javelin-bomb, of which there was an


assortment on board, there would have been danger to the men of the
"Albatross."

But what was the good of such useless massacre? Doubtless to show off the
powers of the aeronef to the members of the Weldon Institute. And so Robur
gave orders for the capture of one of these monstrous cetaceans.

At the shout of "A whale! A whale!" Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans came out
of their cabin. Perhaps there was a whaler in sight! In that case all they had to do
to escape from their flying prison was to jump into the sea, and chance being
picked up by the vessel.

The crew were all on deck. "Shall we try, sir?" asked Tom Turner.

"Yes," said Robur.

In the engine-room the engineer and his assistant were at their posts ready to
obey the orders signaled to them. The "Albatross" dropped towards the sea, and
remained, about fifty feet above it.

There was no ship in sight--of that the two colleagues soon assured
themselves--nor was there any land to be seen to which they could swim,
providing Robur made no attempt to recapture them.

Several jets of water from the spout holes soon announced the presence of
the whales as they came to the surface to breathe. Tom Turner and one of the
men were in the bow. Within his reach was one of those javelin-bombs, of
Californian make, which are shot from an arquebus and which are shaped as a
metallic cylinder terminated by a cylindrical shell armed with a shaft having a
barbed point. Robur was a little farther aft, and with his right hand signaled to
the engineers, while with his left, he directed the steersman. He thus controlled
the aeronef in every way, horizontally and vertically, and it is almost impossible
to conceive with what speed and precision the "Albatross" answered to his
orders. She seemed a living being, of which he was the soul.

"A whale! A whale!" shouted Tom Turner, as the back of a cetacean emerged
from the surface about four cable-lengths in front of the "Albatross."

The "Albatross" swept towards it, and when she was within sixty feet of it
she stopped dead.

Tom Tumer seized the arquebus, which was resting against a cleat on the
rail. He fired, and the projectile, attached to a long line, entered the whale's body.
The shell, filled with an explosive compound, burst, and shot out a small
harpoon with two branches, which fastened into the animal's flesh.

"Look out!" shouted Turner.

Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans, much against their will, became greatly
interested in the spectacle.

The whale, seriously wounded, gave the sea such a slap with his tail, that the


water dashed up over the bow of the aeronef. Then he plunged to a great depth,
while the line, which had been previously wetted in a tub of water to prevent its
taking fire, ran out like lightning. When the whale rose to the surface he started
off at full speed in a northerly direction.

It may be imagined with what speed the "Albatross" was towed in pursuit.
Besides, the propellers had been stopped. The whale was let go as he would, and
the ship followed him. Turner stood ready to cut the line in case a fresh plunge
should render this towing dangerous.

For half an hour, and perhaps for a distance of six miles, the "Albatross" was
thus dragged along, but it was obvious that the whale was tiring. Then, at a
gesture from Robur the assistant engineers started the propellers astern, so as to
oppose a Certain resistance to the whale, who was gradually getting closer.

Soon the aeronef was gliding about twenty-five feet above him. His tail was
beating the waters with incredible violence, and as he turned over on his back an
enormous wave was produced.

Suddenly the whale turned up again, so as to take a header, as it were, and
then dived with such rapidity that Turner had barely time to cut the line.

The aeronef was dragged to the very surface of the water. A whirlpool was
formed where the animal had disappeared. A wave dashed up on to the deck as if
the aeronef were a ship driving against wind and tide.

Luckily, with a blow of the hatchet the mate severed the line, and the
"Albatross," freed from her tug, sprang aloft six hundred feet under the impulse
of her ascensional screws. Robur had maneuvered his ship without losing his
coolness for a moment.

A few minutes afterwards the whale returned to the surface--dead. From
every side the birds flew down on to the carcass, and their cries were enough to
deafen a congress. The "Albatross," without stopping to share in the spoil,
resumed her course to the west.

In the morning of the 17th of June, at about six o'clock, land was sighted on
the horizon. This was the peninsula of Alaska, and the long range of breakers of
the Aleutian Islands.

The "Albatross" glided over the barrier where the fur seals swarm for the
benefit of the Russo-American Company. An excellent business is the capture of
these amphibians, which are from six to seven feet long, russet in color, and
weigh from three hundred to four hundred pounds. There they were in
interminable files, ranged in line of battle, and countable by thousands.

Although they did not move at the passage of the "Albatross," it was
otherwise with the ducks, divers, and loons, whose husky cries filled the air as
they disappeared beneath the waves and fled terrified from the aerial monster.


The twelve hundred miles of the Behring Sea between the first of the
Aleutians and the extreme end of Kamtschatka were traversed during the twenty-
four hours of this day and the following night. Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans
found that here was no present chance of putting their project of escape into
execution. Flight was not to be thought of among the deserts of Eastern Asia, nor
on the coast of the sea of Okhotsk. Evidently the "Albatross" was bound for
Japan or China, and there, although it was not perhaps quite safe to trust
themselves to the mercies of the Chinese or Japanese, the two friends had made
up their minds to run if the aeronef stopped.

But would she stop? She was not like a bird which grows fatigued by too
long a flight, or like a balloon which has to descend for want of gas. She still had
food for many weeks and her organs were of marvelous strength, defying all
weakness and weariness.

During the 18th of June she swept over the peninsula of Kamtschatka, and
during the day there was a glimpse of Petropaulovski and the volcano of
Kloutschew. Then she rose again to cross the Sea of Okhotsk, running down by
the Kurile Isles, which seemed to be a breakwater pierced by hundreds of
channels. On the 19th, in the morning, the "Albatross" was over the strait of La
Perouse between Saghalien and Northern Japan, and had reached the mouth of
the great Siberian river, the Amoor.

Then there came a fog so dense that the aeronef had to rise above it. At the
altitude she was there was no obstacle to be feared, no elevated monuments to
hinder her passage, no mountains against which there was risk of being shattered
in her flight. The country was only slightly varied. But the fog was very
disagreeable, and made everything on board very damp.

All that was necessary was to get above this bed of mist, which was nearly
thirteen hundred feet thick, and the ascensional screws being increased in speed,
the "Albatross" was soon clear of the fog and in the sunny regions of the sky.
Under these circumstances, Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans would have found
some difficulty in carrying out their plan of escape, even admitting that they
could leave the aeronef.

During the day, as Robur passed them he stopped for a moment, and without
seeming to attach any importance to what he said, addressed them carelessly as
follows: "Gentlemen, a sailing-ship or a steamship caught in a fog from which it
cannot escape is always much delayed. It must not move unless it keeps its
whistle or its horn going. It must reduce its speed, and any instant a collision
may be expected. The "Albatross" has none of these things to fear. What does
fog matter to her? She can leave it when she chooses. The whole of space is
hers." And Robur continued his stroll without waiting for an answer, and the


puffs of his pipe were lost in the sky.

"Uncle Prudent,” said Phil Evans, "it seems that this astonishing "Albatross"
never has anything to fear."

"That we shall see!" answered the president of the Weldon Institute.

The fog lasted three days, the 19th, 20th, and 21st of June, with regrettable
persistence. An ascent had to be made to clear the Japanese mountain of
Fujiyama. When the curtain of mist was drawn aside there lay below them an
immense city, with palaces, villas, gardens, and parks. Even without seeing it
Robur had recognized it by the barking of the innumerable dogs, the cries of the
birds of prey, and above all, by the cadaverous odor which the bodies of its
executed criminals gave off into space.

The two colleagues were out on the deck while the engineer was taking his
observations in case he thought it best to continue his course through the fog.

"Gentlemen," said he, "I have no reason for concealing from you that this
town is Tokyo, the capital of Japan."

Uncle Prudent did not reply. In the presence of the engineer he was almost
choked, as if his lungs were short of air.

"This view of Tokyo," continued Robur, "is very curious."

"Curious as it may be--" replied Phil Evans.

"It is not as good as Peking?" interrupted the engineer.

"That is what I think, and very shortly you shall have an opportunity of
judging."

Impossible to be more agreeable!

The "Albatross" then gliding southeast, had her course changed four points,
so as to head to the eastward.


Chapter XII


THROUGH THE HIMALAYAS


During the night the fog cleared off. There were symptoms of an
approaching typhoon--a rapid fall of the barometer, a disappearance of vapor,
large clouds of ellipsoid form clinging to a copper sky, and, on the opposite
horizon, long streaks of carmine on a slate-colored field, with a large sector quite
clear in the north. Then the sea was smooth and calm and at sunset assumed a
deep scarlet hue.

Fortunately the typhoon broke more to the south, and had no other result than
to sweep away the mist which had been accumulating during the last three days.

In an hour they had traversed the hundred and twenty-five miles of the
Korean strait, and while the typhoon was raging on the coast of China, the
"Albatross" was over the Yellow Sea. During the 22nd and 23rd she was over the
Gulf of Pechelee, and on the 24th she was ascending the valley of the Peiho on
her way to the capital of the Celestial Empire.

Leaning over the rail, the two colleagues, as the engineer had told them,
could see distinctly the immense city, the wall which divides it into two parts--
the Manchu town, and the Chinese town--the twelve suburbs which surround it,
the large boulevards which radiate from its center, the temples with their green
and yellow roofs bathed in the rising sun, the grounds surrounding the houses of
the mandarins; then in the middle of the Manchu town the eighteen hundred
acres of the Yellow town, with its pagodas, its imperial gardens, its artificial
lakes, its mountain of coal which towers above the capital; and in the center of
the Yellow town, like a square of Chinese puzzle enclosed in another, the Red
town, that is the imperial palace, with all the peaks of its outrageous architecture.

Below the "Albatross" the air was filled with a singular harmony. It seemed
to be a concert of Aeolian harps. In the air were a hundred kites of different
forms, made of sheets of palm-leaf, and having at their upper end a sort of bow
of light wood with a thin slip of bamboo beneath. In the breath of the wind these
slips, with all their notes varied like those of a harmonicon, gave forth a most
melancholy murmuring. It seemed as though they were breathing musical
oxygen.

It suited Robur's whim to run close up to this aerial orchestra, and the
"Albatross" slowed as she glided through the sonorous waves which the kites
gave off through the atmosphere.


But immediately an extraordinary effect was produced amongst the
innumerable population. Beatings of the tomtoms and sounds of other
formidable instruments of the Chinese orchestra, gun reports by the thousand,
mortars fired in hundreds, all were brought into play to scare away the aeronef.
Although the Chinese astronomers may have recognized the aerial machine as
the moving body that had given rise to such disputes, it was to the Celestial
million, from the humblest tankader to the best-buttoned mandarin, an
apocalyptical monster appearing in the sky of Buddha.

The crew of the "Albatross" troubled themselves very little about these
demonstrations. But the strings which held the kites, and were tied to fixed pegs
in the imperial gardens, were cut or quickly hauled in; and the kites were either
drawn in rapidly, sounding louder as they sank, or else fell like a bird shot
through both wings, whose song ends with its last sigh.

A noisy fanfare escaped from Tom Turner's trumpet, and drowned the final
notes of the aerial concert. It did not interrupt the terrestrial fusillade. At last a
shell exploded a few feet below the "Albatross," and then she mounted into the
inaccessible regions of the sky.

Nothing happened during the few following days of which the prisoners
could take advantage. The aeronef kept on her course to the southwest, thereby
showing that it was intended to take her to India. Twelve hours after leaving
Peking, Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans caught a glimpse of the Great Wall in the
neighborhood of Chen-Si. Then, avoiding the Lung Mountains, they passed over
the valley of the Hoangho and crossed the Chinese border on the Tibet side.

Tibet consists of high table-lands without vegetation, with here and there
snowy peaks and barren ravines, torrents fed by glaciers, depressions with
glittering beds of salt, lakes surrounded by luxurious forests, with icy winds
Sweeping over all.

The barometer indicated an altitude of thirteen thousand feet above the level
of the sea. At that height the temperature, although it was in the warmest months
of the northern hemisphere, was only a little above freezing. This cold,
combined with the speed of the "Albatross," made the voyage somewhat trying,
and although the friends had warm traveling wraps, they preferred to keep to
their cabin.

It need hardly be said that to keep the aeronef in this rarefied atmosphere the
suspensory screws had to be driven at extreme speed. But they worked with
perfect regularity, and the sound of their wings almost acted as a lullaby.

During this day, appearing from below about the size of a carrier pigeon, she
passed over Garlock, a town of western Tibet, the capital of the province of Cari
Khorsum.


On the 27th of June, Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans sighted an enormous
barrier, broken here and there by several peaks, lost in the snows that bounded
the horizon.

Leaning against the fore-cabin, so as to keep their places notwithstanding the
speed of the ship, they watched these colossal masses, which seemed to be
running away from the aeronef.

"The Himalayas, evidently," said Phil Evans; "and probably Robur is going
round their base, so as to pass into India."

"So much the worse," answered Uncle Prudent. "On that immense territory
we Shall perhaps be able to--"

"Unless he goes round by Burma to the east, or Nepal to the west."

"Anyhow, I defy him to go through them."

"Indeed!" said a voice.

The next day, the 28th of June, the "Albatross" was in front of the huge mass
above the province of Zang. On the other side of the chain was the province of
Nepal. These ranges block the road into India from the north. The two northern
ones, between which the aeronef was gliding like a ship between enormous reefs
are the first steps of the Central Asian barrier. The first was the Kuen Lung, the
other the Karakorum, bordering the longitudinal valley parallel to the Himalayas,
from which the Indus flows to the west and the Brahmapootra to the east.

What a superb orographical system! More than two hundred summits have
been measured, seventeen of which exceed twenty-five thousand feet. In front of
the "Albatross," at a height of twenty-nine thousand feet, towered Mount
Everest. To the right was Dhawalagiri, reaching twenty-six thousand eight
hundred feet, and relegated to second place since the measurement of Mount
Everest.

Evidently Robur did not intend to go over the top of these peaks; but
probably he knew the passes of the Himalayas, among others that of Ibi Ganim,
which the brothers Schlagintweit traversed in 1856 at a height of twenty-two
thousand feet. And towards it he went.

Several hours of palpitation, becoming quite painful, followed; and although
the rarefaction of the air was not such as to necessitate recourse being had to the
special apparatus for renewing oxygen in the cabins, the cold was excessive.

Robur stood in the bow, his sturdy figure wrapped in a great-coat. He gave
the orders, while Tom Turner was at the helm. The engineer kept an attentive
watch on his batteries, the acid in which fortunately ran no risk of congelation.
The screws, running at the full strength of the current, gave forth a note of
intense shrillness in spite of the trifling density of the air. The barometer showed
twenty-three thousand feet in altitude.


Magnificent was the grouping of the chaos of mountains! Everywhere were
brilliant white summits. There were no lakes, but glaciers descending ten
thousand feet towards the base. There was no herbage, only a few phanerogams
on the limit of vegetable life. Down on the lower flanks of the range were
splendid forests of pines and cedars. Here were none of the gigantic ferns and
interminable parasites stretching from tree to tree as in the thickets of the jungle.
There were no animals--no wild horses, or yaks, or Tibetan bulls. Occasionally a
scared gazelle showed itself far down the slopes. There were no birds, save a
couple of those crows which can rise to the utmost limits of the respirable air.

The pass at last was traversed. The "Albatross" began to descend. Coming
from the hills out of the forest region there was now beneath them an immense
plain stretching far and wide.

Then Robur stepped up to his guests, and in a pleasant voice remarked,
"India, gentlemen!"


Chapter XIII


OVER THE CASPIAN


The engineer had no intention of taking his ship over the wondrous lands of
Hindustan. To cross the Himalayas was to show how admirable was the machine
he commanded; to convince those who would not be convinced was all he
wished to do.

But if in their hearts Uncle Prudent and his colleague could not help
admiring so perfect an engine of aerial locomotion, they allowed none of their
admiration to be visible. All they thought of was how to escape. They did not
even admire the superb spectacle that lay beneath them as the "Albatross" flew
along the river banks of the Punjab.

At the base of the Himalayas there runs a marshy belt of country, the home
of malarious vapors, the Terai, in which fever is endemic. But this offered no
obstacle to the "Albatross," or, in any way, affected the health of her crew. She
kept on without undue haste towards the angle where India joins on to China and
Turkestan, and on the 29th of June, in the early hours of the morning, there
opened to view the incomparable valley of Cashmere.

Yes! Incomparable is this gorge between the major and the minor Himalayas-
-furrowed by the buttresses in which the mighty range dies out in the basin of the
Hydaspes, and watered by the capricious windings of the river which saw the
struggle between the armies of Porus and Alexander, when India and Greece
contended for Central Asia. The Hydaspes is still there, although the two towns
founded by the Macedonian in remembrance of his victory have long since
disappeared.

During the morning the aeronef was over Serinuggur, which is better known
under the name of Cashmere. Uncle Prudent and his companion beheld the
superb city clustered along both banks of the river; its wooden bridges stretching
across like threads, its villas and their balconies standing out in bold outline, its
hills shaded by tall poplars, its roofs grassed over and looking like molehills; its
numerous canals, with boats like nut-shells, and boatmen like ants; its palaces,
temples, kiosks, mosques, and bungalows on the outskirts; and its old citadel of
Hari-Pawata on the slope of the hill like the most important of the forts of Paris
on the slope of Mont Valerien.

"That would be Venice," said Phil Evans, "if we were in Europe."

"And if we were in Europe," answered Uncle Prudent, "we should know how


to find the way to America."

The "Albatross" did not linger over the lake through which the river flows,
but continued her flight down the valley of the Hydaspes.

For half an hour only did she descend to within thirty feet of the river and
remained stationary. Then, by means of an india-rubber pipe, Tom Turner and
his men replenished their water supply, which was drawn up by a pump worked
by the accumulators. Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans stood watching the
operation. The same idea occurred to each of them. They were only a few feet
from the surface of the stream. They were both good swimmers. A plunge would
give them their liberty; and once they had reached the river, how could Robur
get them back again? For his propellers to work, he must keep at least six feet
above the ground.

In a moment all the chances pro and con were run over in their heads. In a
moment they were considered, and the prisoners rushed to throw themselves
overboard, when several pairs of hands seized them by the shoulders.

They had been watched; and flight was utterly impossible.

This time they did not yield without resisting. They tried to throw off those
who held them. But these men of the "Albatross" were no children.

"Gentlemen," said the engineer, "when people, have the pleasure of traveling
with Robur the Conqueror, as you have so well named him, on board his
admirable "Albatross," they do not leave him in that way. I may add you never
leave him."

Phil Evans drew away his colleague, who was about to commit some act of
violence. They retired to their cabin, resolved to escape, even if it cost them their
lives.

Immediately the "Albatross" resumed her course to the west. During the day
at moderate speed she passed over the territory of Cabulistan, catching a
momentary glimpse of its capital, and crossed the frontier of the kingdom of
Herat, nearly seven hundred miles from Cashmere.

In these much-disputed countries, the open road for the Russians to the
English possessions in India, there were seen many columns and convoys, and,
in a word, everything that constitutes in men and material an army on the march.
There were heard also the roar of the cannon and the crackling of musketry. But
the engineer never meddled with the affairs of others where his honor or
humanity was not concerned. He passed above them. If Herat as we are told, is
the key of Central Asia, it mattered little to him if it was kept in an English or
Muscovite pocket. Terrestrial interests were nothing to him who had made the air
his domain.

Besides, the country soon disappeared in one of those sandstorms which are


so frequent in these regions. The wind called the "tebbad" bears along the seeds
of fever in the impalpable dust it raises in its passage. And many are the
caravans that perish in its eddies.

To escape this dust, which might have interfered with the working of the
screws, the "Albatross" shot up some six thousand feet into a purer atmosphere.

And thus vanished the Persian frontier and the extensive plains. The speed
was not excessive, although there were no rocks ahead, for the mountains
marked on the map are of very moderate altitude. But as the ship approached the
capital, she had to steer clear of Demavend, whose snowy peak rises some
twenty-two thousand feet, and the chain of Elbruz, at whose foot is built
Teheran.

As soon as the day broke on the 2nd of July the peak of Demavend appeared
above the sandstorm, and the "Albatross" was steered so as to pass over the
town, which the wind had wrapped in a mantle of dust.

However, about six o'clock her crew could see the large ditches that surround
it, and the Shah's palace, with its walls covered with porcelain tiles, and its
omamental lakes, which seemed like huge turquoises of beautiful blue.

It was but a hasty glimpse. The "Albatross" now headed for the north, and a
few hours afterwards she was over a little hill at the northern angle of the Persian
frontier, on the shores of a vast extent of water which stretched away out of sight
to the north and east.

The town was Ashurada, the most southerly of the Russian stations. The vast
extent of water was a Sea. It was the Caspian.

The eddies of sand had been passed. There was a view of a group of
European houses rising along a promontory, with a church tower in the midst of
them.

The "Albatross" swooped down towards the surface of the sea. Towards
evening she was running along the coast--which formerly belonged to Turkestan,
but now belongs to Russia--and in the morning of the 3rd of July she was about
three hundred feet above the Caspian.

There was no land in sight, either on the Asiatic or European side. On the
surface of the sea a few white sails were bellying in the breeze. These were
native vessels recognizable by their peculiar rig--kesebeys, with two masts;
kayuks, the old pirate-boats, with one mast; teimils, and smaller craft for trading
and fishing. Here and there a few puffs of smoke rose up to the "Albatross" from
the funnels of the Ashurada steamers, which the Russians keep as the police of
these Turcoman waters.

That morning Tom Turner was talking to the cook, Tapage, and to a question
of his replied, "Yes; we shall be about forty-eight hours over the Caspian."


"Good!" said the cook; "Then we can have some fishing."

"Just so."

They were to remain for forty-eight hours over the Caspian, which is some
six hundred and twenty-five miles long and two hundred wide, because the
speed of the "Albatross" had been much reduced, and while the fishing was
going on she would be stopped altogether.

The reply was heard by Phil Evans, who was then in the bow, where
Frycollin was overwhelming him with piteous pleadings to be put "on the
ground."

Without replying to this preposterous request, Evans returned aft to Uncle
Prudent; and there, taking care not to be overheard, he reported the conversation
that had taken place.

"Phil Evans," said Uncle Prudent, "I think there can be no mistake as to this
scoundrel's intention with regard to us."

"None," said Phil Evans. "He will only give us our liberty when it suits him,
and perhaps not at all."

"In that case we must do all we can to get away from the 'Albatross'."

"A splendid craft, she is, I must admit."

"Perhaps so," said Uncle Prudent; "but she belongs to a scoundrel who
detains us on board in defiance of all right. For us and ours she is a constant
danger. If we do not destroy her--"

"Let us begin by saving ourselves" answered Phil Evans; "we can see about
the destruction afterwards."

"Just so," said Uncle Prudent. "And we must avail ourselves of every chance
that comes, along. Evidently the "Albatross" is going to cross the Caspian into
Europe, either by the north into Russia or by the west into the southern countries.
Well, no matter where we stop, before we get to the Atlantic, we shall be safe.
And we ought to be ready at any moment."

"But," asked Evans, "how are we to get out?"

"Listen to me,” said Uncle Prudent. "It may happen during the night that the
"Albatross" may drop to within a few hundred feet of the ground. Now there are
on board several ropes of that length, and, with a little pluck we might slip down
them--"

"Yes," said Evans. "If the case is desperate I don't mind--"

"Nor I. During the night there's no one about except the man at the wheel.
And if we can drop one of the ropes forward without being seen or heard--"

"Good! I am glad to see you are so cool; that means business. But just now
we are over the Caspian. There are several ships in sight. The "Albatross" is
going down to fish. Cannot we do something now?"


"Sh! They are watching us much more than you think," said Uncle Prudent.
"You saw that when we tried to jump into the Hydaspes."

"And who knows that they don't watch us at night?" asked Evans.

"Well, we must end this; we must finish with this "Albatross" and her
master."

It will be seen how in the excitement of their anger the colleagues--Uncle
Prudent in particular--were prepared to attempt the most hazardous things. The
sense of their powerlessness, the ironical disdain with which Robur treated them,
the brutal remarks he indulged in--all contributed towards intensifying the
aggravation which daily grew more manifest.

This very day something occurred which gave rise to another most
regrettable altercation between Robur and his guests. This was provoked by
Frycollin, who, finding himself above the boundless sea, was seized with another
fit of terror. Like a child, like the Negro he was, he gave himself over to
groaning and protesting and crying, and writhing in a thousand contortions and
grimaces.

"I want to get out! I want to get out! Iam not a bird! Boohoo! I don't want to
fly, I want to get out!"

Uncle Prudent, as may be imagined, did not attempt to quiet him. In fact, he
encouraged him, and particularly as the incessant howling seemed to have a
strangely irritating effect on Robur.

When Tom Turner and his companions were getting ready for fishing, the
engineer ordered them to shut up Frycollin in his cabin. But the Negro never
ceased his jumping about, and began to kick at the wall and yell with redoubled
power.

It was noon. The "Albatross" was only about fifteen or twenty feet above the
water. A few ships, terrified at the apparition, sought safety in flight.

As may be guessed, a sharp lookout was kept on the prisoners, whose
temptation to escape could not but be intensified. Even supposing they jumped
overboard they would have been picked up by the india-rubber boat. As there
was nothing to do during the fishing, in which Phil Evans intended to take part,
Uncle Prudent, raging furiously as usual, retired to his cabin.

The Caspian Sea is a volcanic depression. Into it flow the waters of the
Volga, the Ural, the Kour, the Kouma, the Jemba, and others. Without the
evaporation which relieves it of its overflow, this basin, with an area of 17,000
square miles, and a depth of from sixty to four hundred feet, would flood the low
marshy ground to its north and east. Although it is not in communication with
the Black Sea or the Sea of Aral, being at a much lower level than they are, it
contains an immense number of fish--such fish, be it understood, as can live in


its bitter waters, the bitterness being due to the naphtha which pours in from the
springs on the south.

The crew of the "Albatross" made no secret of their delight at the change in
their food the fishing would bring them.

"Look out!" shouted Turner, as he harpooned a good-size fish, not unlike a
shark.

It was a splendid sturgeon seven feet long, called by the Russians beluga, the
eggs of which mixed up with salt, vinegar, and white wine form caviar.
Sturgeons from the river are, it may be, rather better than those from the sea; but
these were welcomed warmly enough on board the "Albatross."

But the best catches were made with the drag-nets, which brought up at each
haul carp, bream, salmon, saltwater pike, and a number of medium-sized sterlets,
which wealthy gourmets have sent alive to Astrakhan, Moscow, and Petersburg,
and which now passed direct from their natural element into the cook's kettle
without any charge for transport.

An hour's work sufficed to fill up the larders of the aeronef, and she resumed
her course to the north.

During the fishing Frycollin had continued shouting and kicking at his cabin
wall, and making a tremendous noise.

"That wretched nigger will not be quiet, then?" said Robur, almost out of
patience.

"Tt seems to me, sir, he has a right to complain," said Phil Evans.

"Yes, and I have a right to look after my ears," replied Robur.

"Engineer Robur!" said Uncle Prudent, who had just appeared on deck.

"President of the Weldon Institute!"

They had stepped up to one another, and were looking into the whites of each
other's eyes. Then Robur shrugged his shoulders. "Put him at the end of a line,"
he said.

Turner saw his meaning at once. Frycollin was dragged out of his cabin.
Loud were his cries when the mate and one of the men seized him and tied him
into a tub, which they hitched on to a rope--one of those very ropes, in fact, that
Uncle Prudent had intended to use as we know.

The Negro at first thought he was going to be hanged. Not he was only going
to be towed!

The rope was paid out for a hundred feet and Frycollin found himself
hanging in space.

He could then shout at his ease. But fright contracted his larynx, and he was
mute.

Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans endeavored to prevent this performance. They


were thrust aside.

"It is scandalous! It is cowardly!" said Uncle Prudent, quite beside himself
with rage.

"Indeed!" said Robur.

"It is an abuse of power against which I protest."

"Protest away!"

"T will be avenged, Mr. Robur."

"Avenge when you like, Mr. Prudent."

"IT will have my revenge on you and yours."


The crew began to close up with anything but peaceful intentions. Robur
motioned them away.

"Yes, on you and yours!" said Uncle Prudent, whom his colleague in vain
tried to keep quiet.

"Whenever you please!" said the engineer.

"And in every possible way!"

"That is enough now," said Robur, in a threatening tone. "There are other
ropes on board. And if you don't be quiet I'll treat you as I have done your
servant!"

Uncle Prudent was silent, not because he was afraid, but because his wrath
had nearly choked him; and Phil Evans led him off to his cabin.

During the last hour the air had been strangely troubled. The symptoms
could not be mistaken. A storm was threatening. The electric saturation of the
atmosphere had become so great that about half-past two o'clock Robur
witnessed a phenomenon that was new to him.

In the north, whence the storm was traveling, were spirals of half-luminous
vapor due to the difference in the electric charges of the various beds of cloud.
The reflections of these bands came running along the waves in myriads of
lights, growing in intensity as the sky darkened.

The "Albatross" and the storm were sure to meet, for they were exactly in
front of each other.

And Frycollin? Well! Frycollin was being towed--and towed is exactly the
word, for the rope made such an angle, with the aeronef, now going at over sixty
knots an hour, that the tub was a long way behind her.

The crew were busy in preparing for the storm, for the "Albatross" would
either have to rise above it or drive through its lowest layers. She was about
three thousand feet above the sea when a clap of thunder was heard. Suddenly
the squall struck her. In a few seconds the fiery clouds swept on around her.

Phil Evans went to intercede for Frycollin, and asked for him to be taken on
board again. But Robur had already given orders to that effect, and the rope was
being hauled in, when suddenly there took place an inexplicable slackening in
the speed of the screws.

The engineer rushed to the central deckhouse. "Power! More power!" he
shouted. "We must rise quickly and get over the storm!"

"Impossible, sir!"

"What is the matter?"

"The currents are troubled! They are intermittent!" And, in fact, the
"Albatross" was falling fast.

As with the telegraph wires on land during a storm, so was it with the


accumulators of the aeronef. But what is only an inconvenience in the case of
messages was here a terrible danger.

"Let her down, then," said Robur, "and get out of the electric zone! Keep
cool, my lads!"

He stepped on to his quarter-deck and his crew went to their stations.

Although the "Albatross" had sunk several hundred feet she was still in the
thick of the cloud, and the flashes played across her as if they were fireworks. It
seemed as though she was struck. The screws ran more and more slowly, and
what began as a gentle descent threatened to become a collapse.

In less than a minute it was evident they would get down to the surface of the
sea. Once they were immersed no power could drag them from the abyss.

Suddenly the electric cloud appeared above them. The "Albatross" was only
sixty feet from the crest of the waves. In two or three seconds the deck would be
under water.

But Robur, seizing the propitious moment, rushed to the central house and
seized the levers. He turned on the currents from the piles no longer neutralized
by the electric tension of the surrounding atmosphere. In a moment the screws
had regained their normal speed and checked the descent; and the "Albatross"
remained at her slight elevation while her propellers drove her swiftly out of
reach of the storm.

Frycollin, of course, had a bath--though only for a few seconds. When he
was dragged on deck he was as wet as if he had been to the bottom of the sea. As
may be imagined, he cried no more.

In the morning of the 4th of July the "Albatross" had passed over the
northern shore of the Caspian.


Chapter XIV


THE AERONEF AT FULL SPEED


If ever Prudent and Evans despaired on escaping from the "Albatross" it was
during the two days that followed. It may be that Robur considered it more
difficult to keep a watch on his prisoners while he was crossing Europe, and he
knew that they had made up their minds to get away.

But any attempt to have done so would have been simply committing
suicide. To jump from an express going sixty miles an hour is to risk your life,
but to jump from a machine going one hundred and twenty miles an hour would
be to seek your death.

And it was at this speed, the greatest that could be given to her, that the
"Albatross" tore along. Her speed exceeded that of the swallow, which is one
hundred and twelve miles an hour.

At first the wind was in the northeast, and the "Albatross" had it fair, her
general course being a westerly one. But the wind began to drop, and it soon
became impossible for the colleagues to remain on the deck without having their
breath taken away by the rapidity of the flight. And on one occasion they would
have been blown overboard if they had not been dashed up against the
deckhouse by the pressure of the wind.

Luckily the steersman saw them through the windows of his cage, and by the
electric bell gave the alarm to the men in the fore-cabin. Four of them came aft,
creeping along the deck.

Those who have been at sea, beating to windward in half a gale of wind, will
understand what the pressure was like. But here it was the "Albatross" that by
her incomparable speed made her own wind.

To allow Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans to get back to their cabin the speed
had to be reduced. Inside the deckhouse the "Albatross" bore with her a perfectly
breathable atmosphere. To stand such driving the strength of the apparatus must
have been prodigious. The propellers spun round so swiftly that they seemed
immovable, and it was with irresistible power that they screwed themselves
through the air.

The last town that had been noticed was Astrakhan, situated at the north end
of the Caspian Sea. The Star of the Desert--it must have been a poet who so
called it--has now sunk from the first rank to the fifth or sixth. A momentary
glance was afforded at its old walls, with their useless battlements, the ancient


towers in the center of the city, the mosques and modern churches, the cathedral
with its five domes, gilded and dotted with stars as if it were a piece of the sky,
as they rose from the bank of the Volga, which here, as it joins the sea, is over a
mile in width.

Thenceforward the flight of the "Albatross" became quite a race through the
heights of the sky, as if she had been harnessed to one of those fabulous
hippogriffs which cleared a league at every sweep of the wing.

At ten o'clock in the morning, of the 4th of July the aeronef, heading
northwest, followed for a little the valley of the Volga. The steppes of the Don
and the Ural stretched away on each side of the river. Even if it had been
possible to get a glimpse of these vast territories there would have been no time
to count the towns and villages. In the evening the aeronef passed over Moscow
without saluting the flag on the Kremlin. In ten hours she had covered the twelve
hundred miles which separate Astrakhan from the ancient capital of all the
Russias.

From Moscow to St. Petersburg the railway line measures about seven
hundred and fifty miles. This was but a half-day's journey, and the "Albatross,"
as punctual as the mail, reached St. Petersburg and the banks of the Neva at two
o'clock in the morning.

Then came the Gulf of Finland, the Archipelago of Abo, the Baltic, Sweden
in the latitude of Stockholm, and Norway in the latitude of Christiania. Ten hours
only for these twelve hundred miles! Verily it might be thought that no human
power would henceforth be able to check the speed of the "Albatross," and as if
the resultant of her force of projection and the attraction of the earth would
maintain her in an unvarying trajectory round the globe.

But she did stop nevertheless, and that was over the famous fall of the
Rjukanfos in Norway. Gousta, whose summit dominates this wonderful region of
Tellermarken, stood in the west like a gigantic barrier apparently impassable.
And when the "Albatross" resumed her journey at full speed her head had been
tured to the south.

And during this extraordinary flight what was Frycollin doing? He remained
silent in a corner of his cabin, sleeping as well as he could, except at meal times.

Tapage then favored him with his company and amused himself at his
expense. "Eh! eh! my boy!" said he. "So you are not crying any more? Perhaps it
hurt you too much? That two hours hanging cured you of it? At our present rate,
what a splendid air-bath you might have for your rheumatics!"

"Tt seems to me we shall soon go to pieces!"

"Perhaps so; but we shall go so fast we shan't have time to fall! That is some
comfort!"


"Do you think so?"

"T do."

To tell the truth, and not to exaggerate like Tapage, it was only reasonable
that owing to the excessive speed the work of the suspensory screws should be
somewhat lessened. The "Albatross" glided on its bed of air like a Congreve
rocket.

"And shall we last long like that?" asked Frycollin.

"Long? Oh, no, only as long as we live!"

"Oh!" said the Negro, beginning his lamentations.

"Take care, Fry, take care! For, as they say in my country, the master may
send you to the seesaw!" And Frycollin gulped down his sobs as he gulped down
the meat which, in double doses, he was hastily swallowing.

Meanwhile Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans, who were not men to waste time
in wrangling when nothing could come of it, agreed upon doing something. It
was evident that escape was not to be thought of. But if it was impossible for
them to again set foot on the terrestrial globe, could they not make known to its
inhabitants what had become of them since their disappearance, and tell them by
whom they had been carried off, and provoke--how was not very clear--some
audacious attempt on the part of their friends to rescue them from Robur?

Communicate? But how? Should they follow the example of sailors in
distress and enclose in a bottle a document giving the place of shipwreck and
throw it into the sea? But here the sea was the atmosphere. The bottle would not
swim. And if it did not fall on somebody and crack his skull it might never be
found.

The colleagues were about to sacrifice one of the bottles on board when an
idea occurred to Uncle Prudent. He took snuff, as we know, and we may pardon
this fault in an American, who might do worse. And as a snuff-taker he
possessed a snuff-box, which was now empty. This box was made of aluminum.
If it was thrown overboard any honest citizen that found it would pick it up, and,
being an honest citizen, he would take it to the police-office, and there they
would open it and discover from the document what had become of the two
victims of Robur the Conqueror!

And this is what was done. The note was short, but it told all, and it gave the
address of the Weldon Institute, with a request that it might be forwarded. Then
Uncle Prudent folded up the note, shut it in the box, bound the box round with a
piece of worsted so as to keep it from opening it as it fell. And then all that had
to be done was to wait for a favorable opportunity.

During this marvelous flight over Europe it was not an easy thing to leave
the cabin and creep along the deck at the risk of being suddenly and secretly


blown away, and it would not do for the snuff-box to fall into the sea or a gulf or
a lake or a watercourse, for it would then perhaps be lost. At the same time it
was not impossible that the colleagues might in this way get into communication
with the habitable globe.

It was then growing daylight, and it seemed as though it would be better to
wait for the night and take advantage of a slackening speed or a halt to go out on
deck and drop the precious snuff-box into some town.

When all these points had been thought over and settled, the prisoners, found
they could not put their plan into execution--on that day, at all events--for the
"Albatross," after leaving Gousta, had kept her southerly course, which took her
over the North Sea, much to the consternation of the thousands of coasting craft
engaged in the English, Dutch, French, and Belgian trade. Unless the snuff-box
fell on the deck of one of these vessels there was every chance of its going to the
bottom of the sea, and Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans were obliged to wait for a
better opportunity. And, as we shall immediately see, an excellent chance was
soon to be offered them.

At ten o'clock that evening the "Albatross" reached the French coast near
Dunkirk. The night was rather dark. For a moment they could see the lighthouse
at Grisnez cross its electric beam with the lights from Dover on the other side of
the strait. Then the "Albatross" flew over the French territory at a mean height of
three thousand feet.

There was no diminution in her speed. She shot like a rocket over the towns
and villages so numerous in northern France. She was flying straight on to Paris,
and after Dunkirk came Doullens, Amiens, Creil, Saint Denis. She never left the
line; and about midnight she was over the "city of light," which merits its name
even when its inhabitants are asleep or ought to be.

By what strange whim was it that she was stopped over the city of Paris? We
do not know; but down she came till she was within a few hundred feet of the
ground. Robur then came out of his cabin, and the crew came on to the deck to
breathe the ambient air.

Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans took care not to miss such an excellent
opportunity. They left their deckhouse and walked off away from the others so as
to be ready at the propitious moment. It was important their action should not be
seen.

The "Albatross," like a huge coleopter, glided gently over the mighty city.
She took the line of the boulevards, then brilliantly lighted by the Edison lamps.
Up to her there floated the rumble of the vehicles as they drove along the streets,
and the roll of the trains on the numerous railways that converge into Paris. Then
she glided over the highest monuments as if she was going to knock the ball off


the Pantheon or the cross off the Invalides. She hovered over the two minarets of
the Trocadero and the metal tower of the Champ de Mars, where the enormous
reflector was inundating the whole capital with its electric rays.

This aerial promenade, this nocturnal loitering, lasted for about an hour. It
was a halt for breath before the voyage was resumed.

And probably Robur wished to give the Parisians the sight of a meteor quite
unforeseen by their astronomers. The lamps of the "Albatross" were turned on.
Two brilliant sheaves of light shot down and moved along over the squares, the
gardens, the palaces, the sixty thousand houses, and swept the space from one
horizon to the other.

Assuredly the "Albatross" was seen this time--and not only well seen but
heard, for Tom Turner brought out his trumpet and blew a rousing tarantaratara.

At this moment Uncle Prudent leant over the rail, opened his hand, and let
his snuff-box fall.

Immediately the "Albatross" shot upwards, and past her, higher still, there
mounted the noisy cheering of the crowd then thick on the boulevards--a hurrah
of stupefaction to greet the imaginary meteor.

The lamps of the aeronef were turned off, and the darkness and the silence
closed in around as the voyage was resumed at the rate of one hundred and
twenty miles an hour.

This was all that was to be seen of the French capital. At four o'clock in the
morning the "Albatross" had crossed the whole country obliquely; and so as to
lose no time in traversing the Alps or the Pyrenees, she flew over the face of
Provence to the cape of Antibes. At nine o'clock next morning the San Pietrini
assembled on the terrace of St. Peter at Rome were astounded to see her pass
over the eternal city. Two hours afterwards she crossed the Bay of Naples and
hovered for an instant over the fuliginous wreaths of Vesuvius. Then, after
cutting obliquely across the Mediterranean, in the early hours of the afternoon
she was signaled by the look-outs at La Goulette on the Tunisian coast.

After America, Asia! After Asia, Europe! More than eighteen thousand miles
had this wonderful machine accomplished in less than twenty-three clays!

And now she was off over the known and unknown regions of Africa!

It may be interesting to know what had happened to the famous snuff-box
after its fall?

It had fallen in the Rue de Rivoli, opposite No. 200, when the street was
deserted. In the morning it was picked up by an honest sweeper, who took it to
the prefecture of police. There it was at first supposed to be an infernal machine.
And it was untied, examined, and opened with care.

Suddenly a sort of explosion took place. It was a terrific sneeze on the part of


the inspector.

The document was then extracted from the snuff-box, and to the general
surprise, read as follows:

"Messrs. Prudent and Evans, president and secretary of the Weldon Institute,
Philadelphia, have been carried off in the aeronef Albatross belonging to Robur
the engineer."

"Please inform our friends and acquaintances."

"P. and P. E."

Thus was the strange phenomenon at last explained to the people of the two
worlds. Thus was peace given to the scientists of the numerous observatories on
the surface of the terrestrial globe.


Chapter XV


A SKIRMISH IN DAHOMEY


At this point in the circumnavigatory voyage of the "Albatross" it is only
natural that some such questions as the following should be asked. Who was this
Robur, of whom up to the present we know nothing but the name? Did he pass
his life in the air? Did his aeronef never rest? Had he not some retreat in some
inaccessible spot in which, if he had need of repose or revictualing, he could
betake himself? It would be very strange if it were not so. The most powerful
flyers have always an eyrie or nest somewhere.

And what was the engineer going to do with his prisoners? Was he going to
keep them in his power and condemn them to perpetual aviation? Or was he
going to take them on a trip over Africa, South America, Australasia, the Indian
Ocean, the Atlantic and the Pacific, to convince them against their will, and then
dismiss them with, "And now gentlemen, I hope you will believe a little more in
heavier than air?"

To these questions, it is now impossible to reply. They are the secrets of the
future. Perhaps the answers will be revealed. Anyhow the bird-like Robur was
not seeking his nest on the northern frontier of Africa. By the end of the day he
had traversed Tunis from Cape Bon to Cape Carthage, sometimes hovering, and
sometimes darting along at top speed. Soon he reached the interior, and flew
down the beautiful valley of Medjeida above its yellow stream hidden under its
luxuriant bushes of cactus and oleander; and scared away the hundreds of parrots
that perch on the telegraph wires and seem to wait for the messages to pass to
bear them away beneath their wings.

Two hours after sunset the helm was put up and the "Albatross" bore off to
the southeast; and on the morrow, after clearing the Tell Mountains, she saw the
rising of the morning star over the sands of the Sahara.

On the 30th of July there was seen from the aeronef the little village of
Geryville, founded like Laghouat on the frontier of the desert to facilitate the
future conquest of Kabylia. Next, not without difficulty, the peaks of Stillero
were passed against a somewhat boisterous wind. Then the desert was crossed,
sometimes leisurely over the Ksars or green oases, sometimes at terrific speed
that far outstripped the flight of the vultures. Often the crew had to fire into the
flocks of these birds which, a dozen or so at a time, fearlessly hurled them selves
on to the aeronef to the extreme terror of Frycollin.


But if the vultures could only reply with cries and blows of beaks and talons,
the natives, in no way less savage, were not sparing of their musket-shots,
particularly when crossing the Mountain of Sel, whose green and violet slope
bore its cape of white. Then the "Albatross" was at last over the grand Sahara;
and at once she rose into the higher zones so as to escape from a simoom which
was sweeping a wave of ruddy sand along the surface of the ground like a bore
on the surface of the sea.

Then the desolate tablelands of Chetka scattered their ballast in blackish
waves up to the fresh and verdant valley of Ain-Massin. It is difficult to conceive
the variety of the territories which could be seen at one view. To the green hills
covered with trees and shrubs there succeeded long gray undulations draped like
the folds of an Arab burnous and broken in picturesque masses. In the distance
could be seen the wadys with their torrential waters, their forests of palm-trees,
and blocks of small houses grouped on a hill around a mosque, among them
Metlili, where there vegetates a religious chief, the grand marabout Sidi Chick.

Before night several hundred miles had been accomplished above a flattish
country ridged occasionally with large sandhills. If the "Albatross" had halted,
she would have come to the earth in the depths of the Wargla oasis hidden
beneath an immense forest of palm-trees. The town was clearly enough
displayed with its three distinct quarters, the ancient palace of the Sultan, a kind
of fortified Kasbah, houses of brick which had been left to the sun to bake, and
artesian wells dug in the valley--where the aeronef could have renewed her water
supply. But, thanks to her extraordinary speed, the waters of the Hydaspes taken
in the vale of Cashmere still filled her tanks in the center of the African desert.

Was the "Albatross" seen by the Arabs, the Mozabites, and the Negroes who
share amongst them the town of Wargla? Certainly, for she was saluted with
many hundred gunshot, and the bullets fell back before they reached her.

Then came the night, that silent night in the desert of which Felicien David
has so poetically told us the secrets.

During the following hours the course lay southwesterly, cutting across the
routes of El Golea, one of which was explored in 1859 by the intrepid Duveyrier.

The darkness was profound. Nothing could be seen of the Trans-Saharan
Railway constructing on the plans of Duponchel--a long ribbon of iron destined
to bind together Algiers and Timbuktu by way of Laghouat and Gardaia, and
destined eventually to run down into the Gulf of Guinea.

Then the "Albatross" entered the equatorial region below the tropic of
Cancer. Six hundred miles from the northern frontier of the Sahara she crossed
the route on which Major Laing met his, death in 1846, and crossed the road of
the caravans from Morocco to the Sudan, and that part of the desert swept by the


Tuaregs, where could be heard what is called "the song of the sand," a soft and
plaintive murmur that seems to escape from the ground.

Only one thing happened. A cloud of locusts came flying along, and there
fell such a cargo of them on board as to threaten to sink the ship. But all hands
set to work to clear the deck, and the locusts were thrown over except a few
hundred kept by Tapage for his larder. And he served them up in so succulent a
fashion that Frycollin forgot for the moment his perpetual trances and said,
"these are as good as prawns."

The aeronef was then eleven hundred miles from the Wargla oasis and almost
on the northern frontier of the Sudan. About two o'clock in the afternoon a city
appeared in the bend of a large river. The river was the Niger. The city was
Timbuktu.

If, up to then, this African Mecca had only been visited by the travelers of
the ancient world Batouta, Khazan, Imbert, Mungo Park, Adams, Laing, Caillé,
Barth, Lenz, on that day by a most singular chance the two Americans could
boast of having seen, heard, and smelt it, on their return to America--if they ever
got back there.

Of having seen it, because their view included the whole triangle of three or
four miles in circumference; of having heard it, because the day was one of some
rejoicing and the noise was terrible; of having smelt it, because the olfactory
nerve could not but be very disagreeably affected by the odors of the Youbou-
Kamo square, where the meatmarket stands close to the palace of the ancient
Somai kings.

The engineer had no notion of allowing the president and secretary of the
Weldon Institute to be ignorant that they had the honor of contemplating the
Queen of the Sudan, now in the power of the Tuaregs of Taganet.

"Gentlemen, Timbuktu!" he said, in the same tone as twelve days before he
had said, "Gentlemen, India!" Then he continued, "Timbuktu is an important city
of from twelve to thirteen thousand inhabitants, formerly illustrious in science
and art. Perhaps you would like to stay there for a day or two?"

Such a proposal could only have been made ironically. "But," continued he,
"it would be dangerous among the Negroes, Berbers, and Foullanes who occupy,
it--particularly as our arrival in an aeronef might prejudice them against you."

"Sir," said Phil Evans, in the same tone, "for the pleasure of leaving you we
would willingly risk an unpleasant reception from the natives. Prison for prison,
we would rather be in Timbuktu than on the "Albatross."

"That is a matter of taste," answered the engineer. "Anyhow, I shall not try
the adventure, for I am responsible for the safety of the guests who do me the
honor to travel with me."


"And so," said Uncle Prudent, explosively, "you are not content with being
our jailer, but you insult us."

"Oh! a little irony, that is all!"

"Are there any weapons on board?"

"Oh, quite an arsenal."

"Two revolvers will do, if I hold one and you the other."

"A duel!" exclaimed Robur, "a duel, which would perhaps cause the death of
one of us."

"Which certainly would cause it."

"Well! No, Mr. President of the Weldon Institute, I very much prefer keeping
you alive."

"To be sure of living yourself. That is wise."

"Wise or not, it suits me. You are at liberty to think as you like, and to
complain to those who have the power to help you--if you can."

"And that we have done, Mr. Robur."

"Indeed!"

"Was it so difficult when we were crossing the inhabited part of Europe to
drop a letter overboard?"

"Did you do that?" said Robur, in a paroxysm of rage.

"And if we have done it?"

"If you have done it--you deserve--"

"What, sir?"

"To follow your letter overboard."

"Throw us over, then. We did do it."

Robur stepped towards them. At a gesture from him Tom Turner and some of
the crew ran up. The engineer was seriously tempted to put his threat into
execution, and, fearful perhaps of yielding to it, he precipitately rushed into his
cabin.

"Good!" exclaimed Phil Evans.

"And what he will dare not do," said Uncle Prudent, "I Will do! Yes, I Will
do!"

At the moment the population of Timbuktu were crowding onto the squares
and roads and the terraces built like amphitheaters. In the rich quarters of
Sankere and Sarahama, as in the miserable huts at Raguidi, the priests from the
minarets were thundering their loudest maledictions against the aerial monster.
These were more harmless than the rifle-bullets; though assuredly, if the aeronef
had come to earth she would have certainly been torn to pieces.

For some miles noisy flocks of storks, francolins, and ibises escorted the
"Albatross" and tried to race her, but in her rapid flight she soon distanced them.


The evening came. The air was troubled by the roarings of the numerous
herds of elephants and buffaloes which wander over this land, whose fertility is
simply marvelous. For forty-eight hours the whole of the region between the
prime meridian and the second degree, in the bend of the Niger, was viewed
from the "Albatross."

If a geographer had only such an apparatus at his command, with what
facility could he map the country, note the elevations, fix the courses of the
rivers and their affluents, and determine the positions of the towns and villages!
There would then be no huge blanks on the map of Africa, no dotted lines, no
vague designations which are the despair of cartographers.

In the morning of the 11th the "Albatross" crossed the mountains of northern
Guinea, between the Sudan and the gulf which bears their name. On the horizon
was the confused outline of the Kong mountains in the kingdom of Dahomey.

Since the departure from Timbuktu Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans noticed
that the course had been due south. If that direction was persisted in they would
cross the equator in six more degrees. The "Albatross" would then abandon the
continents and fly not over the Bering Sea, or the Caspian Sea, or the North Sea,
or the Mediterranean, but over the Atlantic Ocean.

This look-out was not particularly pleasing to the two friends, whose chances
of escape had sunk to below zero. But the "Albatross" had slackened speed as
though hesitating to leave Africa behind. Was Robur thinking of going back?
No; but his attention had been particularly attracted to the country which he was
then crossing.

We know--and he knew--that the kingdom of Dahomey is one of the most
powerful on the West Coast of Africa. Strong enough to hold its own with its
neighbor Ashantee, its area is somewhat small, being contained within three
hundred and sixty leagues from north to south, and one hundred and eighty from
east to west. But its population numbers some seven or eight hundred thousand,
including the neighboring independent territories of Whydah and Ardrah.

If Dahomey is not a large country, it is often talked about. It is celebrated for
the frightful cruelties which signalize its annual festivals, and by its human
sacrifices--fearful hecatombs intended to honor the sovereign it has lost and the
sovereign who has succeeded him. It is even a matter of politeness when the
King of Dahomey receives a visit from some high personage or some foreign
ambassador to give him a surprise present of a dozen heads, cut off in his honor
by the minister of justice, the "minghan," who is wonderfully skillful in that
branch of his duties.

When the "Albatross" came flying over Dahomey, the old King Bahadou had
just died, and the whole population was proceeding to the enthronization of his


successor. Hence there was great agitation all over the country, and it did not
escape Robur that everybody was on the move.

Long lines of Dahomians were hurrying along the roads from the country
into the capital, Abomey. Well kept roads radiating among vast plains clothed
with giant trees, immense fields of manioc, magnificent forests of palms, cocoa-
trees, mimosas, orange-trees, mango-trees--such was the country whose
perfumes mounted to the "Albatross," while many parrots and cardinals swarmed
among the trees.

The engineer, leaning over the rail, seemed deep in thought, and exchanged
but a few words with Tom Turner. It did not look as though the "Albatross" had
attracted the attention of those moving masses, which were often invisible under
the impenetrable roof of trees. This was doubtless due to her keeping at a good
altitude amid a bank of light cloud.

About eleven o'clock in the morning the capital was sighted, surrounded by
its walls, defended by a fosse measuring twelve miles round, with wide, regular
streets on the flat plain, and a large square on the northern side occupied by the
king's palace. This huge collection of buildings is commanded by a terrace not
far from the place of sacrifice. During the festival days it is from this high
terrace that they throw the prisoners tied up in wicker baskets, and it can be
imagined with what fury these unhappy wretches are cut in pieces.

In one of the courtyards which divide the king's palace there were drawn up
four thousand warriors, one of the contigents of the royal army--and not the least
courageous one. If it is doubtful if there are any Amazons an the river of that
name, there is no doubt of there being Amazons at Dahomey. Some have a blue
shirt with a blue or red scarf, with white-and-blue striped trousers and a white
cap; others, the elephant-huntresses, have a heavy carbine, a short-bladed dagger,
and two antelope horns fixed to their heads by a band of iron. The artillery-
women have a blue-and-red tunic, and, as weapons, blunderbusses and old cast
cannons; and another brigade, consisting of vestal virgins, pure as Diana, have
blue tunics and white trousers. If we add to these Amazons, five or six thousand
men in cotton drawers and shirts, with a knotted tuft to increase their stature, we
shall have passed in review the Dahomian army.

Abomey on this day was deserted. The sovereign, the royal family, the
masculine and feminine army, and the population had all gone out of the capital
to a vast plain a few miles away surrounded by magnificent forests.

On this plain the recognition of the new king was to take place. Here it was
that thousands of prisoners taken during recent razzias were to be immolated in
his honor.

It was about two o'clock when the "Albatross" arrived over the plain and


began to descend among the clouds which still hid her from the Dahomians.

There were sixteen thousand people at least come from all parts of the
kingdom, from Whydah, and Kerapay, and Ardrah, and Tombory, and the most
distant villages.

The new king--a sturdy fellow named Bou-Nadi--some five-and-twenty
years old, was seated on a hillock shaded by a group of wide-branched trees.
Before him stood his male army, his Amazons, and his people.

At the foot of the mound fifty musicians were playing on their barbarous
instruments, elephants’ tusks giving forth a husky note, deerskin drums,
calabashes, guitars, bells struck with an iron clapper, and bamboo flutes, whose
shrill whistle was heard over all. Every other second came discharges of guns
and blunderbusses, discharges of cannons with the carriages jumping so as to
imperil the lives of the artillery-women, and a general uproar so intense that
even the thunder would be unheard amidst it.

In one corner of the plain, under a guard of soldiers, were grouped the
prisoners destined to accompany the defunct king into the other world. At the
obsequies of Ghozo, the father of Bahadou, his son had dispatched three
thousand, and Bou-Nadi could not do less than his predecessor. For an hour there
was a Series of discourses, harangues, palavers and dances, executed not only by
professionals, but by the Amazons, who displayed much martial grace.

But the time for the hecatomb was approaching. Robur, who knew the
customs of Dahomey, did not lose sight of the men, women, and children
reserved for butchery.

The minghan was standing at the foot of the hillock. He was brandishing his
executioner's sword, with its curved blade surmounted by a metal bird, whose
weight rendered the cut more certain.

This time he was not alone. He could not have performed the task. Near him
were grouped a hundred executioners, all accustomed to cut off heads at one
blow.

The "Albatross" came slowly down in an oblique direction. Soon she
emerged from the bed of clouds which hid her till she was within three hundred
feet of the ground, and for the first time she was visible from below.

Contrary to what had hitherto happened, the savages saw in her a celestial
being come to render homage to King Bahadou. The enthusiasm was
indescribable, the shouts were interminable, the prayers were terrific--prayers
addressed to this supernatural hippogriff, which "had doubtless come to" take the
king's body to the higher regions of the Dahomian heaven. And now the first
head fell under the minghan's sword, and the prisoners were led up in hundreds
before the horrible executioners.


Suddenly a gun was fired from the "Albatross." The minister of justice fell
dead on his face!

"Well aimed, Tom!" said Robur,

His comrades, armed as he was, stood ready to fire when the order was
given.

But a change came over the crowd below. They had understood. The winged
monster was not a friendly spirit, it was a hostile spirit. And after the fall of the
minghan loud shouts for revenge arose on all sides. Almost immediately a
fusillade resounded over the plain.

These menaces did not prevent the "Albatross" from descending boldly to
within a hundred and fifty feet of the ground. Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans,
whatever were their feelings towards Robur, could not help joining him in such a
work of humanity.

"Let us free the prisoners!" they shouted.

"That is what I am going to do!" said the engineer.

And the magazine rifles of the "Albatross" in the hands of the colleagues, as
in the hands of the crew, began to rain down the bullets, of which not one was
lost in the masses below. And the little gun shot forth its shrapnel, which really
did marvels.

The prisoners, although they did not understand how the help had come to
them, broke their bonds, while the soldiers were firing at the aeronef. The stern
screw was shot through by a bullet, and a few holes were made in the hull.
Frycollin, crouching in his cabin, received a graze from a bullet that came
through the deckhouse.

"Ah! They will have them!" said Tom Turner. And, rushing to the magazine,
he returned with a dozen dynamite cartridges, which he distributed to the men.
At a sign from Robur, these cartridges were fired at the hillock, and as they
reached the ground exploded like so many small shells.

The king and his court and army and people were stricken with fear at the
turn things had taken. They fled under the trees, while the prisoners ran off
without anybody thinking of pursuing them.

In this way was the festival interfered with. And in this way did Uncle
Prudent and, Phil Evans recognize the power of the aeronef and the services it
could render to humanity.

Soon the "Albatross" rose again to a moderate height, and passing over
Whydah lost to view this savage coast which the southwest wind hems round
with an inaccessible surf. And she flew out over the Atlantic.


Chapter XVI


OVER THE ATLANTIC


Yes, the Atlantic! The fears of the two colleagues were realized; but it did
not seem as though Robur had the least anxiety about venturing over this vast
ocean. Both he and his men seemed quite unconcerned about it and had gone
back to their stations.

Whither was the "Albatross" bound? Was she going more than round the
world as Robur had said? Even if she were, the voyage must end somewhere.
That Robur spent his life in the air on board the aeronef and never came to the
ground was impossible. How could he make up his stock of provisions and the
materials required for working his machines? He must have some retreat, some
harbor of refuge--in some unknown and inaccessible spot where the "Albatross"
could revictual. That he had broken off all connections with the inhabitants of
the land might be true, but with every point on the surface of the earth, certainly
not.

That being the case, where was this point? How had the engineer come to
choose it? Was he expected by a little colony of which he was the chief? Could
he there find a new crew?

What means had he that he should be able to build so costly a vessel as the
"Albatross" and keep her building secret? It is true his living was not expensive.
But, finally, who was this Robur? Where did he come from? What had been his
history? Here were riddles impossible to solve; and Robur was not the man to
assist willingly in their solution.

It is not to be wondered at that these insoluble problems drove the colleagues
almost to frenzy. To find themselves whipped off into the unknown without
knowing what the end might be doubting even if the adventure would end,
sentenced to perpetual aviation, was this not enough to drive the President and
secretary of the Weldon Institute to extremities?

Meanwhile the "Albatross" drove along above the Atlantic, and in the
morning when the sun rose there was nothing to be seen but the circular line
where earth met sky. Not a spot of land was insight in this huge field of vision.
Africa had vanished beneath the northern horizon.

When Frycollin ventured out of his cabin and saw all this water beneath him,
fear took possession of him.

Of the hundred and forty-five million square miles of which the area of the


world's waters consists, the Atlantic claims about a quarter; and it seemed as
though the engineer was in no hurry to cross it. There was now no going at full
speed, none of the hundred and twenty miles an hour at which the "Albatross"
had flown over Europe. Here, where the southwest winds prevail, the wind was
ahead of them, and though it was not very strong, it would not do to defy it and
the "Albatross" was sent along at a moderate speed, which, however, easily
outstripped that of the fastest mail-boat.

On the 13th of July she crossed the line, and the fact was duly announced to
the crew. It was then that Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans ascertained that they
were bound for the southern hemisphere. The crossing of the line took place
without any of the Neptunian ceremonies that still linger on certain ships. Tapage
was the only one to mark the event, and he did so by pouring a pint of water
down Frycollin's neck.

On the 18th of July, when beyond the tropic of Capricorn, another
phenomenon was noticed, which would have been somewhat alarming to a ship
on the sea. A strange succession of luminous waves widened out over the surface
of the ocean with a speed estimated at quite sixty miles an hour. The waves ran
along at about eight feet from one another, tracing two furrows of light. As night
fell a bright reflection rose even to the "Albatross," so that she might have been
taken for a flaming aerolite. Never before had Robur sailed on a sea of fire--fire
without heat--which there was no need to flee from as it mounted upwards into
the sky.

The cause of this light must have been electricity; it could not be attributed to
a bank of fish spawn, nor to a crowd of those animalculae that give
phosphorescence to the sea, and this showed that the electrical tension of the
atmosphere was considerable.

In the morning an ordinary ship would probably have been lost. But the
"Albatross" played with the winds and waves like the powerful bird whose name
she bore. If she did not walk on their surface like the petrels, she could like the
eagles find calm and sunshine in the higher zones.

They had now passed the forty-seventh parallel. The day was but little over
seven hours long, and would become even less as they approached the Pole.

About one o'clock in the afternoon the "Albatross" was floating along in a
lower current than usual, about a hundred feet from the level of the sea. The air
was calm, but in certain parts of the sky were thick black clouds, massed in
mountains, on their upper surface, and ruled off below by a sharp horizontal line.
From these clouds a few lengthy protuberances escaped, and their points as they
fell seemed to draw up hills of foaming water to meet them.

Suddenly the water shot up in the form of a gigantic hourglass, and the


"Albatross" was enveloped in the eddy of an enormous waterspout, while twenty
others, black as ink, raged around her. Fortunately the gyratory movement of the
water was opposite to that of the suspensory screws, otherwise the aeronef
would have been hurled into the sea. But she began to spin round on herself with
frightful rapidity. The danger was immense, and perhaps impossible to escape,
for the engineer could not get through the spout which sucked him back in
defiance of his propellers. The men, thrown to the ends of the deck by
centrifugal force, were grasping the rail to save themselves from being shot off.

"Keep cool!" shouted Robur.

They wanted all their coolness, and their patience, too. Uncle Prudent and
Phil Evans, who had just come out of their cabin, were hurled back at the risk of
flying overboard. As she spun the "Albatross" was carried along by the spout,
which pirouetted along the waves with a speed enough to make the helices
jealous. And if she escaped from the spout she might be caught by another, and
jerked to pieces with the shock.

"Get the gun ready!" said Robur.

The order was given to Tom Tumer, who was crouching behind the swivel
amidships where the effect of the centrifugal force was least felt. He understood.
In a moment he had opened the breech and slipped a cartridge from the
ammunition-box at hand. The gun went off, and the waterspouts collapsed, and
with them vanished the platform of cloud they seemed to bear above them.

"Nothing broken on board?" asked Robur.

"No," answered Tom Turner. "But we don't want to have another game of
humming-top like that!"

For ten minutes or so the "Albatross" had been in extreme peril. Had it not
been for her extraordinary strength of build she would have been lost.

During this passage of the Atlantic many were the hours whose monotony
was unbroken by any phenomenon whatever. The days grew shorter and shorter,
and the cold became keen. Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans saw little of Robur.
Seated in his cabin, the engineer was busy laying out his course and marking it
on his maps, taking his observations whenever he could, recording the readings
of his barometers, thermometers, and chronometers, and making full entries in
his log-book.

The colleagues wrapped themselves well up and eagerly watched for the
sight of land to the southward. At Uncle Prudent's request Frycollin tried to
pump the cook as to whither the engineer was bound, but what reliance could be
placed on the information given by this Gascon? Sometimes Robur was an ex-
minister of the Argentine Republic, sometimes a lord of the Admiralty,
sometimes an ex-President of the United States, sometimes a Spanish general


temporarily retired, sometimes a Viceroy of the Indies who had sought a more
elevated position in the air. Sometimes he possessed millions, thanks to
successful razzias in the aeronef, and he had been proclaimed for piracy.
Sometimes he had been ruined by making the aeronef, and had been forced to fly
aloft to escape from his creditors. As to knowing if he were going to stop
anywhere, no! But if he thought of going to the moon, and found there a
convenient anchorage, he would anchor there! "Eh! Fry! My boy! That would
just suit you to see what was going on up there."

"T shall not go! I refuse!" said the Negro, who took all these things seriously.

"And why, Fry, why? You might get married to some pretty bouncing
Lunarian!"

Frycollin reported this conversation to his master, who saw it was evident
that nothing was to be learnt about Robur. And so he thought still more of how
he could have his revenge on him.

"Phil," said he one day, "is it quite certain that escape is impossible?"

"Impossible."

"Be it so! But a man is always his own property; and if necessary, by
sacrificing his life--"

"If we are to make that sacrifice," said Phil Evans, "the sooner the better. It is
almost time to end this. Where is the "Albatross" going? Here we are flying
obliquely over the Atlantic, and if we keep on we shall get to the coast of
Patagonia or Tierra del Fuego. And what are we to do then? Get into the Pacific,
or go to the continent at the South Pole? Everything is possible with this Robur.
We shall be lost in the end. It is thus a case of legitimate self-defence, and if we
must perish--"

"Which we shall not do," answered Uncle Prudent, "without being avenged,
without annihilating this machine and all she carries."

The colleagues had reached a stage of impotent fury, and were prepared to
sacrifice themselves if they could only destroy the inventor and his secret. A few
months only would then be the life of this prodigious aeronef, of whose
superiority in aerial locomotion they had such convincing proofs! The idea took
such hold of them that they thought of nothing else but how to put it into
execution. And how? By seizing on some of the explosives on board and simply
blowing her up. But could they get at the magazines?

Fortunately for them, Frycollin had no suspicion of their scheme. At the
thought of the "Albatross" exploding in midair, he would not have shrunk from
betraying his master.

It was on the 23rd of July that the land reappeared in the southwest near
Cape Virgins at the entrance of the Straits of Magellan. Under the fifty-second


parallel at this time of year the night was eighteen hours long and the
temperature was six below freezing.

At first the "Albatross," instead of keeping on to the south, followed the
windings of the coast as if to enter the Pacific. After passing Lomas Bay, leaving
Mount Gregory to the north and the Brecknocks to the west, they sighted Puerto
Arena, a small Chilean village, at the moment the churchbells were in full swing;
and a few hours later they were over the old settlement at Port Famine.

If the Patagonians, whose fires could be seen occasionally, were really above
the average in stature, the passengers in the aeronef were unable to say, for to
them they seemed to be dwarfs. But what a magnificent landscape opened
around during these short hours of the southern day! Rugged mountains, peaks
eternally capped with snow, with thick forests rising on their flanks, inland seas,
bays deep set amid the peninsulas, and islands of the Archipelago. Clarence
Island, Dawson Island, and the Land of Desolation, straits and channels, capes
and promontories, all in inextricable confusion, and bound by the ice in one solid
mass from Cape Forward, the most southerly point of the American continent, to
Cape Horn the most southerly point of the New World.

When she reached Fort Famine the "Albatross" resumed her course to the
south. Passing between Mount Tam on the Brunswick Peninsula and Mount
Graves, she steered for Mount Sarmiento, an enormous peak wrapped in snow,
which commands the Straits of Magellan, rising six thousand four hundred feet
from the sea. And now they were over the land of the Fuegians, Tierra del
Fuego, the land of fire. Six months later, in the height of summer, with days from
fifteen to sixteen hours long, how beautiful and fertile would most of this
country be, particularly in its northern portion! Then, all around would be seen
valleys and pasturages that could form the feeding-grounds of thousands of
animals; then would appear virgin forests, gigantic trees-birches, beeches, ash-
trees, cypresses, tree-ferns--and broad plains overrun by herds of guanacos,
vicunas, and ostriches. Now there were armies of penguins and myriads of birds;
and, when the "Albatross" turned on her electric lamps the guillemots, ducks,
and geese came crowding on board enough to fill Tapage's larder a hundred
times and more.

Here was work for the cook, who knew how to bring out the flavor of the
game and keep down its peculiar oiliness. And here was work for Frycollin in
plucking dozen after dozen of such interesting feathered friends.

That day, as the sun was setting about three o'clock in the afternoon, there
appeared in sight a large lake framed in a border of superb forest. The lake was
completely frozen over, and a few natives with long snowshoes on their feet
were swiftly gliding over it.


At the sight of the "Albatross," the Fuegians, overwhelmed with terror--
scattered in all directions, and when they could not get away they hid
themselves, taking, like the animals, to the holes in the ground.

The "Albatross" still held her southerly course, crossing the Beagle Channel,
and Navarin Island and Wollaston Island, on the shores of the Pacific. Then,
having accomplished 4,700 miles since she left Dahomey, she passed the last
islands of the Magellanic archipelago, whose most southerly outpost, lashed by
the everlasting surf, is the terrible Cape Horn.


Chapter XVII


THE SHIPWRECKED CREW


Next day was the 24th of July; and the 24th of July in the southern
hemisphere corresponds to the 24th of January in the northern. The fifty-sixth
degree of latitude had been left behind. The similar parallel in northern Europe
runs through Edinburgh.

The thermometer kept steadily below freezing, so that the machinery was
called upon to furnish a little artificial heat in the cabins. Although the days
begin to lengthen after the 21st day of June in the southern hemisphere, yet the
advance of the "Albatross" towards the Pole more than neutralized this increase,
and consequently the daylight became very short. There was thus very little to be
seen. At night time the cold became very keen; but as there was no scarcity of
clothing on board, the colleagues, well wrapped up, remained a good deal on
deck thinking over their plans of escape, and watching for an opportunity. Little
was seen of Robur; since the high words that had been exchanged in the
Timbuktu country, the engineer had left off speaking to his prisoners. Frycollin
seldom came out of the cook-house, where Tapage treated him most hospitably,
on condition that he acted as his assistant. This position was not without its
advantages, and the Negro, with his master's permission, very willingly accepted
it. Shut up in the galley, he saw nothing of what was passing outside, and might
even consider himself beyond the reach of danger. He was, in fact, very like the
ostrich, not only in his stomach, but in his folly.

But whither went the "Albatross?" Was she in mid-winter bound for the
southern seas or continents round the Pole? In this icy atmosphere, even granting
that the elements of the batteries were unaffected by such frost, would not all the
crew succumb to a horrible death from the cold? That Robur should attempt to
cross the Pole in the warm season was bad enough, but to attempt such a thing in
the depth of the winter night would be the act of a madman.

Thus reasoned the President and Secretary of the Weldon Institute, now they
had been brought to the end of the continent of the New World, which is still
America, although it does not belong to the United States.

What was this intractable Robur going to do? Had not the time arrived for
them to end the voyage by blowing up the ship?

It was noticed that during the 24th of July the engineer had frequent
consultations with his mate. He and Tom Turner kept constant watch on the


barometer--not so much to keep themselves informed of the height at which they
were traveling as to be on the look-out for a change in the weather. Evidently
some indications had been observed of which it was necessary to make careful
note.

Uncle Prudent also remarked that Robur had been taking stock of the
provisions and stores, and everything seemed to show that he was contemplating
turning back.

"Turning back!" said Phil Evans. "But where to?"

"Where he can reprovision the ship," said Uncle Prudent.

"That ought to be in some lonely island in the Pacific with a colony of
scoundrels worthy of their chief."

"That is what I think. I fancy he is going west, and with the speed he can get
up it would not take, him long to get home."

"But we should not be able to put our plan into execution. If we get there--"

"We shall not get there!"

The colleagues had partly guessed the engineer's intentions. During the day it
became no longer doubtful that when the "Albatross" reached the confines of the
Antarctic Sea her course was to be changed. When the ice has formed about
Cape Horn the lower regions of the Pacific are covered with icefields and
icebergs. The floes then form an impenetrable barrier to the strongest ships and
the boldest navigators. Of course, by increasing the speed of her wings the
"Albatross" could clear the mountains of ice accumulated on the ocean as she
could the mountains of earth on the polar continent--if it is a continent that forms
the cap of the southern pole. But would she attempt it in the middle of the polar
night, in an atmosphere of sixty below freezing?

After she had advanced about a hundred miles to the south the "Albatross"
headed westerly, as if for some unknown island of the Pacific. Beneath her
stretched the liquid plain between Asia and America. The waters now had
assumed that singular color which has earned for them the name of the Milky
Sea. In the half shadow, which the enfeebled rays of the sun were unable to
dissipate, the surface of the Pacific was a milky white. It seemed like a vast
snowfield, whose undulations were imperceptible at such a height. If the sea had
been solidified by the cold, and converted into an immense icefield, its aspect
could not have been much different. They knew that the phenomenon was
produced by myriads of luminous particles of phosphorescent corpuscles; but it
was surprising to come across such an opalescent mass beyond the limits of the
Indian Ocean.

Suddenly the barometer fell after keeping somewhat high during the earlier
hours of the day. Evidently the indications were such as a shipmaster might feel


anxious at, though the master of an aeronef might despise them. There was every
sign that a terrible storm had recently raged in the Pacific.

It was one o'clock in the afternoon when Tom Turner came up to the engineer
and said, "Do you see that black spot on the horizon, sir--there away to due north
of us? That is not a rock?"

"No, Tom; there is no land out there."

"Then it must be a ship or a boat."

Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans, who were in the bow, looked in the direction
pointed out by the mate.

Robur asked for the glass and attentively observed the object.

"It is a boat," said he, "and there are some men in it."

"Shipwrecked?" asked Tom.

"Yes! They have had to abandon their ship, and, knowing nothing of the
nearest land, are perhaps dying of hunger and thirst! Well, it shall not be said that
the "Albatross" did not come to their help!"

The orders were given, and the aeronef began to sink towards the sea. At
three hundred yards from it the descent was stopped, and the propellers drove
ahead full speed towards the north.

It was a boat. Her sail flapped against the mast as she rose and fell on the
waves. There was no wind, and she was making no progress. Doubtless there
was no one on board with strength enough left to work the oars. In the boat were
five men asleep or helpless, if they were not dead.

The "Albatross" had arrived above them, and slowly descended. On the
boat's stern was the name of the ship to which she belonged--the "Jeannette" of
Nantes.

"Hallo, there!" shouted Turner, loud enough for the men to hear, for the boat
was only eighty feet below him.

There was no answer. "Fire a gun!" said Robur.

The gun was fired and the report rang out over the sea.

One of the men looked up feebly. His eyes were haggard and his face was
that of a skeleton. As he caught sight of the "Albatross" he made a gesture as of
fear.

"Don't be afraid," said Robur in French, "we have come to help you. Who are
you?"

"We belong to the barque "Jeannette," and I am the mate. We left her a
fortnight ago as she was sinking. We have no water and no food."

The four other men had now sat up. Wan and exhausted, in a terrible state of
emaciation, they lifted their hands towards the "Albatross."

"Look-out!" shouted Robur.


A line was let down, and a pail of fresh water was lowered into the boat. The
men snatched at it and drank it with an eagerness awful to see.

"Bread, bread!" they exclaimed.

Immediately a basket with some food and five pints of coffee descended
towards them. The mate with difficulty restrained them in their ravenousness.

"Where are we?" asked the mate at last.

"Fifty miles from the Chili coast and the Chonos Archipelago," answered
Robur.

"Thanks. But we are becalmed, and--?"

"We are going to tow you."

"Who are you?"

"People who are glad to be of assistance to you," said Robur.

The mate understood that the incognito was to be respected. But had the
flying machine sufficient power to tow them through the water?

Yes; and the boat, attached to a hundred feet of rope, began to move off
towards the east. At ten o'clock at night the land was sighted--or rather they
could see the lights which indicated its position. This rescue from the sky had
come just in time for the survivors of the "Jeannette," and they had good reason
to believe it miraculous.

When they had been taken to the mouth of the channel leading among the
Chonos Islands, Robur shouted to them to cast off the tow-line. This, with many
a blessing to those who had saved them, they did, and the "Albatross" headed out
to the offing.

Certainly there was some good in this aeronef, which could thus help those
who were lost at sea! What balloon, perfect as it might be, would be able to
perform such a service? And between themselves Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans
could not but admire it, although they were quite disposed to deny the evidence
of their senses.


Chapter XVIII


OVER THE VOLCANO


The sea was as rough as ever, and the symptoms became alarming. The
barometer fell several millimeters. The wind came in violent gusts, and then for
a moment or so failed altogether. Under such circumstances a sailing vessel
would have had to reef in her topsails and her foresail. Everything showed that
the wind was rising in the northwest. The storm-glass became much troubled and
its movements were most disquieting.

At one o'clock in the morning the wind came on again with extreme
violence. Although the aeronef was going right in its teeth she was still making
progress at a rate of from twelve to fifteen miles an hour. But that was the utmost
she could do.

Evidently preparations must be made for a cyclone, a very rare occurrence in
these latitudes. Whether it be called a hurricane, as in the Atlantic, a typhoon, as
in Chinese waters a simoom, as in the Sahara, or a tornado, as on the western
coast, such a storm is always a gyratory one, and most dangerous for any ship
caught in the current which increases from the circumference to the center, and
has only one spot of calm, the middle of the vortex.

Robur knew this. He also knew it was best to escape from the cyclone and
get beyond its zone of attraction by ascending to the higher strata. Up to then he
had always succeeded in doing this, but now he had not an hour, perhaps not a
minute, to lose.

In fact the violence of the wind sensibly increased. The crests of the waves
were swept off as they rose and blown into white dust on the surface of the sea.
It was manifest that the cyclone was advancing with fearful velocity straight
towards the regions of the pole.

"Higher!" said Robur.

"Higher it is," said Tom Tumor.

An extreme ascensional power was communicated to the aeronef, and she
shot up slantingly as if she was traveling on a plane sloping downwards from the
southwest. Suddenly the barometer fell more than a dozen millimeters and the
"Albatross" paused in her ascent.

What was the cause of the stoppage? Evidently she was pulled back by the
air; some formidable current had diminished the resistance to the screws. When
a steamer travels upstream more work is got out of her screw than when the


water is running between the blades. The recoil is then considerable, and may
perhaps be as great as the current. It was thus with the "Albatross" at this
moment.

But Robur was not the man to give in. His seventy-four screws, working
perfectly together, were driven at their maximum speed. But the aeronef could
not escape; the attraction of the cyclone was irresistible. During the few
moments of calm she began to ascend, but the heavy pull soon drew her back,
and she sunk like a ship as she founders.

Evidently if the violence of the cyclone went on increasing the "Albatross"
would be but as a straw caught in one of those whirlwinds that root up the trees,
carry off roofs, and blow down walls.

Robur and Tom could only speak by signs. Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans
clung to the rail and wondered if the cyclone was not playing their game in
destroying the aeronef and with her the inventor--and with the inventor the secret
of his invention.

But if the "Albatross" could not get out of the cyclone vertically could she
not do something else? Could she not gain the center, where it was
comparatively calm, and where they would have more control over her? Quite
so, but to do this she would have to break through the circular currents which
were sweeping her round with them. Had she sufficient mechanical power to
escape through them?

Suddenly the upper part of the cloud fell in. The vapor condensed in torrents
of rain. It was two o'clock in the moming. The barometer, oscillating over a
range of twelve millimeters, had now fallen to 27.91, and from this something
should be taken on account of the height of the aeronef above the level of the
Sea.

Strange to say, the cyclone was out of the zone to which such storms are
generally restricted, such zone being bounded by the thirtieth parallel of north
latitude and the twenty-sixth parallel of south latitude. This may perhaps explain
why the eddying storm suddenly tured into a straight one. But what a hurricane!
The tempest in Connecticut on the 22nd of March, 1882, could only have been
compared to it, and the speed of that was more than three hundred miles an hour.

The "Albatross" had thus to fly before the wind or rather she had to be left to
be driven by the current, from which she could neither mount nor escape. But in
following this unchanging trajectory she was bearing due south, towards those
polar regions which Robur had endeavored to avoid. And now he was no longer
master of her course; she would go where the hurricane took her.

Tom Turner was at the helm, and it required all his skill to keep her straight.
In the first hours of the morning--if we can so call the vague tint which began to


rise over the horizon--the "Albatross" was fifteen degrees below Cape Horn;
twelve hundred miles more and she would cross the antarctic circle. Where she
was, in this month of July, the night lasted nineteen hours and a half. The sun's
disk--without warmth, without light--only appeared above the horizon to
disappear almost immediately. At the pole the night lengthened into one of a
hundred and seventy-nine hours. Everything showed that the "Albatross" was
about to plunge into an abyss.

During the day an observation, had it been possible, would have given 66°
AO' south latitude. The aeronef was within fourteen hundred miles of the pole.

Irresistibly was she drawn towards this inaccessible comer of the globe, her
speed eating up, so to speak, her weight, although she weighed less than before,
owing to the flattening of the earth at the pole. It seemed as though she could
have dispensed altogether with her suspensory screws. And soon the fury of the
storm reached such a height that Robur thought it best to reduce the speed of her
helices as much as possible, so as to avoid disaster. And only enough speed was
given to keep the aeronef under control of the rudder.

Amid these dangers the engineer retained his imperturbable coolness, and the
crew obeyed him as if their leader's mind had entered into them. Uncle Prudent
and Phil Evans had not for a moment left the deck; they could remain without
being disturbed. The air made but slight resistance. The aeronef was like an
aerostat, which drifts with the fluid masses in which it is plunged.

Is the domain of the southern pole a continent or an archipelago? Or is it a
palaeocrystic sea, whose ice melts not even during the long summer? We know
not. But what we do know is that the southern pole is colder than the northern
one--a phenomenon due to the position of the earth in its orbit during winter in
the antarctic regions.

During this day there was nothing to show that the storm was abating. It was
by the seventy-fifth meridian to the west that the "Albatross" crossed into the
circumpolar region. By what meridian would she come out--if she ever came
out?

As she descended more to the south the length of the day diminished. Before
long she would be plunged in that continuous night which is illuminated only by
the rays of the moon or the pale streamers of the aurora. But the moon was then
new, and the companions of Robur might see nothing of the regions whose secret
has hitherto defied human curiosity, There was not much inconvenience on
board from the cold, for the temperature was not nearly so low as was expected.

It seemed as though the hurricane was a sort of Gulf Stream, carrying a
certain amount of heat along with it.

Great was the regret that the whole region was in such profound obscurity.


Even if the moon had been in full glory but few observations could have been
made. At this season of the year an immense curtain of snow, an icy carapace,
covers up the polar surface. There was none of that ice "blink" to be seen, that
whitish tint of which the reflection is absent from dark horizons. Under such
circumstances, how could they distinguish the shape of the ground, the extent of
the seas, the position of the islands? How could they recognize the hydrographic
network of the country or the orographic configuration, and distinguish the hills
and mountains from the icebergs and floes?

A little after midnight an aurora illuminated the darkness. With its silver
fringes and spangles radiating over space, it seemed like a huge fan open over
half the sky. Its farthest electric effluences were lost in the Southern Cross,
whose four bright stars were gleaming overhead. The phenomenon was one of
incomparable magnificence, and the light showed the face of the country as a
confused mass of white.

It need not be said that they had approached so near to the pole that the
compass was constantly affected, and gave no precise indication of the course
pursued. Its inclination was such that at one time Robur felt certain they were
passing over the magnetic pole discovered by Sir James Ross. And an hour later,
in calculating the angle the needle made with the vertical, he exclaimed: "the
South Pole is beneath us!"

A white cap appeared, but nothing could be seen of what it bid under its ice.

A few minutes afterwards the aurora died away, and the point where all the
world's meridians cross is still to be discovered.

If Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans wished to bury in the most mysterious
solitudes the aeronef and all she bore, the moment was propitious. If they did not
do so it was doubtless because the explosive they required was still denied to
them.

The hurricane still raged and swept along with such rapidity that had a
mountain been met with the aeronef would have been dashed to pieces like a
ship on a lee shore. Not only had the power gone to steer her horizontally, but
the control of her elevation had also vanished.

And it was not unlikely that mountains did exist in these antarctic lands. Any
instant a shock might happen which would destroy the "Albatross." Such a
catastrophe became more probable as the wind shifted more to the east after they
passed the prime meridian. Two luminous points then showed themselves ahead
of the "Albatross." There were the two volcanos of the Ross Mountains--Erebus
and Terror. Was the "Albatross" to be shriveled up in their flames like a gigantic
butterfly?

An hour of intense excitement followed. One of the volcanoes, Erebus,


seemed to be rushing at the aeronef, which could not move from the bed of the
hurricane. The cloud of flame grew as they neared it. A network of fire barred
their road. A brilliant light shone round over all. The figures on board stood out
in the bright light as if come from another world. Motionless, without a sound or
a gesture, they waited for the terrible moment when the furnace would wrap
them in its fires.

But the storm that bore the "Albatross" saved them from such a fearful fate.
The flames of Erebus were blown down by the hurricane as it passed, and the
"Albatross" flew over unhurt. She swept through a hail of ejected material,
which was fortunately kept at bay by the centrifugal action of the suspensory
screws. And she harmlessly passed over the crater while it was in full eruption.

An hour afterwards the horizon hid from their view the two colossal torches
which light the confines of the world during the long polar night.

At two o'clock in the morning Balleny Island was sighted on the coast of
Discovery Land, though it could not be recognized owing to its being bound to
the mainland by a cement of ice.

And the "Albatross" emerged from the polar circle on the hundred and
seventy-fifth meridian. The hurricane had carried her over the icebergs and
icefloes, against which she was in danger of being dashed a hundred times or
more. She was not in the hands of the helmsman, but in the hand of God--and
God is a good pilot.

The aeronef sped along to the north, and at the sixtieth parallel the storm
showed signs of dying away. Its violence sensibly diminished. The "Albatross"
began to come under control again. And, what was a great comfort, had again
entered the lighted regions of the globe; and the day reappeared about eight
o'clock in the morning.

Robur had been carried by the storm into the Pacific over the polar region,
accomplishing four thousand three hundred and fifty miles in nineteen hours, or
about three miles a minute, a speed almost double that which the "Albatross"
was equal to with her propellers under ordinary circumstances. But he did not
know where he then was owing to the disturbance of the needle in the
neighborhood of the magnetic pole, and he would have to wait till the sun shone
out under convenient conditions for observation. Unfortunately, heavy clouds
covered the sky all that day and the sun did not appear.

This was a disappointment more keenly felt as both propelling screws had
sustained damage during the tempest. Robur, much disconcerted at this accident,
could only advance at a moderate speed during this day, and when he passed
over the antipodes of Paris was only going about eighteen miles an hour. It was
necessary not to aggravate the damage to the screws, for if the propellers were


rendered useless the situation of the aeronef above the vast seas of the Pacific
would be a very awkward one. And the engineer began to consider if he could
not effect his repairs on the spot, so as to make sure of continuing his voyage.

In the morning of the 27th of July, about seven o'clock, land was sighted to
the north. It was soon seen to be an island. But which island was it of the
thousands that dot the Pacific? However, Robur decided to stop at it without
landing. He thought, that he could repair damages during the day and start in the
evening.

The wind had died away completely and this was a favorable circumstance
for the maneuver he desired to execute. At least, if she did not remain stationary
the "Albatross" would be carried he knew not where.

A cable one hundred and fifty feet long with an anchor at the end was
dropped overboard. When the aeronef reached the shore of the island the anchor
dragged up the first few rocks and then got firmly fixed between two large
blocks. The cable then stretched to full length under the influence of the
suspensory screws, and the "Albatross" remained motionless, riding like a ship
in a roadstead.

It was the first time she had been fastened to the earth since she left
Philadelphia.


Chapter XIX


ANCHORED AT LAST


When the "Albatross" was high in the air the island could be seen to be of
moderate size. But on what parallel was it situated? What meridian ran through
it? Was it an island in the Pacific, in Australasia, or in the Indian Ocean? When
the sun appeared, and Robur had taken his observations, they would know; but
although they could not trust to the indications of the compass there was reason
to think they were in the Pacific.

At this height--one hundred and fifty feet--the island which measured about
fifteen miles round, was like a three-pointed star in the sea.

Off the southwest point was an islet and a range of rocks. On the shore there
were no tide-marks, and this tended to confirm Robur in his opinion as to his
position for the ebb and flow are almost imperceptible in the Pacific.

At the northwest point there was a conical mountain about two hundred feet
high.

No natives were to be seen, but they might be on the opposite coast. In any
case, if they had perceived the aeronef, terror had made them either hide
themselves or run away. The "Albatross" had anchored on the southwest point of
the island. Not far off, down a little creek, a small river flowed in among the
rocks. Beyond were several winding valleys; trees of different kinds; and birds--
partridges and bustards--in great numbers. If the island was not inhabited it was
habitable. Robur might surely have landed on it; if he had not done so it was
probably because the ground was uneven and did not offer a convenient spot to
beach the aeronef.

While he was waiting for the sun the engineer began the repairs he reckoned
on completing before the day was over. The suspensory screws were undamaged
and had worked admirably amid all the violence of the storm, which, as we have
said, had considerably lightened their work. At this moment half of them were in
action, enough to keep the "Albatross" fixed to the shore by the taut cable. But
the two propellers had suffered, and more than Robur had thought. Their blades
would have to be adjusted and the gearing seen to by which they received their
rotatory movement.

It was the screw at the bow which was first attacked under Robur's
superintendence. It was the best to commence with, in case the "Albatross" had
to leave before the work was finished. With only this propeller he could easily


keep a proper course.

Meanwhile Uncle Prudent and his colleague, after walking about the deck,
had sat down aft. Frycollin was strangely reassured. What a difference! To be
suspended only one hundred and fifty feet from the ground!

The work was only interrupted for a moment while the elevation of the sun
above the horizon allowed Robur to take an horary angle, so that at the time of
its culmination he could calculate his position.

The result of the observation, taken with the greatest exactitude, was as
follows:

Longitude, 176° 10' west. Latitude, 44° 25' south.

This point on the map answered to the position of the Chatham Islands, and
particularly of Pitt Island, one of the group.

"That is nearer than I supposed," said Robur to Tom Turner.

"How far off are we?"

"Forty-six degrees south of X Island, or two thousand eight hundred miles."

"All the more reason to get our propellers into order," said the mate. "We
may have the wind against us this passage, and with the little stores we have left
we ought to get to X as soon as possible."

"Yes, Tom, and I hope to get under way tonight, even if I go with one screw,
and put the other to-rights on the voyage."

"Mr. Robur," said Tom "What is to be done with those two gentlemen and
their servant?"

"Do you think they would complain if they became colonists of X Island?"

But where was this X? It was an island lost in the immensity of the Pacific
Ocean between the Equator and the Tropic of Cancer--an island most
appropriately named by Robur in this algebraic fashion. It was in the north of the
South Pacific, a long way out of the route of inter-oceanic communication. There
it was that Robur had founded his little colony, and there the "Albatross" rested
when tired with her flight. There she was provisioned for all her voyages. In X
Island, Robur, a man of immense wealth, had established a shipyard in which he
built his aeronef. There he could repair it, and even rebuild it. In his warehouses
were materials and provisions of all sorts stored for the fifty inhabitants who
lived on the island.

When Robur had doubled Cape Horn a few days before his intention had
been to regain X Island by crossing the Pacific obliquely. But the cyclone had
seized the "Albatross," and the hurricane had carried her away to the south. In
fact, he had been brought back to much the same latitude as before, and if his
propellers had not been damaged the delay would have been of no importance.

His object was therefore to get back to X Island, but as the mate had said, the


voyage would be a long one, and the winds would probably be against them. The
mechanical power of the "Albatross" was, however, quite equal to taking her to
her destination, and under ordinary circumstances she would be there in three or
four days.

Hence Robur's resolve to anchor on the Chatham Islands. There was every
opportunity for repairing at least the fore-screw. He had no fear that if the wind
were to rise he would be driven to the south instead of to the north. When night
came the repairs would be finished, and he would have to maneuver so as to
weigh anchor. If it were too firmly fixed in the rocks he could cut the cable and
resume his flight towards the equator.

The crew of the "Albatross," knowing there was no time to lose, set to work
vigorously.

While they were busy in the bow of the aeronef, Uncle Prudent and Phil
Evans held a little conversation together which had exceptionally important
consequences.

"Phil Evans," said Uncle Prudent, "you have resolved, as I have, to sacrifice
your life?"

"Yes, like you."

"Tt is evident that we can expect nothing from Robur."

"Nothing."

"Well, Phil Evans, I have made up my mind. If the "Albatross" leaves this
place tonight, the night will not pass without our having accomplished our task.
We will smash the wings of this bird of Robur's! This night I will blow it into the
air!"

"The sooner the better," said Phil Evans.

It will be seen that the two colleagues were agreed on all points even in
accepting with indifference the frightful death in store for them. "Have you all
you want?" asked Evans.

"Yes. Last night, while Robur and his people had enough to do to look after
the safety of the ship, I slipped into the magazine and got hold of a dynamite
cartridge."

"Let us set to work, Uncle Prudent."

"No. Wait till tonight. When the night comes we will go into our cabin, and
you shall see something that will surprise you."

At six o'clock the colleagues dined together as usual. Two hours afterwards
they retired to their cabin like men who wished to make up for a sleepless night.

Neither Robur nor any of his companions had a suspicion of the catastrophe
that threatened the "Albatross."

This was Uncle Prudent's plan. As he had said, he had stolen into the


magazine, and there had possessed himself of some powder and cartridge like
those used by Robur in Dahomey. Returning to his cabin, he had carefully
concealed the cartridge with which he had resolved to blow up the "Albatross" in
mid-air.

Phil Evans, screened by his companion, was now examining the infernal
machine, which was a metallic canister containing about two pounds of
dynamite, enough to shatter the aeronef to atoms. If the explosion did not
destroy her at once, it would do so in her fall. Nothing was easier than to place
this cartridge in a comer of the cabin, so that it would blow in the deck and tear
away the framework of the hull.

But to obtain the explosion it was necessary to adjust the fulminating cap
with which the cartridge was fitted. This was the most delicate part of the
operation, for the explosion would have to be carefully timed, so as not to occur
too soon or too late.

Uncle Prudent had carefully thought over the matter. His conclusions were as
follows. As soon as the fore propeller was repaired the aeronef would resume her
course to the north, and that done Robur and his crew would probably come aft
to put the other screw into order. The presence of these people about the cabin
might interfere with his plans, and so he had resolved to make a slow match do
duty as a time-fuse.

"When I got the cartridge," said he to Phil Evans, "I took some gunpowder as
well. With the powder I will make a fuse that will take some time to burn, and
which will lead into the fulminate. My idea is to light it about midnight, so that
the explosion will take place about three or four o'clock in the morning."

"Well planned!" said Phil Evans.

The colleagues, as we see, had arrived at such a stage as to look with the
greatest nonchalance on the awful destruction in which they were about to
perish. Their hatred against Robur and his people had so increased that they
would sacrifice their own lives to destroy the "Albatross" and all she bore. The
act was that of madmen, it was horrible; but at such a pitch had they arrived after
five weeks of anger that could not vent itself, of rage that could not be gratified.

"And Frycollin?" asked Phil Evans, "have we the right to dispose of his
life?"

"We shall sacrifice ours as well!" said Uncle Prudent. But it is doubtful if
Frycollin would have thought the reason sufficient.

Immediately Uncle Prudent set to work, while Evans kept watch in the
neighborhood of the cabin. The crew were all at work forward. There was no
fear of being surprised. Uncle Prudent began by rubbing a small quantity of the
powder very fine; and then, having slightly moistened it, he wrapped it up in a


piece of rag in the shape of a match. When it was lighted he calculated it would
burn about an inch in five minutes, or a yard in three hours. The match was tried
and found to answer, and was then wound round with string and attached to the
cap of the cartridge. Uncle Prudent had all finished about ten o'clock in the
evening without having excited the least suspicion.

During the day the work on the fore screw had been actively carried on, but
it had had to be taken on board to adjust the twisted blades. Of the piles and
accumulators and the machinery that drove the ship nothing was damaged.

When night fell Robur and his men knocked off work. The fore propeller not
been got into place, and to finish it would take another three hours. After some
conversation with Tom Turner it was decided to give the crew a rest, and
postpone what required to be done to the next morning.

The final adjustment was a matter of extreme nicety, and the electric lamps
did not give so suitable a light for such work as the daylight.

Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans were not aware of this. They had understood
that the screw would be in place during the night, and that the "Albatross" would
be on her way to the north.

The night was dark and moonless. Heavy clouds made the darkness deeper.
A light breeze began to rise. A few puffs came from the southwest, but they had
no effect on the "Albatross." She remained motionless at her anchor, and the
cable stretched vertically downward to the ground.

Uncle Prudent and his colleague, imagining they were under way again, sat
shut up in their cabin, exchanging but a few words, and listening to the f-r-r-r-r
of the suspensory screws, which drowned every other sound on board. They
were waiting till the time of action arrived.

A little before midnight Uncle Prudent said, "It is time!" Under the berths in
the cabin was a sliding box, forming a small locker, and in this locker Uncle
Prudent put the dynamite and the slow-match. In this way the match would burn
without betraying itself by its smoke or spluttering. Uncle Prudent lighted the
end and pushed back the box under the berth with "Now let us go aft, and wait."

They then went out, and were astonished not to find the steersman at his
post.

Phil Evans leant out over the rail.

"The "Albatross" is where she was," said he in a low voice. "The work is not
finished. They have not started!"

Uncle Prudent made a gesture of disappointment. "We shall have to put out
the match," said he.

"No," said Phil Evans, "we must escape!"

"Escape?"


"Yes! down the cable! Fifty yards is nothing!"

"Nothing, of course, Phil Evans, and we should be fools not to take the
chance now it has come."

But first they went back to the cabin and took away all they could carry, with
a view to a more or less prolonged stay on the Chatham Islands. Then they shut
the door and noiselessly crept forward, intending to wake Frycollin and take him
with them.

The darkness was intense. The clouds were racing up from the southwest,
and the aeronef was tugging at her anchor and thus throwing the cable more and
more out of the vertical. There would be no difficulty in slipping down it.

The colleagues made their way along the deck, stopping in the shadow of the
deckhouses to listen if there was any sound. The silence was unbroken. No light
shone from the portholes. The aeronef was not only silent; she was asleep.

Uncle Prudent was close to Frycollin's cabin when Phil Evans stopped him.
"The look-out!" he said.

A man was crouching near the deckhouse. He was only half asleep. All flight
would be impossible if he were to give the alarm. Close by were a few ropes,
and pieces of rag and waste used in the work at the screw.

An instant afterwards the man was gagged and blindfolded and lashed to the
rail unable to utter a sound or move an inch. This was done almost without a
whisper.

Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans listened. All was silent within the cabins.
Every one on board was asleep. They reached Frycollin's cabin. Tapage was
snoring away in a style worthy of his name, and that promised well.

To his great surprise, Uncle Prudent had not even to push Frycollin's door. It
was open. He stepped into the doorway and looked around. "Nobody here!" he
said.

"Nobody! Where can he be?" asked Phil Evans.

They went into the bow, thinking Frycollin might perhaps be asleep in the
comer. Still they found nobody.

"Has the fellow got the start of us?" asked Uncle Prudent.

"Whether he has or not," said Phil Evans, "we can't wait any longer. Down
you go."

Without hesitation the fugitives one after the other clambered over the side
and, seizing the cable with hands and feet slipped down it safe and sound to the
ground.

Think of their joy at again treading the earth they had lost for so long--at
walking on solid ground and being no longer the playthings of the atmosphere!

They were staring up the creek to the interior of the island when suddenly a


form rose in front of them. It was Frycollin. The Negro had had the same idea as
his master and the audacity to start without telling him. But there was no time for
recriminations, and Uncle Prudent was in search of a refuge in some distant part
of the island when Phil Evans stopped him.

"Uncle Prudent," said he. "Here we are safe from Robur. He is doomed like
his companions to a terrible death. He deserves it, we know. But if he would
swear on his honor not to take us prisoners again--"

"The honor of such a man--"

Uncle Prudent did not finish his sentence.

There was a noise on the "Albatross." Evidently, the alarm had been given.
The escape was discovered.

"Help! Help!" shouted somebody. It was the look-out man, who had got rid
of his gag. Hurried footsteps were heard on deck. Almost immediately the
electric lamps shot beams over a large circle.

"There they are! There they are!" shouted Tom Turner. The fugitives were
seen.

At the same instant an order was given by Robur, and the suspensory screws
being slowed, the cable was hauled in on board, and the "Albatross" sank
towards the ground.

At this moment the voice of Phil Evans was heard shouting, "Engineer
Robur, will you give us your word of honor to leave us free on this island?"

"Never!" said Robur. And the reply was followed by the report of a gun, and
the bullet grazed Phil's shoulder.

"Ah! The brutes!" said Uncle Prudent. Knife in hand, he rushed towards the
rocks where the anchor had fixed itself. The aeronef was not more than fifty feet
from the ground.

In a few seconds the cable was cut, and the breeze, which had increased
considerably, striking the "Albatross" on the quarter, carried her out over the sea.


Chapter XX


THE WRECK OF THE ALBATROSS


It was then twenty minutes after midnight. Five or six shots had been fired
from the aeronef. Uncle Prudent and Frycollin, supporting Phil Evans, had taken
shelter among the rocks. They had not been hit. For the moment there was
nothing to fear.

As the "Albatross" drifted off from Pitt Island she rose obliquely to nearly
three thousand feet. It was necessary to increase the ascensional power to
prevent her falling into the sea.

When the look-out man had got clear of his gag and shouted, Robur and Tom
Turner had rushed up to him and torn off his bandage. The mate had then run
back to the stern cabin. It was empty! Tapage had searched Frycollin's cabin, and
that also was empty.

When he saw that the prisoners had escaped, Robur was seized with a
paroxysm of anger. The escape meant the revelation of his secret to the world.
He had not been much concerned at the document thrown overboard while they
were crossing Europe, for there were so many chances that it would be lost in its
fall; but now!

As he grew calm, "They have escaped," said he. "Be it so! But they cannot
get away from Pitt Island, and in a day or so I will go back! I will recapture
them! And then--"

In fact, the safety of the three fugitives was by no means assured. The
"Albatross" would be repaired, and return well in hand. Before the day was out
they might again be in the power of the engineer.

Before the day was out! But in two hours the "Albatross" would be
annihilated! The dynamite cartridge was like a torpedo fastened to her hull, and
would accomplish her destruction in mid-air. The breeze freshened, and the
aeronef was carried to the northeast. Although her speed was but moderate, she
would be out of sight of the Chatham Islands before sunrise. To return against
the wind she must have her propellers going, particularly the one in the bow.

"Tom," said the engineer, "turn the lights full on."

"Yes, Sir."

"And all hands to work."

"Yes, Sir."

There was no longer any idea of putting off the work till tomorrow. There


was now no thought of fatigue. Not one of the men of the "Albatross" failed to
share in the feelings of his chief. Not one but was ready to do anything to
recapture the fugitives!

As soon as the screw was in place they would return to the island and drop
another anchor, and give chase to the fugitives. Then only would they begin
repairing the stern-screw; and then the aeronef could resume her voyage across
the Pacific to X Island.

It was important, above all things, that the "Albatross" should not be carried
too far to the northeast, but unfortunately the breeze grew stronger, and she
could not head against it, or even remain stationary. Deprived of her propellers
she was an unguidable balloon. The fugitives on the shore knew that she would
have disappeared before the explosion blew her to pieces.

Robur felt much disappointment at seeing his plans so interfered with. Would
it not take him much longer than he thought to get back to his old anchorage?

While the work at the screw was actively pushed on, he resolved to descend
to the surface of the sea, in the hope that the wind would there be lighter.
Perhaps the "Albatross" would be able to remain in the neighborhood until she
was again fit to work to windward.

The maneuver was instantly executed. If a passing ship had sighted the aerial
machine as she sunk through the air, with her electric lights in full blaze, with
what terror would she have been seized!

When the "Albatross" was a few hundred feet from the waves she stopped.
Unfortunately Robur found that the breeze was stronger here than above, and the
aeronef drifted off more rapidly. He risked being blown a long, way off to the
northeast, and that would delay his return to Pitt Island. In short, after several
experiments, he found it better to keep his ship well up in the air, and the
"Albatross" went aloft to about ten thousand feet. There, if she did not remain
stationary, the drifting was very slight. The engineer could thus hope that by
sunrise at such an altitude he would still be in sight of the island.

Robur did not trouble himself about the reception the fugitives might have
received from the natives--if there were any natives. That they might help them
mattered little to him. With the powers of offense possessed by the "Albatross"
they would be promptly terrified and dispersed. The capture of the prisoners was
certain, and once he had them again, "They will not escape from X Island!"

About one o'clock in the morning the fore-screw was finished, and all that
had to be done was to get it back to its place. This would take about an hour.
That done, the "Albatross" would be headed southwest and the stern-screw could
be taken in hand.

And how about the match that was burning in the deserted cabin? The match


of which more than a third was now consumed? And the spark that was creeping
along to the dynamite?

Assuredly if the men of the aeronef had not been so busy one of them would
have heard the feeble sputtering that was going on in the deckhouse. Perhaps he
would have smelt the burning powder! He would doubtless have become
uneasy! And told Tom Turner! And then they would have looked about, and
found the box and the infernal machine; and then there would have been time to
save this wonderful "Albatross" and all she bore!

But the men were at work in the bow, twenty yards away from the cabin.
Nothing brought them to that part of the deck; nothing called off their attention
from their work. Robur was there working with his hands, excellent mechanic as
he was. He hurried on the work, but nothing was neglected, everything was
carefully done. Was it not necessary that he should again become absolute
master of his invention? If he did not recapture the fugitives they would get
away home. They would begin inquiring into matters. They might even discover
X Island, and there would be an end to this life, which the men of the
"Albatross" had created for themselves, a life that seemed superhuman and
sublime.

Tom Turner came up to the engineer. It was a quarter past one. "It seems to
me, sir, that the breeze is falling, and going round to the west."

"What does the barometer say?" asked Robur, after looking up at the sky.

"It is almost stationary, and the clouds seem gathering below us."

"So they are, and it may be raining down at the sea; but if we keep above the
rain it makes no difference to us. It will not interfere with the work."

"If it is raining it is not a heavy rain," said Tom. "The clouds do not look like
it, and probably the wind has dropped altogether."

"Perhaps so, but I think we had better not go down yet. Let us get into going
order as soon as we can, and then we can do as we like."

At a few minutes after two the first part of the work was finished. The fore-
screw was in its place, and the power was turned on. The speed was gradually
increased, and the "Albatross," heading to the southwest, returned at moderate
speed towards the Chatham Islands.

"Tom," said Robur, "it is about two hours and a half since we got adrift. The
wind has not changed all the time. I think we ought to be over the island in an
hour."

"Yes, sir. We are going about forty feet a second. We ought to be there about
half-past three."

"All the better. It would suit us best to get back while it is dark, and even
beach the "Albatross" if we can. Those fellows will fancy we are a long way off


to the northward, and never think of keeping a look-out. If we have to stop a day
or two on the island--"

"We'll stop, and if we have to fight an army of natives?"

"We'll fight," said Robur. "We'll fight then for our "Albatross.""

The engineer went forward to the men, who were waiting for orders. "My
lads," he said to them, "we cannot knock off yet. We must work till day comes."

They were all ready to do so. The stern-screw had now to be treated as the
other had been. The damage was the same, a twisting from the violence of the
hurricane during the passage across the southern pole.

But to get the screw on board it seemed best to stop the progress of the
aeronef for a few minutes, and even to drive her backwards. The engines were
reversed. The aeronef began to fall astern, when Tom Turner was surprised by a
peculiar odor.

This was from the gas given off by the match, which had accumulated in the
box, and was now escaping from the cabin. "Hallo!" said the mate, with a sniff.

"What is the matter?” asked Robur.

"Don't you smell something? Isn't it burning powder?"

"So it is, Tom."

"And it comes from that cabin."

"Yes, the very cabin--"

"Have those scoundrels set it on fire?"

"Suppose it is something else!" exclaimed Robur. "Force the door, Tom;
drive in the door!"

But the mate had not made one step towards it when a fearful explosion
shook the "Albatross." The cabins flew into splinters. The lamps went out. The
electric current suddenly failed. The darkness was complete. Most of the
suspensory screws were twisted or broken, but a few in the bow still revolved.

At the same instant the hull of the aeronef opened just behind the first
deckhouse, where the engines for the fore-screw were placed; and the after-part
of the deck collapsed in space.

Immediately the last suspensory screw stopped spinning, and the "Albatross"
dropped into the abyss.

It was a fall of ten thousand feet for the eight men who were clinging to the
wreck; and the fall was even faster than it might have been, for the fore propeller
was vertical in the air and still working!

It was then that Robur, with extraordinary coolness, climbed up to the broken
deckhouse, and seizing the lever reversed the rotation, so that the propeller
became a suspender. The fall continued, but it was checked, and the wreck did
not fall with the accelerating swiftness of bodies influenced solely by


gravitation; and if it was death to the survivors of the "Albatross" from their
being hurled into the sea, it was not death by asphyxia amid air which the
rapidity of descent rendered unbreathable.

Eighty seconds after the explosion, all that remained of the "Albatross"
plunged into the waves!


Chapter XXI


THE INSTITUTE AGAIN


Some weeks before, on the 13th of June, on the morning after the sitting
during which the Weldon Institute had been given over to such stormy
discussions, the excitement of all classes of the Philadelphia population, black or
white, had been much easier to imagine than to describe.

From a very early hour conversation was entirely occupied with the
unexpected and scandalous incident of the night before. A stranger calling
himself an engineer, and answering to the name of Robur, a person of unknown
origin, of anonymous nationality, had unexpectedly presented himself in the
club-room, insulted the balloonists, made fun of the aeronauts, boasted of the
marvels of machines heavier than air, and raised a frightful tumult by the
remarks with which he greeted the menaces of his adversaries. After leaving the
desk, amid a volley of revolver shots, he had disappeared, and in spite of every
endeavor, no trace could be found of him.

Assuredly here was enough to exercise every tongue and excite every
imagination. But by how much was this excitement increased when in the
evening of the 13th of June it was found that neither the president nor secretary
of the Weldon Institute had returned to their homes! Was it by chance only that
they were absent? No, or at least there was nothing to lead people to think so. It
had even been agreed that in the morning they would be back at the club, one as
president, the other as secretary, to take their places during a discussion on the
events of the preceding evening.

And not only was there the complete disappearance of these two
considerable personages in the state of Pennsylvania, but there was no news of
the valet Frycollin. He was as undiscoverable as his master. Never had a Negro
since Toussaint L'Ouverture, Soulouque, or Dessaline had so much talked about
him.

The next day there was no news. Neither the colleagues nor Frycollin had
been found. The anxiety became serious. Agitation commenced. A numerous
crowd besieged the post and telegraph offices in case any news should be
received. There was no news.

And they had been seen coming out of the Weldon Institute loudly talking
together, and with Frycollin in attendance, go down Walnut Street towards
Fairmount Park! Jem Chip, the vegetarian, had even shaken hands with the


president and left him with "Tomorrow!"

And William T. Forbes, the manufacturer of sugar from rags, had received a
cordial shake from Phil Evans who had said to him twice, "Au revoir! Au
revoir!"

Miss Doll and Miss Mat Forbes, so attached to Uncle Prudent by the bonds
of purest friendship, could not get over the disappearance, and in order to obtain
news of the absent, talked even more than they were accustomed to.

Three, four, five, six days passed. Then a week, then two weeks, and there
was nothing to give a clue to the missing three. The most minute search had been
made in every quarter. Nothing! In the park, even under the trees and
brushwood. Nothing! Always nothing! Although here it was noticed that the
grass looked to be pressed down in a way that seemed suspicious and certainly
was inexplicable; and at the edge of the clearing there were traces of a recent
struggle. Perhaps a band of scoundrels had attacked the colleagues here in the
deserted park in the middle of the night!

It was possible. The police proceeded with their inquiries in all due form and
with all lawful slowness. They dragged the Schuyllkill river, and cut into the
thick bushes that fringe its banks; and if this was useless it was not quite a waste,
for the Schuyllkill is in great want of a good weeding, and it got it on this
occasion. Practical people are the authorities of Philadelphia!

Then the newspapers were tried. Advertisements and notices and articles
were sent to all the journals in the Union without distinction of color. The "Daily
Negro," the special organ of the black race, published a portrait of Frycollin after
his latest photograph. Rewards were offered to whoever would give news of the
three absentees, and even to those who would find some clue to put the police on
the track. "Five thousand dollars! Five thousand dollars to any citizen who
would--"

Nothing was done. The five thousand dollars remained with the treasurer of
the Weldon Institute.

Undiscoverable! Undiscoverable! Undiscoverable! Uncle Prudent and Phil
Evans, of Philadelphia!

It need hardly be said that the club was put to serious inconvenience by this
disappearance of its president and secretary. And at first the assembly voted
urgency to a measure which suspended the work on the "Go-Ahead." How, in the
absence of the principal promoters of the affair, of those who had devoted to the
enterprise a certain part of their fortune in time and money--how could they
finish the work when these were not present? It were better, then, to wait.

And just then came the first news of the strange phenomenon which had
exercised people's minds some weeks before. The mysterious object had been


again seen at different times in the higher regions of the atmosphere. But nobody
dreamt of establishing a connection between this singular reappearance and the
no less singular disappearance of the members of the Weldon Institute. In fact, it
would have required a very strong dose of imagination to connect one of these
facts with the other.

Whatever it might be, asteroid or aerolite or aerial monster, it had reappeared
in such a way that its dimensions and shape could be much better appreciated,
first in Canada, over the country between Ottawa and Quebec, on the very
morning after the disappearance of the colleagues, and later over the plains of
the Far West, where it had tried its speed against an express train on the Union
Pacific.

At the end of this day the doubts of the learned world were at an end. The
body was not a product of nature, it was a flying machine, the practical
application of the theory of "heavier than air." And if the inventor of the aeronef
had wished to keep himself unknown he could evidently have done better than to
try it over the Far West. As to the mechanical force he required, or the engines
by which it was communicated, nothing was known, but there could be no doubt
the aeronef was gifted with an extraordinary faculty of locomotion. In fact, a few
days afterwards it was reported from the Celestial Empire, then from the
southern part of India, then from the Russian steppes.

Who was then this bold mechanician that possessed such powers of
locomotion, for whom States had no frontiers and oceans no limits, who
disposed of the terrestrial atmosphere as if it were his domain? Could it be this
Robur whose theories had been so brutally thrown in the face of the Weldon
Institute the day he led the attack against the utopia of guidable balloons?
Perhaps such a notion occurred to some of the wide-awake people, but none
dreamt that the said Robur had anything to do with the disappearance of the
president and secretary of the Institute.

Things remained in this state of mystery when a telegram arrived from
France through the New York cable at 11-37 A.M. on July 13. And what was this
telegram? It was the text of the document found at Paris in a snuff-box revealing
what had happened to the two personages for whom the Union was in mourning.

So, then, the perpetrator of this kidnapping "was" Robur the engineer, come
expressly to Philadelphia to destroy in its egg the theory of the balloonists. He it
was who commanded the "Albatross!" He it was who carried off by way of
reprisal Uncle Prudent, Phil Evans and Frycollin; and they might be considered
lost for ever. At least until some means were found of constructing an engine
capable of contending with this powerful machine their terrestrial friends would
never bring them back to earth.


What excitement! What stupor! The telegram from Paris had been addressed
to the members of the Weldon Institute. The members of the club were
immediately informed of it. Ten minutes later all Philadelphia received the news
through its telephones, and in less than an hour all America heard of it through
the innumerable electric wires of the new continent.

No one would believe it! "It is an unseasonable joke," said some. "It is all
smoke," said others. How could such a thing be done in Philadelphia, and so
secretly, too? How could the "Albatross" have been beached in Fairmount Park
without its appearance having been signaled all over Pennsylvania?

Very good. These were the arguments. The incredulous had the right of
doubting. But the right did not last long. Seven days after the receipt of the
telegram the French mail-boat "Normandie" came into the Hudson, bringing the
famous snuff-box. The railway took it in all haste from New York to
Philadelphia.

It was indeed the snuff-box of the President of the Weldon Institute. Jem
Chip would have done on at day to take some more substantial nourishment, for
he fell into a swoon when he recognized it. How many a time had he taken from
it the pinch of friendship! And Miss Doll and Miss Mat also recognized it, and
so did William T. Forbes, Truck Milnor, Bat T. Fynn, and many other members.
And not only was it the president's snuff-box, it was the president's writing!

Then did the people lament and stretch out their hands in despair to the skies.
Uncle Prudent and his colleague carried away in a flying machine, and no one
able to deliver them!

The Niagara Falls Company, in which Uncle Prudent was the largest
shareholder, thought of suspending its business and turning off its cataracts. The
Wheelton Watch Company thought of winding up its machinery, now it had lost
its manager.

Nothing more was heard of the aeronef. July passed, and there was no news.
August ran its course, and the uncertainty on the subject of Robur's prisoners
was as great as ever. Had he, like Icarus, fallen a victim to his own temerity?

The first twenty-seven days of September went by without result, but on the
28th a rumor spread through Philadelphia that Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans had
during the afternoon quietly walked into the president's house. And, what was
more extraordinary, the rumor was true, although very few believed it.

They had, however, to give in to the evidence. There could be no doubt these
were the two men, and not their shadows. And Frycollin also had come back!
The members of the club, then their friends, then the crowd, swarmed into the
president's house, and shook hands with the president and secretary, and cheered
them again and again. Jem Chip was there, having left his luncheon's joint of


boiled lettuces, and William T. Forbes and his daughters, and all the members of
the club. It is a mystery how Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans emerged alive from
the thousands who welcomed them.

On that evening was the weekly meeting of the Institute. It was expected that
the colleagues would take their places at the desk. As they had said nothing of
their adventures, it was thought they would then speak, and relate the
impressions of their voyage. But for some reason or other both were silent. And
so also was Frycollin, whom his congeners in their delirium had failed to
dismember.

But though the colleagues did not tell what had happened to them, that is no
reason why we should not. We know what occurred on the night of the 27th and
28th of July; the daring escape to the earth, the scramble among the rocks, the
bullet fired at Phil Evans, the cut cable, and the "Albatross" deprived of her
propellers, drifting off to the northeast at a great altitude. Her electric lamps
rendered her visible for some time. And then she disappeared.

The fugitives had little to fear. Now could Robur get back to the island for
three or four hours if his screws were out of gear? By that time the "Albatross"
would have been destroyed by the explosion, and be no more than a wreck
floating on the sea; those whom she bore would be mangled corpses, which the
ocean would not even give up again. The act of vengeance would be
accomplished.

Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans looked upon it as an act of legitimate self-
defence, and felt no remorse whatever. Evans was but slightly wounded by the
rifle bullet, and the three made their way up from the shore in the hope of
meeting some of the natives. The hope was realized. About fifty natives were
living by fishing off the western coast. They had seen the aeronef descend on the
island, and they welcomed the fugitives as if they were supernatural beings.
They worshipped them, we ought rather to say. They accommodated them in the
most comfortable of their huts.

As they had expected, Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans saw nothing more of
the aeronef. They concluded that the catastrophe had taken place in some high
region of the atmosphere, and that they would hear no more of Robur and his
prodigious machine.

Meanwhile they had to wait for an opportunity of returning to America. The
Chatham Islands are not much visited by navigators, and all August passed
without sign of a ship. The fugitives began to ask themselves if they had not
exchanged one prison for another.

At last a ship came to water at the Chatham Islands. It will not have been
forgotten that when Uncle Prudent was seized he had on him several thousand


paper dollars, much more than would take him back to America. After thanking
their adorers, who were not sparing of their most respectful demonstrations,
Uncle Prudent, Phil Evans, and Frycollin embarked for Auckland. They said
nothing of their adventures, and in two weeks landed in New Zealand.

At Auckland, a mail-boat took them on board as passengers, and after a
splendid passage the survivors of the "Albatross" stepped ashore at San
Francisco. They said nothing as to who they were or whence they had come, but
as they had paid full price for their berths no American captain would trouble
them further. At San Francisco they took the first train out on the Pacific
Railway, and on the 27th of September, they arrived at Philadelphia, That is the
compendious history of what had occurred since the escape of the fugitives. And
that is why this very evening the president and secretary of the Weldon Institute
took their seats amid a most extraordinary attendance.

Never before had either of them been so calm. To look at them it did not
seem as though anything abnormal had happened since the memorable sitting of
the 12th of June. Three months and a half had gone, and seemed to be counted as
nothing. After the first round of cheers, which both received without showing the
slightest emotion, Uncle Prudent took off his hat and spoke.

"Worthy citizens," said he, "the meeting is now open."

Tremendous applause. And properly so, for if it was not extraordinary that
the meeting was open, it was extraordinary that it should be opened by Uncle
Prudent and Phil Evans.

The president allowed the enthusiasm to subside in shouts and clappings;
then he continued: "At our last meeting, gentlemen, the discussion was
somewhat animated--(hear, hear)--between the partisans of the screw before and
those of the screw behind for our balloon the "Go-Ahead." (Marks of surprise.)
We have found a way to bring the beforists and the behindists in agreement. That
way is as follows: we are going to use two screws, one at each end of the car."
Silence, and complete stupefaction.

That was all.

Yes, all! Of the kidnapping of the president and secretary of the Weldon
Institute not a word! Not a word of the "Albatross" nor of Robur! Not a word of
the voyage! Not a word of the way in which the prisoners had escaped! Not a
word of what had become of the aeronef, if it still flew through space, or if they
were to be prepared for new reprisals on the member's of the club!

Of course the balloonists were longing to ask Uncle Prudent and the
secretary about all these things, but they looked so close and so serious that they
thought it best to respect their attitude. When they thought fit to speak they
would do so, and it would be an honor to hear. After all, there might be in all this


some secret which would not yet be divulged.

And then Uncle Prudent, resuming his speech amid a silence up to then
unknown in the meetings of the Weldon Institute, said, "Gentlemen, it now only
remains for us to finish the aerostat 'Go-Ahead.' It is left to her to effect the
conquest of the air! The meeting is at an end!"


Chapter XXII


THE GO-AHEAD IS LAUNCHED


On the following 19th of April, seven months after the unexpected return of
Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans, Philadelphia was in a state of unwonted
excitement. There were neither elections nor meetings this time. The aerostat
"Go-Ahead," built by the Weldon Institute, was to take possession of her natural
element.

The celebrated Harry W. Tinder, whose name we mentioned at the beginning
of this story, had been engaged as aeronaut. He had no assistant, and the only
passengers were to be the president and secretary of the Weldon Institute.

Did they not merit such an honor? Did it not come to them appropriately to
rise in person to protest against any apparatus that was heavier than air?

During the seven months, however, they had said nothing of their
adventures; and even Frycollin had not uttered a whisper of Robur and his
wonderful clipper. Probably Uncle Prudent and his friend desired that no
question should arise as to the merits of the aeronef, or any other flying machine.

Although the "Go-Ahead" might not claim the first place among aerial
locomotives, they would have nothing to say about the inventions of other
aviators. They believed, and would always believe, that the true atmospheric
vehicle was the aerostat, and that to it alone belonged the future.

Besides, he on whom they had been so terribly--and in their idea so justly--
avenged, existed no longer. None of those who accompanied him had survived.
The secret of the "Albatross" was buried in the depths of the Pacific!

That Robur had a retreat, an island in the middle of that vast ocean, where he
could put into port, was only a hypothesis; and the colleagues reserved to
themselves the right of making inquiries on the subject later on. The grand
experiment which the Weldon Institute had been preparing for so long was at last
to take place. The "Go-Ahead" was the most perfect type of what had up to then
been invented in aerostatic art--she was what an "Inflexible" or a "Formidable" is
in ships of war.

She possessed all the qualities of a good aerostat. Her dimensions allowed of
her rising to the greatest height a balloon could attain; her impermeability
enabled her to remain for an indefinite time in the atmosphere; her solidity
would defy any dilation of gas or violence of wind or rain; her capacity gave her
sufficient ascensional force to lift with all their accessories an electric engine


that would communicate to her propellers a power superior to anything yet
obtained. The "Go-Ahead" was of elongated form, so as to facilitate her
horizontal displacement. Her car was a platform somewhat like that of the
balloon used by Krebs and Renard; and it carried all the necessary outfit,
instruments, cables, grapnels, guide-ropes, etc., and the piles and accumulators
for the mechanical power. The car had a screw in front, and a screw and rudder
behind. But probably the work done by the machines would be very much less
than that done by the machines of the "Albatross."

The "Go-Ahead" had been taken to the clearing in Fairmount Park, to the
very spot where the aeronef had landed for a few hours.

Her ascensional power was due to the very lightest of gaseous bodies.
Ordinary lighting gas possesses an elevating force of about 700 grams for every
cubic meter. But hydrogen possesses an ascensional force estimated at 1,100
grams per cubic meter. Pure hydrogen prepared according to the method of the
celebrated Henry Gifford filled the enormous balloon. And as the capacity of the
"Go-Ahead" was 40,000 cubic meters, the ascensional power of the gas she
contained was 40,000 multiplied by 1,100 or 44,000 kilograms.

On this 29th of April everything was ready. Since eleven o'clock the
enormous aerostat had been floating a few feet from the ground ready to rise in
mid-air. It was splendid weather and seemed to have been made specially for the
experiment, although if the breeze had been stronger the results might have been
more conclusive. There had never been any doubt that a balloon could be guided
in a calm atmosphere; but to guide it when the atmosphere is in motion is quite
another thing; and it is under such circumstances that the experiment should be
tried.

But there was no wind today, nor any sign of any. Strange to say, North
America on that day omitted to send on to Europe one of those first-class storms
which it seems to have in such inexhaustible numbers. A better day could not
have been chosen for an aeronautic experiment.

The crowd was immense in Fairmount Park; trains had poured into the
Pennsylvania capital sightseers from the neighboring states; industrial and
commercial life came to a standstill that the people might troop to the show-
master, workmen, women, old men, children, members of Congress, soldiers,
magistrates, reporters, white natives and black natives, all were there. We need
not stop to describe the excitement, the unaccountable movements, the sudden
pushings, which made the mass heave and swell. Nor need we recount the
number of cheers which rose from all sides like fireworks when Uncle Prudent
and Phil Evans appeared on the platform and hoisted the American colors. Need
we say that the majority of the crowd had come from afar not so much to see the


"Go-Ahead" as to gaze on these extraordinary men?

Why two and not three? Why not Frycollin? Because Frycollin thought his
campaign in the "Albatross" sufficient for his fame. He had declined the honor of
accompanying his master, and he took no part in the frenzied declamations that
greeted the president and secretary of the Weldon Institute.

Of the members of the illustrious assembly not one was absent from the
reserved places within the ropes. There were Truck Milnor, Bat T. Fynn, and
William T. Forbes with his two daughters on his arm. All had come to affirm by
their presence that nothing could separate them from the partisans of "lighter
than air."

About twenty minutes past eleven a gun announced the end of the final
preparations. The "Go-Ahead" only waited the signal to start. At twenty-five
minutes past eleven the second gun was fired.

The "Go-Ahead" was about one hundred and fifty feet above the clearing,
and was held by a rope. In this way the platform commanded the excited crowd.
Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans stood upright and placed their left hands on their
hearts, to signify how deeply they were touched by their reception. Then they
extended their right hands towards the zenith, to signify that the greatest of
known balloons was about to take possession of the supra-terrestrial domain.

A hundred thousand hands were placed in answer on a hundred thousand
hearts, and a hundred thousand other hands were lifted to the sky.

The third gun was fired at half-past eleven. "Let go!" shouted Uncle Prudent;
and the "Go-Ahead" rose "majestically"--an adverb consecrated by custom to all
aerostatic ascents.

It really was a superb spectacle. It seemed as if a vessel were just launched
from the stocks. And was she not a vessel launched into the aerial sea? The "Go-
Ahead" went up in a perfectly vertical line--a proof of the calmness of the
atmosphere--and stopped at an altitude of eight hundred feet.

Then she began her horizontal maneuvering. With her screws going she
moved to the east at a speed of twelve yards a second. That is the speed of the
whale--not an inappropriate comparison, for the balloon was somewhat of the
shape of the giant of the northern seas.

A salvo of cheers mounted towards the skillful aeronauts. Then under the
influence of her rudder, the "Go-Ahead" went through all the evolutions that her
steersman could give her. She turned in a small circle; she moved forwards and
backwards in a way to convince the most refractory disbeliever in the guiding of
balloons. And if there had been any disbeliever there he would have been simply
annihilated.

But why was there no wind to assist at this magnificent experiment? It was


regrettable. Doubtless the spectators would have seen the "Go-Ahead"
unhesitatingly execute all the movements of a sailing-vessel in beating to
windward, or of a steamer driving in the wind's eye.

At this moment the aerostat rose a few hundred yards. The maneuver was
understood below. Uncle Prudent and his companions were going in search of a
breeze in the higher zones, so as to complete the experiment. The system of
cellular balloons--analogous to the swimming bladder in fishes--into which
could be introduced a certain amount of air by pumping, had provided for this
vertical motion. Without throwing out ballast or losing gas the aeronaut was able
to rise or sink at his will. Of course there was a valve in the upper hemisphere
which would permit of a rapid descent if found necessary. All these contrivances
are well known, but they were here fitted in perfection.

The "Go-Ahead" then rose vertically. Her enormous dimensions gradually
grew smaller to the eye, and the necks of the crowd were almost cricked as they
gazed into the air. Gradually the whale became a porpoise, and the porpoise
became a gudgeon. The ascensional movement did not cease until the "Go-
Ahead" had reached a height of fourteen thousand feet. But the air was so free
from mist that she remained clearly visible.

However, she remained over the clearing as if she were a fixture. An
immense bell had imprisoned the atmosphere and deprived it of movement; not a
breath of wind was there, high or low. The aerostat maneuvered without
encountering any resistance, seeming very small owing to the distance, much as
if she were being looked at through the wrong end of a telescope.

Suddenly there was a shout among the crowd, a shout followed by a hundred
thousand more. All hands were stretched towards a point on the horizon. That
point was the northwest. There in the deep azure appeared a moving body, which
was approaching and growing larger. Was it a bird beating with its wings the
higher zones of space? Was it an aerolite shooting obliquely through the
atmosphere? In any case, its speed was terrific, and it would soon be above the
crowd. A suspicion communicated itself electrically to the brains of all on the
clearing.

But it seemed as though the "Go-Ahead" had sighted this strange object.
Assuredly it seemed as though she feared some danger, for her speed was
increased, and she was going east as fast as she could.

Yes, the crowd saw what it meant! A name uttered by one of the members of
the Weldon Institute was repeated by a hundred thousand mouths:

"The "Albatross!" The "Albatross!"


Chapter XXIII


THE GRAND COLLAPSE


It was indeed the "Albatross!" It was indeed Robur who had reappeared in
the heights of the sky! It was he who like a huge bird of prey was going to strike
the "Go-Ahead."

And yet, nine months before, the aeronef, shattered by the explosion, her
screws broken, her deck smashed in two, had been apparently annihilated.

Without the prodigious coolness of the engineer, who reversed the gyratory
motion of the fore propeller and converted it into a suspensory screw, the men of
the "Albatross" would all have been asphyxiated by the fall. But if they had
escaped asphyxia, how had they escaped being drowned in the Pacific?

The remains of the deck, the blades of the propellers, the compartments of
the cabins, all formed a sort of raft. When a wounded bird falls on the waves its
wings keep it afloat. For several hours Robur and his men remained unhelped, at
first on the wreck, and afterwards in the india-rubber boat that had fallen
uninjured. A few hours after sunrise they were sighted by a passing ship, and a
boat was lowered to their rescue.

Robur and his companions were saved, and so was much of what remained
of the aeronef. The engineer said that his ship had perished in a collision, and no
further questions were asked him.

The ship was an English three-master, the "Two Friends," bound for
Melbourne, where she arrived a few days afterwards.

Robur was in Australia, but a long way from X Island, to which he desired to
return as soon as possible.

In the ruins of the aftermost cabin he had found a considerable sum of
money, quite enough to provide for himself and companions without applying to
anyone for help. A short time after he arrived in Melbourne he became the owner
of a small brigantine of about a hundred tons, and in her he sailed for X Island.

There he had but one idea--to be avenged. But to secure his vengeance he
would have to make another "Albatross." This after all was an easy task for him
who made the first. He used up what he could of the old material; the propellers
and engines he had brought back in the brigantine. The mechanism was fitted
with new piles and new accumulators, and, in short, in less than eight months,
the work was finished, and a new "Albatross," identical with the one destroyed
by the explosion, was ready to take flight. And he had the same crew.


The "Albatross" left X Island in the first week of April. During this aerial
passage Robur did not want to be seen from the earth, and he came along almost
always above the clouds. When he arrived over North America he descended in
a desolate spot in the Far West. There the engineer, keeping a profound
incognito, learnt with considerable pleasure that the Weldon Institute was about
to begin its experiments, and that the "Go-Ahead," with Uncle Prudent and Phil
Evans, was going to start from Philadelphia on the 29th of April.

Here was a chance for Robur and his crew to gratify their longing for
revenge. Here was a chance for inflicting on their foes a terrible vengeance,
which in the "Go-Ahead" they could not escape. A public vengeance, which
would at the same time prove the superiority of the aeronef to all aerostats and
contrivances of that nature!

And that is why, on this very day, like a vulture from the clouds, the aeronef
appeared over Fairmount Park.

Yes! It was the "Albatross," easily recognizable by all those who had never
before seen her.

The "Go-Ahead" was in full flight; but it soon appeared that she could not
escape horizontally, and so she sought her safety in a vertical direction, not
dropping to the ground, for the aeronef would have cut her off, but rising to a
zone where she could not perhaps be reached. This was very daring, and at the
same time very logical.

But the "Albatross" began to rise after her. Although she was smaller than
the "Go-Ahead," it was a case of the swordfish and the whale.

This could easily be seen from below and with what anxiety! In a few
moments the aerostat had attained a height of sixteen thousand feet.

The "Albatross" followed her as she rose. She flew round her flanks, and
maneuvered round her in a circle with a constantly diminishing radius. She could
have annihilated her at a stroke, and Uncle Prudent and his companions would
have been dashed to atoms in a frightful fall.

The people, mute with horror, gazed breathlessly; they were seized with that
sort of fear which presses on the chest and grips the legs when we see anyone
fall from a height. An aerial combat was beginning in which there were none of
the chances of safety as in a sea-fight. It was the first of its kind, but it would not
be the last, for progress is one of the laws of this world. And if the "Go-Ahead"
was flying the American colors, did not the "Albatross" display the stars and
golden sun of Robur the Conqueror?

The "Go-Ahead" tried to distance her enemy by rising still higher. She threw
away the ballast she had in reserve; she made a new leap of three thousand feet;
she was now but a dot in space. The "Albatross," which followed her round and


round at top speed, was now invisible.

Suddenly a shout of terror rose from the crowd. The "Go-Ahead" increased
rapidly in size, and the aeronef appeared dropping with her. This time it was a
fall. The gas had dilated in the higher zones of the atmosphere and had burst the
balloon, which, half inflated still, was falling rapidly.

But the aeronef, slowing her suspensory screws, came down just as fast. She
ran alongside the "Go-Ahead" when she was not more than four thousand feet
from the ground.

Would Robur destroy her?

No; he was going to save her crew!

And so cleverly did he handle his vessel that the aeronaut jumped on board.

Would Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans refuse to be saved by him? They were
quite capable of doing so. But the crew threw themselves on them and dragged
them by force from the "Go-Ahead" to the "Albatross."

Then the aeronef glided off and remained stationary, while the balloon, quite
empty of gas, fell on the trees of the clearing and hung there like a gigantic rag.

An appalling silence reigned on the ground. It seemed as though life were
suspended in each of the crowd; and many eyes had been closed so as not to
behold the final catastrophe. Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans had again become
the prisoners of the redoubtable Robur. Now he had recaptured them, would he
carry them off into space, where it was impossible to follow him?

It seemed so.

However, instead of mounting into the sky the "Albatross" stopped six feet
from the ground. Then, amid profound silence, the engineer's voice was heard.

"Citizens of the United States," he said, "The president and secretary of the
Weldon Institute are again in my power. In keeping them I am only within my
right. But from the passion kindled in them by the success of the "Albatross" I
see that their minds are not prepared for that important revolution which the
conquest of the air will one day bring, Uncle Prudent and Phil Evans, you are
free!"

The president, the secretary, and the aeronaut had only to jump down.

Then Robur continued.

"Citizens of the United States, my experiment is finished; but my advice to
those present is to be premature in nothing, not even in progress. It is evolution
and not revolution that we should seek. In a word, we must not be before our
time. I have come too soon today to withstand such contradictory and divided
interests as yours. Nations are not yet fit for union.

"I go, then; and I take my secret with me. But it will not be lost to humanity.
It will belong to you the day you are educated enough to profit by it and wise


enough not to abuse it. Citizens of the United States--Good-by!"

And the "Albatross," beating the air with her seventy-four screws, and driven
by her propellers, shot off towards the east amid a tempest of cheers.

The two colleagues, profoundly humiliated, and through them the whole
Weldon Institute, did the only thing they could. They went home.

And the crowd by a sudden change of front greeted them with particularly
keen sarcasms, and, at their expense, are sarcastic still.

And now, who is this Robur? Shall we ever know?

We know today. Robur is the science of the future. Perhaps the science of
tomorrow. Certainly the science that will come!

Does the "Albatross" still cruise in the atmosphere in the realm that none can
take from her? There is no reason to doubt it.

Will Robur, the Conqueror, appear one day as he said? Yes! He will come to
declare the secret of his invention, which will greatly change the social and
political conditions of the world.

As for the future of aerial locomotion, it belongs to the aeronef and not the
aerostat.

It is to the "Albatross" that the conquest of the air will assuredly fall.


THE ADVENTURES OF A SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT

AMONG THE VARIOUS RACES AND COUNTRIES OF CENTRAL
ASIA

BEING THE EXPLOITS AND EXPERIENCES OF CLAUDIUS
BOMBARNAC OF "THE TWENTIETH CENTURY"


BY JULES VERNE


CHAPTER I.

CLAUDIUS BOMBARNAC,

Special Correspondent,

"Twentieth Century."

Tiflis, Transcaucasia.

Such is the address of the telegram I found on the 13th of May when I
arrived at Tiflis.

This is what the telegram said:


"As the matters in hand will terminate on the 15th instant Claudius
Bombarnac will repair to Uzun Ada, a port on the east coast of the Caspian.
There he will take the train by the direct Grand Transasiatic between the
European frontier and the capital of the Celestial Empire. He will transmit his
impressions in the way of news, interviewing remarkable people on the road, and
report the most trivial incidents by letter or telegram as necessity dictates. The
Twentieth Century trusts to the zeal, intelligence, activity and tact of its
correspondent, who can draw on its bankers to any extent he may deem
necessary."

It was the very morning I had arrived at Tiflis with the intention of spending
three weeks there in a visit to the Georgian provinces for the benefit of my
newspaper, and also, I hoped, for that of its readers.

Here was the unexpected, indeed; the uncertainty of a special correspondent's
life.

At this time the Russian railways had been connected with the line between
Poti, Tiflis and Baku. After a long and increasing run through the Southern
Russian provinces I had crossed the Caucasus, and imagined I was to have a
little rest in the capital of Transcaucasia. And here was the imperious
administration of the Twentieth Century giving me only half a day's halt in this
town! I had hardly arrived before I was obliged to be off again without
unstrapping my portmanteau! But what would you have? We must bow to the
exigencies of special correspondence and the modern interview!

But all the same I had been carefully studying this Transcaucasian district,
and was well provided with geographic and ethnologic memoranda. Perhaps it
may be as well for you to know that the fur cap, in the shape of a turban, which
forms the headgear of the mountaineers and cossacks is called a "papakha," that
the overcoat gathered in at the waist, over which the cartridge belt is hung, is
called a "tcherkeska" by some and "bechmet" by others! Be prepared to assert
that the Georgians and Armenians wear a sugar-loaf hat, that the merchants wear
a "touloupa," a sort of sheepskin cape, that the Kurd and Parsee still wear the
"bourka,"” a cloak in a material something like plush which is always
waterproofed.

And of the headgear of the Georgian ladies, the "tassakravi," composed of a
light ribbon, a woolen veil, or piece of muslin round such lovely faces; and their
gowns of startling colors, with the wide open sleeves, their under skirts fitted to
the figure, their winter cloak of velvet, trimmed with fur and silver gimp, their
summer mantle of white cotton, the "tchadre," which they tie tight on the neck--
all those fashions in fact so carefully entered in my notebook, what shall I say of
them?


Learn, then, that their national orchestras are composed of "zournas," which
are shrill flutes; "salamouris," which are squeaky clarinets; mandolines, with
copper strings, twanged with a feather; "tchianouris," violins, which are played
upright; "dimplipitos," a kind of cymbals which rattle like hail on a window
pane.

Know that the "schaska" is a sword hung from a bandolier trimmed with
studs and silver embroidery, that the "kindjall" or "kandijar" is a dagger worn in
the belt, that the armament of the soldiers of the Caucasus is completed by a long
Damascus gun ornamented with bands of chiseled metal.

Know that the "tarantass" is a sort of berline hung on five pieces of rather
elastic wood between wheels placed rather wide apart and of moderate height;
that this carriage is driven by a "yemtchik," on the front seat, who has three
horses, to whom is added a postilion, the "falétre," when it is necessary to hire a
fourth horse from the "smatritel," who is the postmaster on the Caucasian roads.

Know, then, that the verst is two-thirds of a mile, that the different nomadic
people of the governments of Transcaucasia are composed of Kalmucks,
descendants of the Eleuthes, fifteen thousand, Kirghizes of Mussulman origin
eight thousand, Koundrof Tartars eleven hundred, Sartof Tartars a hundred and
twelve, Nogais eight thousand five hundred, Turkomans nearly four thousand.

And thus, after having so minutely absorbed my Georgia, here was this ukase
obliging me to abandon it! And I should not even have time to visit Mount
Ararat or publish my impressions of a journey in Transcaucasia, losing a
thousand lines of copy at the least, and for which I had at my disposal the 32,000
words of my language actually recognized by the French Academy.

It was hard, but there was no way out of it. And to begin with, at what
o'clock did the train for Tiflis start from the Caspian?

The station at Tiflis is the junction of three lines of railway: the western line
ending at Poti on the Black Sea, where the passengers land coming from Europe,
the eastern line which ends at Baku, where the passengers embark to cross the
Caspian, and the line which the Russians have just made for a length of about a
hundred miles between Ciscaucasia and Transcaucasia, from Vladikarkaz to
Tiflis, crossing the Arkhot range at a height of four thousand five hundred feet,
and which connects the Georgian capital with the railways of Southern Russia.

I went to the railway station at a run, and rushed into the departure office.

"When is there a train for Baku?" I asked.

"You are going to Baku?" answered the clerk.

And from his trap-door he gave me one of those looks more military than
civil, which are invariably found under the peak of a Muscovite cap.

"T think so," said I, perhaps a little sharply, "that is, if it is not forbidden to go


to Baku."

"No," he replied, dryly, "that is, if you are provided with a proper passport."

"I will have a proper passport," I replied to this ferocious functionary, who,
like all the others in Holy Russia, seemed to me an intensified gendarme.

Then I again asked what time the train left for Baku.

"Six o'clock tonight."

"And when does it get there?"

"Seven o'clock in the morning."

"Is that in time to catch the boat for Uzun Ada?"

"In time."

And the man at the trap-door replied to my salute by a salute of mechanical
precision.

The question of passport did not trouble me. The French consul would know
how to give me all the references required by the Russian administration.

Six o'clock tonight, and it is already nine o'clock in the morning! Bah! When
certain guide books tell you how to explore Paris in two days, Rome in three
days, and London in four days, it would be rather curious if I could not do Tiflis
in a half day. Either one is a correspondent or one is not!

It goes without saying that my newspaper would not have sent me to Russia,
if I could not speak fluently in Russian, English and German. To require a
newspaper man to know the few thousand languages which are used to express
thought in the five parts of the world would be too much; but with the three
languages above named, and French added, one can go far across the two
continents. It is true, there is Turkish of which I had picked up a few phrases,
and there is Chinese of which I did not understand a single word. But I had no
fear of remaining dumb in Turkestan and the Celestial Empire. There would be
interpreters on the road, and I did not expect to lose a detail of my run on the
Grand Transasiatic. I knew how to see, and see I would. Why should I hide it
from myself? I am one of those who think that everything here below can serve
as copy for a newspaper man; that the earth, the moon, the sky, the universe were
only made as fitting subjects for newspaper articles, and that my pen was in no
fear of a holiday on the road.

Before starting off round Tiflis let us have done with this passport business.
Fortunately I had no need for a "poderojnaia," which was formerly indispensable
to whoever traveled in Russia. That was in the time of the couriers, of the post
horses, and thanks to its powers that official exeat cleared away all difficulties,
assured the most rapid relays, the most amiable civilities from the postilions, the
greatest rapidity of transport, and that to such a pitch that a well-recommended
traveler could traverse in eight days five hours the two thousand seven hundred


versts which separate Tiflis from Petersburg. But what difficulties there were in
procuring that passport!

A mere permission to move about would do for to-day, a certificate attesting
in a certain way that you are not a murderer or even a political criminal, that you
are what is called an honest man, in a civilized country. Thanks to the assistance
I received from our consul at Tiflis, I was soon all in due order with the
Muscovite authorities.

It was an affair of two hours and two roubles. I then devoted myself entirely,
eyes, ears, legs, to the exploration of the Georgian capital, without taking a
guide, for guides are a horror to me. It is true that I should have been capable of
guiding no matter what stranger, through the mazes of this capital which I had so
carefully studied beforehand. That is a natural gift.

Here is what I recognized as I wandered about haphazard: first, there was the
"douma," which is the town hall, where the "golova," or mayor, resides; if you
had done me the honor to accompany me, I would have taken you to the
promenade of Krasnoia-Gora on the left bank of the Koura, the Champs Elysées
of the place, something like the Tivoli of Copenhagen, or the fair of the
Belleville boulevard with its "Katchélis," delightful seesaws, the artfully
managed undulations of which will make you seasick. And everywhere amid the
confusion of market booths, the women in holiday costume, moving about with
faces uncovered, both Georgians and Armenians, thereby showing that they are
Christians.

As to the men, they are Apollos of the Belvedere, not so simply clothed,
having the air of princes, and I should like to know if they are not so. Are they
not descended from them? But I will genealogize later on. Let us continue our
exploration at full stride. A minute lost is ten lines of correspondence, and ten
lines of correspondence is--that depends on the generosity of the newspaper and
its managers.

Quick to the grand caravanserai. There you will find the caravans from all
points of the Asiatic continent. Here is one just coming in, composed of
Armenian merchants. There is one going out, formed of traders in Persia and
Russian Turkestan. I should like to arrive with one and depart with the other.
That is not possible, and I am sorry for it. Since the establishment of the
Transasiatic railways, it is not often that you can meet with those interminable
and picturesque lines of horsemen, pedestrians, horses, camels, asses, carts. Bah!
I have no fear that my journey across Central Asia will fail for want of interest.
A special correspondent of the Twentieth Century will know how to make it
interesting.

Here now are the bazaars with the thousand products of Persia, China,


Turkey, Siberia, Mongolia. There is a profusion of the fabrics of Teheran, Shiraz,
Kandahar, Kabul, carpets marvelous in weaving and colors, silks, which are not
worth as much as those of Lyons.

Will I buy any? No; to embarrass oneself with packages on a trip from the
Caspian to the Celestial Empire, never! The little portmanteau I can carry in my
hand, the bag slung across my shoulders, and a traveling suit will be enough for
me. Linen? I will get it on the road, in English fashion.

Let us stop in front of the famous baths of Tiflis, the thermal waters of which
attain a temperature of 60 degrees centigrade. There you will find in use the
highest development of massage, the suppling of the spine, the cracking of the
joints. I remember what was said by our great Dumas whose peregrinations were
never devoid of incidents; he invented them when he wanted them, that genial
precursor of high-pressure correspondence! But I have no time to be shampooed,
or to be cracked or suppled.

Stop! The Hotel de France. Where is there not a Hotel de France? I enter, I
order breakfast--a Georgian breakfast watered with a certain Kachelie wine,
which is said to never make you drunk, that is, if you do not sniff up as much as
you drink in using the large-necked bottles into which you dip your nose before
your lips. At least that is the proceeding dear to the natives of Transcaucasia. As
to the Russians, who are generally sober, the infusion of tea is enough for them,
not without a certain addition of vodka, which is the Muscovite brandy.

I, a Frenchman, and even a Gascon, am content to drink my bottle of
Kachelie, as we drank our Chateau Laffite, in those regretted days, when the sun
still distilled it on the hillsides of Pauillac. In truth this Caucasian wine, although
rather sour, accompanied by the boiled fowl, known as pilau--has rather a
pleasant taste about it.

It is over and paid for. Let us mingle with the sixteen thousand inhabitants of
the Georgian capital. Let us lose ourselves in the labyrinth of its streets, among
its cosmopolitan population. Many Jews who button their coats from left to right,
as they write--the contrary way to the other Aryan peoples. Perhaps the sons of
Israel are not masters in this country, as in so many others? That is so,
undoubtedly; a local proverb says it takes six Jews to outwit an Armenian, and
Armenians are plentiful in these Transcaucasian provinces.

I reach a sandy square, where camels, with their heads out straight, and their
feet bent under in front, are sitting in hundreds. They used to be here in
thousands, but since the opening of the Transcaspian railway some years ago
now, the number of these humped beasts of burden has sensibly diminished. Just
compare one of these beasts with a goods truck or a luggage van!

Following the slope of the streets, I come out on the quays by the Koura, the


bed of which divides the town into two unequal parts. On each side rise the
houses, one above the other, each one looking over the roof of its neighbors. In
the neighborhood of the river there is a good deal of trade. There you will find
much moving about of vendors of wine, with their goatskins bellying out like
balloons, and vendors of water with their buffalo skins, fitted with pipes looking
like elephants’ trunks.

Here am I wandering at a venture; but to wander is human, says the
collegians of Bordeaux, as they muse on the quays of the Gironde.

"Sir," says a good little Jew to me, showing me a certain habitation which
seems a very ordinary one, "you are a stranger?"

"Quite."

"Then do not pass this house without stopping a moment to admire it."

"And why?"

"There lived the famous tenor Satar, who sang the contre-fa from his chest.
And they paid him for it!"

I told the worthy patriarch that I hoped he would be able to sing a contre-sol
even better paid for; and I went up the hill to the right of the Koura, so as to have
a view of the whole town.

At the top of the hill, on a little open space where a reciter is declaiming with
vigorous gestures the verses of Saadi, the adorable Persian poet, I abandon
myself to the contemplation of the Transcaucasian capital. What I am doing here,
I propose to do again in a fortnight at Pekin. But the pagodas and yamens of the
Celestial Empire can wait awhile, here is Tiflis before my eyes; walls of the
citadels, belfries of the temples belonging to the different religions, a
metropolitan church with its double cross, houses of Russian, Persian, or
Armenian construction; a few roofs, but many terraces; a few omamental
frontages, but many balconies and verandas; then two well-marked zones, the
lower zone remaining Georgian, the higher zone, more modern, traversed by a
long boulevard planted with fine trees, among which is seen the palace of Prince
Bariatinsky, a capricious, unexpected marvel of irregularity, which the horizon
borders with its grand frontier of mountains.

It is now five o'clock. I have no time to deliver myself in a remunerative
torrent of descriptive phrases. Let us hurry off to the railway station.

There is a crowd of Armenians, Georgians, Mingrelians, Tartars, Kurds,
Israelites, Russians, from the shores of the Caspian, some taking their tickets--
Oh! the Oriental color--direct for Baku, some for intermediate stations.

This time I was completely in order. Neither the clerk with the gendarme's
face, nor the gendarmes themselves could hinder my departure.

I take a ticket for Baku, first class. I go down on the platform to the


carriages. According to my custom, I install myself in a comfortable corner. A
few travelers follow me while the cosmopolitan populace invade the second and
third-class carriages. The doors are shut after the visit of the ticket inspector. A
last scream of the whistle announces that the train is about to start.

Suddenly there is a shout--a shout in which anger is mingled with despair,
and I catch these words in German:

"Stop! Stop!"

I put down the window and look out.

A fat man, bag in hand, traveling cap on head, his legs embarrassed in the
skirts of a huge overcoat, short and breathless. He is late.

The porters try to stop him. Try to stop a bomb in the middle of its trajectory!
Once again has right to give place to might.

The Teuton bomb describes a well-calculated curve, and has just fallen into
the compartment next to ours, through the door a traveler had obligingly left
open.

The train begins to move at the same instant, the engine wheels begin to slip
on the rails, then the speed increases.

We are off.


CHAPTER II.

We were three minutes late in starting; it is well to be precise. A special
correspondent who is not precise is a geometer who neglects to run out his
calculations to the tenth decimal. This delay of three minutes made the German
our traveling companion. I have an idea that this good man will furnish me with
some copy, but it is only a presentiment.

It is still daylight at six o'clock in the evening in this latitude. I have bought a
time-table and I consult it. The map which accompanies it shows me station by
station the course of the line between Tiflis and Baku. Not to know the direction
taken by the engine, to be ignorant if the train is going northeast or southeast,
would be insupportable to me, all the more as when night comes, I shall see
nothing, for I cannot see in the dark as if I were an owl or a cat.

My time-table shows me that the railway skirts for a little distance the
carriage road between Tiflis and the Caspian, running through Saganlong, Poily,
Elisabethpol, Karascal, Aliat, to Baku, along the valley of the Koura. We cannot
tolerate a railway which winds about; it must keep to a straight line as much as
possible. And that is what the Transgeorgian does.

Among the stations there is one I would have gladly stopped at if I had had
time, Elisabethpol. Before I received the telegram from the Twentieth Century, I


had intended to stay there a week. I had read such attractive descriptions of it,
and I had but a five minutes' stop there, and that between two and three o'clock
in the morning! Instead of a town resplendent in the rays of the sun, I could only
obtain a view of a vague mass confusedly discoverable in the pale beams of the
moon!

Having ended my careful examination of the time-table, I began to examine
my traveling companions. There were four of us, and I need scarcely say that we
occupied the four corners of the compartment. I had taken the farthest corner
facing the engine. At the two opposite angles two travelers were seated facing
each other. As soon as they got in they had pulled their caps down on their eyes
and wrapped themselves up in their cloaks--evidently they were Georgians as far
as I could see. But they belonged to that special and privileged race who sleep on
the railway, and they did not wake up until we reached Baku. There was nothing
to be got out of those people; the carriage is not a carriage for them, it is a bed.

In front of me was quite a different type with nothing of the Oriental about it;
thirty-two to thirty-five years old, face with a reddish beard, very much alive in
look, nose like that of a dog standing at point, mouth only too glad to talk, hands
free and easy, ready for a shake with anybody; a tall, vigorous, broad-
shouldered, powerful man. By the way in which he settled himself and put down
his bag, and unrolled his traveling rug of bright-hued tartan, I had recognized the
Anglo-Saxon traveler, more accustomed to long journeys by land and sea than to
the comforts of his home, if he had a home. He looked like a commercial
traveler. I noticed that his jewelry was in profusion; rings on his fingers, pin in
his scarf, studs on his cuffs, with photographic views in them, showy trinkets
hanging from the watch-chain across his waistcoat. Although he had no earrings
and did not wear a ring at his nose I should not have been surprised if he turned
out to be an American--probably a Yankee.

That is my business. To find out who are my traveling companions, whence
they come, where they go, is that not the duty of a special correspondent in
search of interviews? I will begin with my neighbor in front of me. That will not
be difficult, I imagine. He is not dreaming or sleeping, or looking out on the
landscape lighted by the last rays of the sun. If I am not mistaken he will be just
as glad to speak to me as I am to speak to him--and reciprocally.

I will see. But a fear restrains me. Suppose this American--and I am sure he
is one--should also be a special, perhaps for the World or the New York Herald,
and suppose he has also been ordered off to do this Grand Asiatic. That would be
most annoying! He would be a rival!

My hesitation is prolonged. Shall I speak, shall I not speak? Already night
has begun to fall. At last I was about to open my mouth when my companion


prevented me.

"You are a Frenchman?" he said in my native tongue.

"Yes, sir," I replied in his.

Evidently we could understand each other.

The ice was broken, and then question followed on question rather rapidly
between us. You know the Oriental proverb:

"A fool asks more questions in an hour than a wise man in a year."

But as neither my companion nor myself had any pretensions to wisdom we
asked away merrily.

"Wait a bit," said my American.

I italicize this phrase because it will recur frequently, like the pull of the rope
which gives the impetus to the swing.

"Wait a bit! I'll lay ten to one that you are a reporter!"

"And you would win! Yes. I am a reporter sent by the Twentieth Century to
do this journey."

"Going all the way to Pekin?"

"To Pekin."

"So am I," replied the Yankee.

And that was what I was afraid of.

"Same trade?" said I indifferently.

"No. You need not excite yourself. We don't sell the same stuff, sir."

"Claudius Bombarnac, of Bordeaux, is delighted to be on the same road as--"

"Fulk Ephrinell, of the firm of Strong, Bulbul & Co., of New York City, New
York, U.S.A."

And he really added U.S.A.

We were mutually introduced. I a traveler in news, and he a traveler in--In
what? That I had to find out.

The conversation continues. Ephrinell, as may be supposed, has been
everywhere--and even farther, as he observes. He knows both Americas and
almost all Europe. But this is the first time he has set foot in Asia. He talks and
talks, and always jerks in Wait a bit, with inexhaustible loquacity. Has the
Hunson the same properties as the Garonne?

I listen to him for two hours. I have hardly heard the names of the stations
yelled out at each stop, Saganlong, Poily, and the others. And I really should
have liked to examine the landscape in the soft light of the moon, and made a
few notes on the road.

Fortunately my fellow traveler had already crossed these eastern parts of
Georgia. He pointed out the spots of interest, the villages, the watercourses, the
mountains on the horizon. But I hardly saw them. Confound these railways! You


start, you arrive, and you have seen nothing on the road!

"No!" I exclaim, "there is none of the charm about it as there is in traveling
by post, in troika, tarantass, with the surprises of the road, the originality of the
inns, the confusion when you change horses, the glass of vodka of the
yemtchiks--and occasionally the meeting with those honest brigands whose race
is nearly extinct."

"Mr. Bombarnac," said Ephrinell to me, "are you serious in regretting all
those fine things?"

"Quite serious," I reply. "With the advantages of the straight line of railway
we lose the picturesqueness of the curved line, or the broken line of the
highways of the past. And, Monsieur Ephrinell, when you read of traveling in
Transcaucasia forty years ago, do you not regret it? Shall I see one of those
villages inhabited by Cossacks who are soldiers and farmers at one and the same
time? Shall I be present at one of those merry-makings which charm the tourist?
those djiquitovkas with the men upright on their horses, throwing their swords,
discharging their pistols, and escorting you if you are in the company of some
high functionary, or a colonel of the Staniza."

"Undoubtedly we have lost all those fine things," replies my Yankee. "But,
thanks to these iron ribbons which will eventually encircle our globe like a
hogshead of cider or a bale of cotton, we can go in thirteen days from Tiflis to
Pekin. That is why, if you expect any incidents, to enliven you--"

"Certainly, Monsieur Ephrinell."

"Tllusions, Mr. Bombarnac! Nothing will happen either to you or me. Wait a
bit, I promise you a journey, the most prosaic, the most homely, the flattest--flat
as the steppes of Kara Koum, which the Grand Transasiatic traverses in
Turkestan, and the plains of the desert of Gobi it crosses in China--"

"Well, we shall see, for I travel for the pleasure of my readers."

"And I travel merely for my own business."

And at this reply the idea recurred to me that Ephrinell would not be quite
the traveling companion I had dreamed of. He had goods to sell, I had none to
buy. I foresaw that our meeting would not lead to a sufficient intimacy during
our long journey. He was one of those Yankees who, as they say, hold a dollar
between their teeth, which it is impossible to get away from them, and I should
get nothing out of him that was worth having.

And although I knew that he traveled for Strong, Bulbul & Co., of New
York, I had never heard of the firm. To listen to their representative, it would
appear that Strong, Bulbul & Co. ought to be known throughout the world.

But then, how was it that they were unknown to me, a pupil of Chincholle,
our master in everything! I was quite at a loss because I had never heard of the


firm of Strong, Bulbul & Co.

I was about to interrogate Ephrinell on this point, when he said to me:

"Have you ever been in the United States, Mr. Bombarnac?"

"No, Monsieur Ephrinell."

"You will come to our country some day?"

"Perhaps."

"Then you will not forget to explore the establishment of Strong, Bulbul &
Coe

"Explore it?"

"That is the proper word."

"Good! I shall not fail to do so."

"You will see one of the most remarkable industrial establishments of the
New Continent."

"T have no doubt of it; but how am I to know it?"

"Wait a bit, Mr. Bombarnac. Imagine a colossal workshop, immense
buildings for the mounting and adjusting of the pieces, a steam engine of fifteen
hundred horse-power, ventilators making six hundred revolutions a minute,
boilers consuming a hundred tons of coals a day, a chimney stack four hundred
and fifty feet high, vast outhouses for the storage of our goods, which we send to
the five parts of the world, a general manager, two sub-managers, four
secretaries, eight under-secretaries, a staff of five hundred clerks and nine
hundred workmen, a whole regiment of travelers like your servant, working in
Europe, Asia, Africa, America, Australasia, in short, a turnover exceeding
annually one hundred million dollars! And all that, Mr. Bombarnac, for making
millions of--yes, I said millions--"

At this moment the train commenced to slow under the action of its
automatic brakes, and he stopped.

"Elisabethpol! Elisabethpol!" shout the guard and the porters on the station.

Our conversation is interrupted. I lower the window on my side, and open
the door, being desirous of stretching my legs.

Ephrinell did not get out.

Here was I striding along the platform of a very poorly lighted station. A
dozen travelers had already left the train. Five or six Georgians were crowding
on the steps of the compartments. Ten minutes at Elisabethpol; the time-table
allowed us no more.

As soon as the bell begins to ring I return to our carriage, and when I have
shut the door I notice that my place is taken. Yes! Facing the American, a lady
has installed herself with that Anglo-Saxon coolness which is as unlimited as the
infinite. Is she young? Is she old? Is she pretty? Is she plain? The obscurity does


not allow me to judge. In any case, my French gallantry prevents me from
claiming my corner, and I sit down beside this person who makes no attempt at
apology.

Ephrinell seems to be asleep, and that stops my knowing what it is that
Strong, Bulbul & Co., of New York, manufacture by the million.

The train has started. We have left Elisabethpol behind. What have I seen of
this charming town of twenty thousand inhabitants, built on the Gandja-tchai, a
tributary of the Koura, which I had specially worked up before my arrival?
Nothing of its brick houses hidden under verdure, nothing of its curious ruins,
nothing of its superb mosque built at the beginning of the eighteenth century. Of
its admirable plane trees, so sought after by crows and blackbirds, and which
maintain a supportable temperature during the excessive heats of summer, I had
scarcely seen the higher branches with the moon shining on them. And on the
banks of the stream which bears its silvery murmuring waters along the principal
street, I had only seen a few houses in little gardens, like small crenelated
fortresses. All that remained in my memory would be an indecisive outline,
seized in flight from between the steam puffs of our engine. And why are these
houses always in a state of defence? Because Elisabethpol is a fortified town
exposed to the frequent attacks of the Lesghians of Chirvan, and these
mountaineers, according to the best-informed historians, are directly descended
from Attila's hordes.

It was nearly midnight. Weariness invited me to sleep, and yet, like a good
reporter, I must sleep with one eye and one ear open.

I fall into that sort of slumber provoked by the regular trepidations of a train
on the road, mingled with ear-splitting whistles and the grind of the brakes as the
speed is slowed, and tumultuous roars as passing trains are met with, besides the
names of the stations shouted out during the short stoppages, and the banging of
the doors which are opened or shut with metallic sonority.

In this way I heard the shouts of Geran, Varvara, Oudjarry, Kiourdamir,
Klourdane, then Karasoul, Navagi. I sat up, but as I no longer occupied the
comer from which I had been so cavalierly evicted, it was impossible for me to
look through the window.

And then I began to ask what is hidden beneath this mass of veils and wraps
and petticoats, which has usurped my place. Is this lady going to be my
companion all the way to the terminus of the Grand Transasiatic? Shall I
exchange a sympathetic salute with her in the streets of Pekin? And from her my
thoughts wander to my companion who is snoring in the corner in a way that
would make all the ventilators of Strong, Bulbul & Co. quite jealous. And what
is it these big people make? Is it iron bridges, or locomotives, or armor plates, or


steam boilers, or mining pumps? From what my American told me, I might find
a rival to Creusot or Cokerill or Essen in this formidable establishment in the
United States of America. At least unless he has been taking a rise out of me, for
he does not seem to be "green," as they say in his country, which means to say
that he does not look very much like an idiot, this Ephrinell!

And yet it seems that I must gradually have fallen sound asleep. Withdrawn
from exterior influences, I did not even hear the stentorian respiration of the
Yankee. The train arrived at Aliat, and stayed there ten minutes without my
being aware of it. I am sorry for it, for Aliat is a little seaport, and I should like
to have had a first glimpse of the Caspian, and of the countries ravaged by Peter
the Great. Two columns of the historico-fantastic might have been made out of
that, with the aid of Bouillet and Larousse.

"Baku! Baku!"

The word repeated as the train stopped awoke me.

It was seven o'clock in the morning.


CHAPTER III.

The boat did not start until three o'clock in the afternoon. Those of my
companions who intended to cross the Caspian hurried off to the harbor; it being
necessary to engage a cabin, or to mark one's place in the steamer's saloon.

Ephrinell precipitately left me with these words:

"TI have not an instant to lose. I must see about the transport of my baggage."

"Have you much?"

"Forty-two cases."

"Forty-two cases!" I exclaimed.

"And I am sorry I have not double as many. Allow me--"

If he had had a voyage of eight days, instead of one of twenty-four hours,
and had to cross the Atlantic instead of the Caspian, he could not have been in a
greater hurry.

As you may imagine, the Yankee did not for a moment think of offering his
hand to assist our companion in descending from the carriage. I took his place.
The lady leaned on my arm and jumped--no, gently put her foot on the ground.
My reward was a thank you, sir, uttered in a hard, dry, unmistakably British
voice.

Thackeray has said somewhere that a well-brought-up Englishwoman is the
completest of the works of God on this earth. My only wish is to verify this
gallant affirmation in the case of my companion. She has put back her veil. Is
she a young woman or an old girl? With these Englishwomen one never knows!


Twenty-five years is apparently about her age, she has an Albionesque
complexion, a jerky walk, a high dress like an equinoctial tide, no spectacles,
although she has eyes of the intense blue which are generally short-sighted.
While I bend my back as I bow, she honors me with a nod, which only brings
into play the vertebrae of her long neck, and she walks off straight toward the
way out.

Probably I shall meet this person again on the steamboat. For my part, I shall
not go down to the harbor until it is time to start. I am at Baku: I have half a day
to see Baku, and I shall not lose an hour, now that the chances of my wanderings
have brought me to Baku.

It is possible that the name may in no way excite the reader's curiosity. But
perhaps it may inflame his imagination if I tell him that Baku is the town of the
Guebres, the city of the Parsees, the metropolis of the fire-worshippers.

Encircled by a triple girdle of black battlemented walls, the town is built near
Cape Apcheron, on the extreme spur of the Caucasian range. But am I in Persia
or in Russia? In Russia undoubtedly, for Georgia is a Russian province; but we
can still believe we are in Persia, for Baku has retained its Persian physiognomy.
I visit a palace of the khans, a pure product of the architecture of the time of
Schahriar and Scheherazade, "daughter of the moon," his gifted romancer, a
palace in which the delicate sculpture is as fresh as it came from the chisel.
Further on rise some slender minarets, and not the bulbous roofs of Moscow the
Holy, at the angles of an old mosque, into which one can enter without taking off
one's boots. True, the muezzin no longer declaims from it some sonorous verse
of the Koran at the hour of prayer. And yet Baku has portions of it which are real
Russian in manners and aspect, with their wooden houses without a trace of
Oriental color, a railway station of imposing aspect, worthy of a great city in
Europe or America, and at the end of one of the roads, a modern harbor, the
atmosphere of which is foul with the coal smoke vomited from the steamer
funnels.

And, in truth, one asks what they are doing with coal in this town of naphtha.
What is the good of coal when the bare and arid soil of Apcheron, which grows
only the Pontic absinthium, is so rich in mineral oil? At eighty francs the
hundred kilos, it yields naphtha, black or white, which the exigencies of supply
will not exhaust for centuries.

A marvelous phenomenon indeed! Do you want a light or a fire? Nothing can
be simpler; make a hole in the ground, the gas escapes, and you apply a match.
That is a natural gasometer within the reach of all purses.

I should have liked to visit the famous sanctuary of Atesh Gah; but it is
twenty-two versts from the town, and time failed me. There burns the eternal


fire, kept up for centuries by the Parsee priests from India, who never touch
animal food.

This reminds me that I have not yet breakfasted, and as eleven o'clock
strikes, I make my way to the restaurant at the railway, where I have no intention
of conforming myself to the alimentary code of the Parsees of Atesh Gah.

As I am entering, Ephrinell rushes out.

"Breakfast?" say I.

"T have had it," he replies.

"And your cases?"

"T have still twenty-nine to get down to the steamer. But, pardon, I have not a
moment to lose. When a man represents the firm of Strong, Bulbul & Co., who
send out every week five thousand cases of their goods--"

"Go, go, Monsieur Ephrinell, we will meet on board. By the by, you have not
met our traveling companion?"

"What traveling companion?"

"The young lady who took my place in the carriage."

"Was there a young lady with us?"

"Of course."

"Well you are the first to tell me so, Mr. Bombarnac. You are the first to tell
me so."

And thereupon the American goes out of the door and disappears. It is to be
hoped I shall know before we get to Pekin what it is that Strong, Bulbul & Co.
send out in such quantities. Five thousand cases a week--what an output, and
what a turnover!

I had soon finished my breakfast and was off again. During my walk I was
able to admire a few magnificent Lesghians; these wore the grayish tcherkesse,
with the cartridge belts on the chest, the bechmet of bright red silk, the gaiters
embroidered with silver, the boots flat, without a heel, the white papak on the
head, the long gun on the shoulders, the schaska and kandijar at the belt--in short
men of the arsenal as there are men of the orchestra, but of superb aspect and
who ought to have a marvelous effect in the processions of the Russian emperor.

It is already two o'clock, and I think I had better get down to the boat. I must
call at the railway station, where I have left my light luggage at the cloakroom.

Soon I am off again, bag in one hand, stick in the other, hastening down one
of the roads leading to the harbor.

At the break in the wall where access is obtained to the quay, my attention is,
I do not know why, attracted by two people walking along together. The man is
from thirty to thirty-five years old, the woman from twenty-five to thirty, the
man already a grayish brown, with mobile face, lively look, easy walk with a


certain swinging of the hips. The woman still a pretty blonde, blue eyes, a rather
fresh complexion, her hair frizzed under a cap, a traveling costume which is in
good taste neither in its unfashionable cut nor in its glaring color. Evidently a
married couple come in the train from Tiflis, and unless I am mistaken they are
French.

But although I look at them with curiosity, they take no notice of me. They
are too much occupied to see me. In their hands, on their shoulders, they have
bags and cushions and wraps and sticks and sunshades and umbrellas. They are
carrying every kind of little package you can think of which they do not care to
put with the luggage on the steamer. I have a good mind to go and help them. Is
it not a happy chance--and a rare one--to meet with French people away from
France?

Just as I am walking up to them, Ephrinell appears, drags me away, and I
leave the couple behind. It is only a postponement. I will meet them again on the
steamboat and make their acquaintance on the voyage.

"Well," said I to the Yankee, "how are you getting on with your cargo?"

"At this moment, sir, the thirty-seventh case is on the road."

"And no accident up to now?

"No accident."

"And what may be in those cases, if you please?

"In those cases? Ah! There is the thirty-seventh!" he exclaimed, and he ran
out to meet a truck which had just come onto the quay.

There was a good deal of bustle about, and all the animation of departures
and arrivals. Baku is the most frequented and the safest port on the Caspian.
Derbent, situated more to the north, cannot keep up with it, and it absorbs almost
the entire maritime traffic of this sea, or rather this great lake which has no
communication with the neighboring seas. The establishment of Uzun Ada on
the opposite coast has doubled the trade which used to pass through Baku. The
Transcaspian now open for passengers and goods is the chief commercial route
between Europe and Turkestan.

In the near future there will perhaps be a second route along the Persian
frontier connecting the South Russian railways with those of British India, and
that will save travelers the navigation of the Caspian. And when this vast basin
has dried up through evaporation, why should not a railroad be run across its
sandy bed, so that trains can run through without transhipment at Baku and Uzun
Ada?

While we are waiting for the realization of this desideratum, it is necessary to
take the steamboat, and that I am preparing to do in company with many others.

Our steamer is called the Astara, of the Caucasus and Mercury Company.


She is a big paddle steamer, making three trips a week from coast to coast. She is
a very roomy boat, designed to carry a large cargo, and the builders have thought
considerably more of the cargo than of the passengers. After all, there is not
much to make a fuss about in a day's voyage.

There is a noisy crowd on the quay of people who are going off, and people
who have come to see them off, recruited from the cosmopolitan population of
Baku. I notice that the travelers are mostly Turkomans, with about a score of
Europeans of different nationalities, a few Persians, and two representatives of
the Celestial Empire. Evidently their destination is China. .

The Astara is loaded up. The hold is not big enough, and a good deal of the
cargo has overflowed onto the deck. The stern is reserved for passengers, but
from the bridge forward to the topgallant forecastle, there is a heap of cases
covered with tarpaulins to protect them from the sea.

There Ephrinell's cases have been put. He has lent a hand with Yankee
energy, determined not to lose sight of his valuable property, which is in cubical
cases, about two feet on the side, covered with patent leather, carefully strapped,
and on which can be read the stenciled words, "Strong, Bulbul & Co., Now
York."

"Are all your goods on board?" I asked the American.

"There is the forty-second case just coming," he replied.

And there was the said case on the back of a porter already coming along the
gangway.

It seemed to me that the porter was rather tottery, owing perhaps to a lengthy
absorption of vodka.

"Wait a bit!" shouted Ephrinell. Then in good Russian, so as to be better
understood, he shouted:

"Look out! Look out!"

It is good advice, but it is too late. The porter has just made a false step. The
case slips from his shoulders, falls--luckily over the rail of the Astara--breaks in
two, and a quantity of little packets of paper scatter their contents on the deck.

What a shout of indignation did Ephrinell raise! What a whack with his fist
did he administer to the unfortunate porter as he repeated in a voice of despair:
"My teeth, my poor teeth!"

And he went down on his knees to gather up his little bits of artificial ivory
that were scattered all about, while I could hardly keep from laughing.

Yes! It was teeth which Strong, Bulbul & Co., of New York made! It was for
manufacturing five thousand cases a week for the five parts of the world that this
huge concern existed! It was for supplying the dentists of the old and new
worlds; it was for sending teeth as far as China, that their factory required fifteen


hundred horse power, and burned a hundred tons of coal a day! That is quite
American!

After all, the population of the globe is fourteen hundred million, and as
there are thirty-two teeth per inhabitant, that makes forty-five thousand millions;
so that if it ever became necessary to replace all the true teeth by false ones, the
firm of Strong, Bulbul & Co. would not be able to supply them.

But we must leave Ephrinell gathering up the odontological treasures of the
forty-second case. The bell is ringing for the last time. All the passengers are
aboard. The Astara is casting off her warps.

Suddenly there are shouts from the quay. I recognize them as being in
German, the same as I had heard at Tiflis when the train was starting for Baku.

It is the same man. He is panting, he runs, he cannot run much farther. The
gangway has been drawn ashore, and the steamer is already moving off. How
will this late comer get on board?

Luckily there is a rope out astern which still keeps the Astara near the quay.
The German appears just as two sailors are manoeuvring with the fender. They
each give him a hand and help him on board.

Evidently this fat man is an old hand at this sort of thing, and I should not be
surprised if he did not arrive at his destination.

However, the Astara is under way, her powerful paddles are at work, and we
are soon out of the harbor.

About a quarter of a mile out there is a sort of boiling, agitating the surface
of the sea, and showing some deep trouble in the waters. I was then near the rail
on the starboard quarter, and, smoking my cigar, was looking at the harbor
disappearing behind the point round Cape Apcheron, while the range of the
Caucasus ran up into the western horizon.

Of my cigar there remained only the end between my lips, and taking a last
whiff, I threw it overboard.

In an instant a sheet of flame burst out all round the steamer The boiling
came from a submarine spring of naphtha, and the cigar end had set it alight.

Screams arise. The Astara rolls amid sheaves of flame; but a movement of
the helm steers us away from the flaming spring, and we are out of danger.

The captain comes aft and says to me in a frigid tone:

"That was a foolish thing to do."

And I reply, as I usually reply under such circumstances:

"Really, captain, I did not know--"

"You ought always to know, sir!"

These words are uttered in a dry, cantankerous tone a few feet away from


I turn to see who it is.
It is the Englishwoman who has read me this little lesson.


CHAPTER IV.

I am always suspicious of a traveler's "impressions." These impressions are
subjective--a word I use because it is the fashion, although I am not quite sure
what it means. A cheerful man looks at things cheerfully, a sorrowful man looks
at them sorrowfully. Democritus would have found something enchanting about
the banks of the Jordan and the shores of the Dead Sea. Heraclitus would have
found something disagreeable about the Bay of Naples and the beach of the
Bosphorus. I am of a happy nature--you must really pardon me if I am rather
egotistic in this history, for it is so seldom that an author's personality is so
mixed up with what he is writing about--like Hugo, Dumas, Lamartine, and so
many others. Shakespeare is an exception, and I am not Shakespeare--and, as far
as that goes, I am not Lamartine, nor Dumas, nor Hugo.

However, opposed as I am to the doctrines of Schopenhauer and Leopardi, I
will admit that the shores of the Caspian did seem rather gloomy and dispiriting.
There seemed to be nothing alive on the coast; no vegetation, no birds. There
was nothing to make you think you were on a great sea. True, the Caspian is
only a lake about eighty feet below the level of the Mediterranean, but this lake
is often troubled by violent storms. A ship cannot "get away," as sailors say: it is
only about a hundred leagues wide. The coast is quickly reached eastward or
westward, and harbors of refuge are not numerous on either the Asiatic or the
European side.

There are a hundred passengers on board the Astara--a large number of them
Caucasians trading with Turkestan, and who will be with us all the way to the
eastern provinces of the Celestial Empire.

For some years now the Transcaspian has been running between Uzun Ada
and the Chinese frontier. Even between this part and Samarkand it has no less
than sixty-three stations; and it is in this section of the line that most of the
passengers will alight. I need not worry about them, and I will lose no time in
studying them. Suppose one of them proves interesting, I may pump him and
peg away at him, and just at the critical moment he will get out.

No! All my attention I must devote to those who are going through with me.
I have already secured Ephrinell, and perhaps that charming Englishwoman, who
seems to me to be going to Pekin. I shall meet with other traveling companions
at Uzun Ada. With regard to the French couple, there is nothing more at present,
but the passage of the Caspian will not be accomplished before I know


something about them. There are also these two Chinamen who are evidently
going to China. If I only knew a hundred words of the "Kouan-hoa," which is the
language spoken in the Celestial Empire, I might perhaps make something out of
these curious guys. What I really want is some personage with a story, some
mysterious hero traveling incognito, a lord or a bandit. I must not forget my
trade as a reporter of occurrences and an interviewer of mankind--at so much a
line and well selected. He who makes a good choice has a good chance.

I go down the stairs to the saloon aft. There is not a place vacant. The cabins
are already occupied by the passengers who are afraid of the pitching and
rolling. They went to bed as soon as they came on board, and they will not get
up until the boat is alongside the wharf at Uzun Ada. The cabins being full, other
travelers have installed themselves on the couches, amid a lot of little packages,
and they will not move from there.

As I am going to pass the night on deck, I return up the cabin stairs. The
American is there, just finishing the repacking of his case.

"Would you believe it!" he exclaims, "that that drunken moujik actually
asked me for something to drink?"

"I hope you have lost nothing, Monsieur Ephrinell?" I reply.

"No; fortunately."

"May I ask how many teeth you are importing into China in those cases?"

"Eighteen hundred thousand, without counting the wisdom teeth!"

And Ephrinell began to laugh at this little joke, which he fired off on several
other occasions during the voyage. I left him and went onto the bridge between
the paddle boxes.

It is a beautiful night, with the northerly wind beginning to freshen. In the
offing, long, greenish streaks are sweeping over the surface of the sea. It is
possible that the night may be rougher than we expect. In the forepart of the
steamer are many passengers, Turkomans in rags, Kirghizes wrapped up to the
eyes, moujiks in emigrant costume--poor fellows, in fact, stretched on the spare
Spars, against the sides, and along the tarpaulins. They are almost all smoking or
nibbling at the provisions they have brought for the voyage. The others are
trying to sleep and forget their fatigue, and perhaps their hunger.

It occurs to me to take a stroll among these groups. I am like a hunter beating
the brushwood before getting into the hiding place. And I go among this heap of
packages, looking them over as if I were a custom house officer.

A rather large deal case, covered with a tarpaulin, attracts my attention. It
measures about a yard and a half in height, and a yard in width and depth. It has
been placed here with the care required by these words in Russian, written on the
side, "Glass--Fragile--Keep from damp," and then directions, '"Top--Bottom,"


which have been respected. And then there is the address, "Mademoiselle Zinca
Klork, Avenue Cha-Coua, Pekin, Petchili, China."

This Zinca Klork--her name showed it--ought to be a Roumanian, and she
was taking advantage of this through train on the Grand Transasiatic to get her
glass forwarded. Was this an article in request at the shops of the Middle
Kingdom? How otherwise could the fair Celestials admire their almond eyes and
their elaborate hair?

The bell rang and announced the six-o'clock dinner. The dining-room is
forward. I went down to it, and found it already occupied by some forty people.

Ephrinell had installed himself nearly in the middle. There was a vacant seat
near him; he beckoned to me to occupy it, and I hastened to take possession.

Was it by chance? I know not; but the Englishwoman was seated on
Ephrinell's left and talking to him. He introduced me.

"Miss Horatia Bluett," he said.

Opposite I saw the French couple conscientiously studying the bill of fare.

At the other end of the table, close to where the food came from--and where
the people got served first--was the German passenger, a man strongly built and
with a ruddy face, fair hair, reddish beard, clumsy hands, and a very long nose
which reminded one of the proboscidean feature of the plantigrades. He had that
peculiar look of the officers of the Landsturm threatened with premature obesity.

"He is not late this time," said I to Ephrinell.

"The dinner hour is never forgotten in the German Empire!" replied the
American.

"Do you know that German's name?"

"Baron Weissschnitzerdorfer."

"And with that name is he going to Pekin?"

"To Pekin, like that Russian major who is sitting near the captain of the
Astara."

I looked at the man indicated. He was about fifty years of age, of true
Muscovite type, beard and hair turning gray, face prepossessing. I knew Russian:
he ought to know French. Perhaps he was the fellow traveler of whom I had
dreamed.

"You said he was a major, Mr. Ephrinell?"

"Yes, a doctor in the Russian army, and they call him Major Noltitz."

Evidently the American was some distance ahead of me, and yet he was not
a reporter by profession.

As the rolling was not yet very great, we could dine in comfort. Ephrinell
chatted with Miss Horatia Bluett, and I understood that there was an
understanding between these two perfectly Anglo-Saxon natures.


In fact, one was a traveler in teeth and the other was a traveler in hair. Miss
Horatia Bluett represented an important firm in London, Messrs. Holmes-Holme,
to whom the Celestial Empire annually exports two millions of female heads of
hair. She was going to Pekin on account of the said firm, to open an office as a
center for the collection of the Chinese hair crop. It seemed a promising
enterprise, as the secret society of the Blue Lotus was agitating for the abolition
of the pigtail, which is the emblem of the servitude of the Chinese to the Manchu
Tartars. "Come," thought I, "if China sends her hair to England, America sends
her teeth: that is a capital exchange, and everything is for the best."

We had been at the table for a quarter of an hour, and nothing had happened.
The traveler with the smooth complexion and his blonde companion seemed to
listen to us when we spoke in French. It evidently pleased them, and they were
already showing an inclination to join in our talk. I was not mistaken, then; they
are compatriots, but of what class?

At this moment the Astara gave a lurch. The plates rattled on the table; the
covers slipped; the glasses upset some of their contents; the hanging lamps
swung out of the vertical--or rather our seats and the table moved in accordance
with the roll of the ship. It is a curious effect, when one is sailor enough to bear
it without alarm.

"Eh!" said the American; "here is the good old Caspian shaking her skin."

"Are you subject to seasickness?" I asked.

"No more than a porpoise," said he. "Are you ever seasick?" he continued to
his neighbor.

"Never," said Miss Horatia Bluett.

On the other side of the table there was an interchange of a few words in
French.

"You are not unwell, Madame Caterna?"

"No, Adolphe, not yet; but if this continues, I am afraid--"

"Well, Caroline, we had better go on deck. The wind has hauled a point to
the eastward, and the Astara will soon be sticking her nose in the feathers."

His way of expressing himself shows that "Monsieur Caterna"--if that was
his name--was a sailor, or ought to have been one. That explains the way he rolls
his hips as he walks.

The pitching now becomes very violent. The majority of the company cannot
stand it. About thirty of the passengers have left the table for the deck. I hope the
fresh air will do them good. We are now only a dozen in the dining room,
including the captain, with whom Major Noltitz is quietly conversing. Ephrinell
and Miss Bluett seem to be thoroughly accustomed to these inevitable incidents
of navigation. The German baron drinks and eats as if he had taken up his


quarters in some bier-halle at Munich, or Frankfort, holding his knife in his right
hand, his fork in his left, and making up little heaps of meat, which he salts and
peppers and covers with sauce, and then inserts under his hairy lip on the point
of his knife. Fie! What behavior! And yet he gets on splendidly, and neither
rolling nor pitching makes him lose a mouthful of food or drink.

A little way off are the two Celestials, whom I watch with curiosity.

One is a young man of distinguished bearing, about twenty-five years old, of
pleasant physiognomy, in spite of his yellow skin and his narrow eyes. A few
years spent in Europe have evidently Europeanized his manners and even his
dress. His mustache is silky, his eye is intelligent his hair is much more French
than Chinese. He seems to me a nice fellow, of a cheerful temperament, who
would not ascend the "Tower of Regret," as the Chinese have it, oftener than he
could help.

His companion, on the contrary, whom he always appears to be making fun
of, is of the type of the true porcelain doll, with the moving head; he is from fifty
to fifty-five years old, like a monkey in the face, the top of his head half shaven,
the pigtail down his back, the traditional costume, frock, vest, belt, baggy
trousers, many-colored slippers; a China vase of the Green family. He, however,
could hold out no longer, and after a tremendous pitch, accompanied by a long
rattle of the crockery, he got up and hurried on deck. And as he did so, the
younger Chinaman shouted after him, "Cornaro! Cornaro!" at the same time
holding out a little volume he had left on the table.

What was the meaning of this Italian word in an Oriental mouth? Did the
Chinaman speak the language of Boccaccio? The Twentieth Century ought to
know, and it would know.

Madame Caterna arose, very pale, and Monsieur Caterna, a model husband,
followed her on deck.

The dinner over, leaving Ephrinell and Miss Bluett to talk of brokerages and
prices current, I went for a stroll on the poop of the Astara. Night had nearly
closed in. The hurrying clouds, driven from the eastward, draped in deep folds
the higher zones of the sky, with here and there a few stars peeping through. The
wind was rising. The white light of the steamer clicked as it swung on the
foremast. The red and green lights rolled with the ship, and projected their long
colored rays onto the troubled waters.

I met Ephrinell, Miss Horatia Bluett having retired to her cabin; he was
going down into the saloon to find a comfortable corner on one of the couches. I
wished him good night, and he left me after gratifying me with a similar wish.

As for me, I will wrap myself in my rug and lie down in a comer of the deck,
and sleep like a sailor during his watch below.


It is only eight o'clock. I light my cigar, and with my legs wide apart, to
assure my stability as the ship rolled, I begin to walk up and down the deck. The
deck is already abandoned by the first-class passengers, and I am almost alone.
On the bridge is the mate, pacing backward and forward, and watching the
course he has given to the man at the wheel, who is close to him. The paddles
are impetuously beating into the sea, and now and then breaking into thunder, as
one or the other of the wheels runs wild, as the rolling lifts it clear of the water.
A thick smoke rises from the funnel, which occasionally belches forth a shower
of sparks.

At nine o'clock the night is very dark. I try to make out some steamer's lights
in the distance, but in vain, for the Caspian has not many ships on it. I can hear
only the cry of the sea birds, gulls and scoters, who are abandoning themselves
to the caprices of the wind.

During my promenade, one thought besets me: is the voyage to end without
my getting anything out of it as copy for my journal? My instructions made me
responsible for producing something, and surely not without reason. What? Not
an adventure from Tiflis to Pekin? Evidently that could only be my fault! And I
resolved to do everything to avoid such a misfortune.

It is half-past ten when I sit down on one of the seats in the stern of the
Astara. But with this increasing wind it is impossible for me to remain there. I
rise, therefore, and make my way forward. Under the bridge, between the paddle
boxes, the wind is so strong that I seek shelter among the packages covered by
the tarpaulin. Stretched on one of the boxes, wrapped in my rug, with my head
resting against the tarpaulin, I shall soon be asleep.

After some time, I do not exactly know how much, I am awakened by a
curious noise. Whence comes this noise? I listen more attentively. It seems as
though some one is snoring close to my ear.

"That is some steerage passenger," I think. "He has got under the tarpaulin
between the cases, and he will not do so badly in his improvised cabin."

By the light which filters down from the lower part of the binnacle, I see
nothing.

I listen again. The noise has ceased.

I look about. There is no one on this part of the deck, for the second-class
passengers are all forward.

Then I must have been dreaming, and I resume my position and try again to
sleep.

This time there is no mistake. The snoring has begun again, and I am sure it
is coming from the case against which I am leaning my head.

"Goodness!" I say. "There must be an animal in here!"


An animal? What? A dog? A cat? Why have they hidden a domestic animal
in this case? Is it a wild animal? A panther, a tiger, a lion?

Now I am off on the trail! It must be a wild animal on its way from some
menagerie to some sultan of Central Asia. This case is a cage, and if the cage
opens, if the animal springs out onto the deck--here is an incident, here is
something worth chronicling; and here I am with my professional enthusiasm
running mad. I must know at all costs to whom this wild beast is being sent; is it
going to Uzon Ada, or is it going to China? The address ought to be on the case.

I light a wax vesta, and as I am sheltered from the wind, the flame keeps
upright.

By its light what do I read?

The case containing the wild beast is the very one with the address:

"Mademoiselle Zinca Klork, Avenue Cha-Coua, Pekin, China."

Fragile, my wild beast! Keep from damp, my lion! Quite so! But for what
does Miss Zinca Klork, this pretty--for the Roumanian ought to be pretty, and
she is certainly a Roumanian--for what does she want a wild beast sent in this
way?

Let us think about it and be reasonable. This animal, whatever it may be,
must eat and drink. From the time it starts from Uzon Ada it will take eleven
days to cross Asia, and reach the capital of the Celestial Empire. Well, what do
they give it to drink, what do they give it to eat, if he is not going to get out of
his cage, if he is going to be shut up during the whole of the journey? The
officials of the Grand Transasiatic will be no more careful in their attentions to
the said wild beast than if he were a glass, for he is described as such; and he
will die of inanition!

All these things sent my brain whirling. My thoughts bewildered me. "Is it a
lovely dream that dazes me, or am I awake?" as Margaret says in Faust, more
lyrically than dramatically. To resist is impossible. I have a two-pound weight on
each eyelid. I lay down along by the tarpaulin; my rug wraps me more closely,
and I fall into a deep sleep.

How long have I slept? Perhaps for three or four hours. One thing is certain,
and that is that it is not yet daylight when I awake.

Irub my eyes, I rise, I go and lean against the rail.

The Astara is not so lively, for the wind has shifted to the northeast.

The night is cold. I warm myself by walking about briskly for half an hour. I
think no more of my wild beast. Suddenly remembrance returns to me. Should I
not call the attention of the stationmaster to this disquieting case? But that is no
business of mine. We shall see before we start.

I look at my watch. It is only three o'clock in the morning. I will go back to


my place. And I do so with my head against the side of the case. I shut my eyes.

Suddenly there is a new sound. This time I am not mistaken. A half-stifled
sneeze shakes the side of the case. Never did an animal sneeze like that!

Is it possible? A human being is hidden in this case and is being fraudulently
carried by the Grand Transasiatic to the pretty Roumanian! But is it a man or a
woman? It seems as though the sneeze had a masculine sound about it.

It is impossible to sleep now. How long the day is coming! How eager I am
to examine this box! I wanted incidents--well! and here is one, and if I do not get
five lines out of this--

The eastern horizon grows brighter. The clouds in the zenith are the first to
color. The sun appears at last all watery with the mists of the sea.

I look; it is indeed the case addressed to Pekin. I notice that certain holes are
pierced here and there, by which the air inside can be renewed. Perhaps two eyes
are looking through these holes, watching what is going on outside? Do not be
indiscreet!

At breakfast gather all the passengers whom the sea has not affected: the
young Chinaman, Major Noltitz, Ephrinell, Miss Bluett, Monsieur Caterna, the
Baron Weissschnitzerdérfer, and seven or eight other passengers. I am careful
not to let the American into the secret of the case. He would be guilty of some
indiscretion, and then good-by to my news par!

About noon the land is reported to the eastward, a low, yellowish land, with
no rocky margin, but a few sandhills in the neighborhood of Krasnovodsk.

In an hour we are in sight of Uzun Ada, and twenty-seven minutes afterward
we set foot in Asia.


CHAPTER V.

Travelers used to land at Mikhailov, a little port at the end of the
Transcaspian line; but ships of moderate tonnage hardly had water enough there
to come alongside. On this account, General Annenkof, the creator of the new
railway, the eminent engineer whose name will frequently recur in my narrative,
was led to found Uzun Ada, and thereby considerably shorten the crossing of the
Caspian. The station was built in three months, and it was opened on the 8th of
May, 1886.

Fortunately I had read the account given by Boulangier, the engineer, relating
to the prodigious work of General Annenkof, so that I shall not be so very much
abroad during the railway journey between Uzun Ada and Samarkand, and,
besides, I trust to Major Noltitz, who knows all about the matter. I have a
presentiment that we shall become good friends, and in spite of the proverb


which says, "Though your friend be of honey do not lick him!" I intend to "lick"
my companion often enough for the benefit of my readers.

We often hear of the extraordinary rapidity with which the Americans have
thrown their railroads across the plains of the Far West. But the Russians are in
no whit behind them, if even they have not surpassed them in rapidity as well as
in industrial audacity.

People are fully acquainted with the adventurous campaign of General
Skobeleff against the Turkomans, a campaign of which the building of the
railway assured the definite success. Since then the political state of Central Asia
has been entirely changed, and Turkestan is merely a province of Asiatic Russia,
extending to the frontiers of the Chinese Empire. And already Chinese Turkestan
is very visibly submitting to the Muscovite influence which the vertiginous
heights of the Pamir plateau have not been able to check in its civilizing march.

I was about to cross the countries which were formerly ravaged by
Tamerlane and Genghis Khan, those fabulous countries of which the Russians in
1886 possessed six hundred and fifteen thousand square kilometres, with thirteen
hundred thousand inhabitants. The southern part of this region now forms the
Transcaspian province, divided into six districts, Fort Alexandrovski,
Krasnovodsk, Askhabad, Karibent, Merv, Pendjeh, governed by Muscovite
colonels or lieutenant-colonels.

As may be imagined, it hardly takes an hour to see Uzun Ada, the name of
which means Long Island. It is almost a town, but a modern town, traced with a
square, drawn with a line or a large carpet of yellow sand. No monuments, no
memories, bridges of planks, houses of wood, to which comfort is beginning to
add a few mansions in stone. One can see what this, first station of the
Transcaspian will be like in fifty years; a great city after having been a great
railway station.

Do not think that there are no hotels. Among others there is the Hotel du
Czar, which has a good table, good rooms and good beds. But the question of
beds has no interest for me. As the train starts at four o'clock this afternoon, to
begin with, I must telegraph to the Twentieth Century, by the Caspian cable, that
I am at my post at the Uzun Ada station. That done, I can see if I can pick up
anything worth reporting.

Nothing is more simple. It consists in opening an account with those of my
companions with whom I may have to do during the journey. That is my custom,
I always find it answers, and while waiting for the unknown, I write down the
known in my pocketbook, with a number to distinguish each:

1. Fulk Ephrinell, American. 2. Miss Horatia Bluett, English. 3. Major
Noltitz, Russian. 4. Monsieur Caterna, French. 5. Madame Caterna, French. 6.


Baron Weissschnitzerdorfer, German.

As to the Chinese, they will have a number later on, when I have made up
my mind about them. As to the individual in the box, I intend to enter into
communication with him, or her, and to be of assistance in that quarter if I can
do so without betraying the secret.

The train is already marshaled in the station. It is composed of first and
second-class cars, a restaurant car and two baggage vans. These cars are painted
of a light color, an excellent precaution against the heat and against the cold. For
in the Central Asian provinces the temperature ranges between fifty degrees
centigrade above zero and twenty below, and in a range of seventy degrees it is
only prudent to minimize the effects.

These cars are in a convenient manner joined together by gangways, on the
American plan. Instead of being shut up in a compartment, the traveler strolls
about along the whole length of the train. There is room to pass between the
stuffed seats, and in the front and rear of each car are the platforms united by the
gangways. This facility of communication assures the security of the train.

Our engine has a bogie on four small wheels, and is thus able to negotiate the
sharpest curves; a tender with water and fuel; then come a front van, three first-
class cars with twenty-four places each, a restaurant car with pantry and kitchen,
four second-class cars and a rear van; in all twelve vehicles, counting in the
locomotive and tender. The first class cars are provided with dressing rooms, and
their seats, by very simple mechanism, are convertible into beds, which, in fact,
are indispensable for long journeys. The second-class travelers are not so
comfortably treated, and besides, they have to bring their victuals with them,
unless they prefer to take their meals at the stations. There are not many,
however, who travel the complete journey between the Caspian and the eastern
provinces of China--that is to say about six thousand kilometres. Most of them
go to the principal towns and villages of Russian Turkestan, which have been
reached by the Transcaspian Railway for some years, and which up to the
Chinese frontier has a length of over 1,360 miles.

This Grand Transasiatic has only been open six weeks and the company is as
yet only running two trains a week. All has gone well up to the present; but I
ought to add the significant detail that the railway men carry a supply of
revolvers to arm the passengers with if necessary. This is a wise precaution in
crossing the Chinese deserts, where an attack on the train is not improbable.

I believe the company are doing their best to ensure the punctuality of their
trains; but the Chinese section is managed by Celestials, and who knows what
has been the past life of those people? Will they not be more intent on the
security of their dividends than of their passengers?


As I wait for the departure I stroll about on the platform, looking through the
windows of the cars, which have no doors along the sides, the entrances being at
the ends.

Everything is new; the engine is as bright as it can be, the carriages are
brilliant in their new paint, their springs have not begun to give with wear, and
their wheels run true on the rails. Then there is the rolling stock with which we
are going to cross a continent. There is no railway as long as this--not even in
America. The Canadian line measures five thousand kilometres, the Central
Union, five thousand two hundred and sixty, the Santa Fe line, four thousand
eight hundred and seventy-five, the Atlantic Pacific, five thousand six hundred
and thirty, the Northern Pacific, six thousand two hundred and fifty. There is
only one line which will be longer when it is finished, and that is the Grand
Transsiberian, from the Urals to Vladivostock, which will measure six thousand
five hundred kilometres.

Between Tiflis and Pekin our journey will not last more than thirteen days,
from Uzun Ada it will only last eleven. The train will only stop at the smaller
stations to take in fuel and water. At the chief towns like Merv, Bokhara,
Samarkand, Tashkend, Kachgar, Kokhand, Sou Tcheou, Lan Tcheou, Tai Youan,
it will stop a few hours--and that will enable me to do these towns in reporter
style.

Of course, the same driver and stoker will not take us through. They will be
relieved every six hours. Russians will take us up to the frontier of Turkestan,
and Chinese will take us on through China.

But there is one representative of the company who will not leave his post,
and that is Popof, our head guard, a true Russian of soldierly bearing, hairy and
bearded, with a folded overcoat and a Muscovite cap. I intend to talk a good deal
with this gallant fellow, although he is not very talkative. If he does not despise a
glass of vodka, opportunity offered, he may have a good deal to say to me; for
ten years he has been on the Transcaspian between Uzun Ada and the Pamirs,
and during the last month he has been all along the line to Pekin.

I call him No. 7 in my notebook, and I hope he will give me information
enough. I only want a few incidents of the journey, just a few little incidents
worthy of the Twentieth Century.

Among the passengers I see on the platform are a few Jews, recognizable
more by their faces than their attire. Formerly, in Central Asia, they could only
wear the "toppe," a sort of round cap, and a plain rope belt, without any silk
ornamentation--under pain of death. And I am told that they could ride on asses
in certain towns and walk on foot in others. Now they wear the oriental turban
and roll in their carriages if their purse allows of it. Who would hinder them now


they are subjects of the White Czar, Russian citizens, rejoicing in civil and
political rights equal to those of their Turkoman compatriots?

There are a few Tadjiks of Persian origin, the handsomest men you can
imagine. They have booked for Merv, or Bokhara, or Samarkand, or Tachkend,
or Kokhand, and will not pass the Russo-Chinese frontier. As a rule they are
second-class passengers. Among the first-class passengers I noticed a few
Usbegs of the ordinary type, with retreating foreheads and prominent cheek
bones, and brown complexions, who were the lords of the country, and from
whose families come the emirs and khans of Central Asia.

But are there not any Europeans in this Grand Transasiatic train? It must be
confessed that I can only count five or six. There are a few commercial travelers
from South Russia, and one of those inevitable gentlemen from the United
Kingdom, who are inevitably to be found on the railways and steamboats. It is
still necessary to obtain permission to travel on the Transcaspian, permission
which the Russian administration does not willingly accord to an Englishman;
but this man has apparently been able to get one.

And he seems to me to be worth notice. He is tall and thin, and looks quite
the fifty years that his gray hairs proclaim him to be. His characteristic
expression is one of haughtiness, or rather disdain, composed in equal parts of
love of all things English and contempt for all things that are not. This type is
occasionally so insupportable, even to his compatriots, that Dickens, Thackeray
and others have often made fun of it. How he turned up his nose at the station at
Uzun Ada, at the train, at the men, at the car in which he had secured a seat by
placing in it his traveling bag! Let us call him No. 8 in my pocketbook.

There seem to be no personages of importance. That is a pity. If only the
Emperor of Russia, on one side, or the Son of Heaven, on the other, were to enter
the train to meet officially on the frontier of the two empires, what festivities
there would be, what grandeur, what descriptions, what copy for letters and
telegrams!

It occurs to me to have a look at the mysterious box. Has it not a right to be
so Called? Yes, certainly. I must really find out where it has been put and how to
get at it easily.

The front van is already full of Ephrinell's baggage. It does not open at the
side, but in front and behind, like the cars. It is also furnished with a platform
and a gangway. An interior passage allows the guard to go through it to reach the
tender and locomotive if necessary. Popof's little cabin is on the platform of the
first car, in the left-hand corner. At night it will be easy for me to visit the van,
for it is only shut in by the doors at the ends of the passage arranged between the
packages. If this van is reserved for luggage registered through to China, the


luggage for the Turkestan stations ought to be in the van at the rear.

When I arrived the famous box was still on the platform.

In looking at it closely I observe that airholes have been bored on each of its
sides, and that on one side it has two panels, one of which can be made to slide
on the other from the inside. And I am led to think that the prisoner has had it
made so in order that he can, if necessary, leave his prison--probably during the
night.

Just now the porters are beginning to lift the box. I have the satisfaction of
seeing that they attend to the directions inscribed on it. It is placed, with great
care, near the entrance to the van, on the left, the side with the panels outward, as
if it were the door of a cupboard. And is not the box a cupboard? A cupboard I
propose to open?

It remains to be seen if the guard in charge of the luggage is to remain in this
van. No. I find that his post is just outside it.

"There it is, all right!" said one of the porters, looking to see that the case
was as it should be, top where top should be, and so on.

"There is no fear of its moving," said another porter; "the glass will reach
Pekin all right, unless the train runs off the metals."

"Or it does not run into anything," said the other; "and that remains to be
seen."

They were right--these good fellows--it remained to be seen--and it would be
seen.

The American came up to me and took a last look at his stock of incisors,
molars and canines, with a repetition of his invariable "Wait a bit."

"You know, Monsieur Bombarnac," he said to me, "that the passengers are
going to dine at the Hotel du Czar before the departure of the train. It is time
now. Will you come with me?"

"I follow you."

And we entered the dining room. All my numbers are there: 1, Ephrinell,
taking his place as usual by the side of 2, Miss Horatia Bluett. The French
couple, 4 and 5, are also side by side. Number 3, that is Major Noltitz, is seated
in front of numbers 9 and 10, the two Chinese to whom I have just given
numbers in my notebook. As to the fat German, number 6, he has already got his
long nose into his soup plate. I see also that the Guard Popol, number 7, has his
place at the foot of the table. The other passengers, Europeans and Asiatics, are
installed, passim with the evident intention of doing justice to the repast.

Ah! I forgot my number 8, the disdainful gentleman whose name I don't yet
know, and who seems determined to find the Russian cookery inferior to the
English.


I also notice with what attention Monsieur Caterna looks after his wife, and
encourages her to make up for the time lost when she was unwell on board the
Astara. He keeps her glass filled, he chooses the best pieces for her, etc.

"What a good thing it is," I hear him say, "that we are not to leeward of the
Teuton, for there would be nothing left for us!"

He is to windward of him--that is to say, the dishes reach him before they get
to the baron, which, however, does not prevent his clearing them without shame.

The observation, in sea language, made me smile, and Caterna, noticing it,
gave me a wink with a slight movement of the shoulder toward the baron.

It is evident that these French people are not of high distinction, they do not
belong to the upper circles; but they are good people, I will answer for it, and
when we have to rub shoulders with compatriots, we must not be too particular
in Turkestan.

The dinner ends ten minutes before the time fixed for our departure. The bell
rings and we all make a move for the train, the engine of which is blowing off
steam.

Mentally, I offer a last prayer to the God of reporters and ask him not to
spare me adventures. Then, after satisfying myself that all my numbers are in the
first-class cars, so that I can keep an eye on them, I take my place.

The Baron Weissschnitzerd6rfer--what an interminable name--is not
behindhand this time. On the contrary, it is the train this time which is five
minutes late in starting; and the German has begun to complain, to chafe and to
swear, and threatens to sue the company for damages. Ten thousand roubles--not
a penny less!--if it causes him to fail. Fail in what, considering that he is going to
Pekin?

At length the last shriek of the whistle cleaves the air, the cars begin to move,
and a loud cheer salutes the departure of the Grand Transasiatic express.


CHAPTER VI.

The ideas of a man on horseback are different to those which occur to him
when he is on foot. The difference is even more noticeable when he is on the
railway. The association of his thoughts, the character of his reflections are all
affected by the speed of the train. They "roll" in his head, as he rolls in his car.
And so it comes about that I am in a particularly lively mood, desirous of
observing, greedy of instruction, and that at a speed of thirty-one miles an hour.
That is the rate at which we are to travel through Turkestan, and when we reach
the Celestial Empire we shall have to be content with eighteen.

That is what I have just ascertained by consulting my time-table, which I
bought at the station. It is accompanied by a long slip map, folded and refolded
on itself, which shows the whole length of the line between the Caspian and the
eastern coast of China. I study, then, my Transasiatic, on leaving Uzun Ada, just
as I studied my Transgeorgian when I left Tiflis.

The gauge of the line is about sixty-three inches--as is usual on the Russian
lines, which are thus about four inches wider than those of other European
countries. It is said, with regard to this, that the Germans have made a great
number of axles of this length, in case they have to invade Russia. I should like
to think that the Russians have taken the same precautions in the no less
probable event of their having to invade Germany.

On either side of the line are long sandhills, between which the train runs out
from Uzun Ada; when it reaches the arm of the sea which separates Long Island
from the continent, it crosses an embankment about 1,200 yards long, edged
with masses of rock to protect it against the violence of the waves.

We have already passed several stations without stopping, among others
Mikhailov, a league from Uzun Ada. Now they are from ten to eleven miles
apart. Those I have seen, as yet, look like villas, with balustrades and Italian
roofs, which has a curious effect in Turkestan and the neighborhood of Persia.
The desert extends up to the neighborhood of Uzun Ada, and the railway stations
form so many little oases, made by the hand of man. It is man, in fact, who has
planted these slender, sea-green poplars, which give so little shade; it is man
who, at great expense, has brought here the water whose refreshing jets fall back
into an elegant vase. Without these hydraulic works there would not be a tree,
not a corner of green in these oases. They are the nurses of the line, and dry-
nurses are of no use to locomotives.

The truth is that I have never seen such a bare, arid country, so clear of
vegetation; and it extends for one hundred and fifty miles from Uzun Ada. When
General Annenkof commenced his works at Mikhailov, he was obliged to distil


the water from the Caspian Sea, as if he were on board ship. But if water is
necessary to produce steam, coal is necessary to vaporize the water. The readers
of the Twentieth Century will ask how are the furnaces fed in a country in which
there is neither coal nor wood? Are there stores of these things at the principal
stations of the Transcaspian? Not at all. They have simply put in practice an idea
which occurred to our great chemist, Sainte-Claire Deville, when first petroleum
was used in France. The furnaces are fed, by the aid of a pulverizing apparatus,
with the residue produced from the distillation of the naphtha, which Baku and
Derbent produce in such inexhaustible quantities. At certain stations on the line
there are vast reservoirs of this combustible mineral, from which the tenders are
filled, and it is burned in specially adapted fireboxes. In a similar way naphtha is
used on the steamboats on the Volga and the other affluents of the Caspian.

I repeat, the country is not particularly varied. The ground is nearly flat in the
sandy districts, and quite flat in the alluvial plains, where the brackish water
stagnates in pools. Nothing could be better for a line of railway. There are no
cuttings, no embankments, no viaducts, no works of art--to use a term dear to
engineers, very "dear," I should say. Here and there are a few wooden bridges
from two hundred to three hundred feet long. Under such circumstances the cost
per kilometre of the Transcaspian did not exceed seventy-five thousand francs.

The monotony of the journey would only be broken on the vast oases of
Merv, Bokhara and Samarkand.

But let us busy ourselves with the passengers, as we can do all the more
easily from our being able to walk from one end to the other of the train. With a
little imagination we can make ourselves believe we are in a sort of traveling
village, and I am just going to take a run down main street.

Remember that the engine and tender are followed by the van at the angle of
which is placed the mysterious case, and that Popof's compartment is in the left-
hand corner of the platform of the first car.

Inside this car I notice a few Sarthes of tall figure and haughty face, draped
in their long robes of bright colors, from beneath which appear the braided
leather boots. They have splendid eyes, a superb beard, arched nose, and you
would take them for real lords, provided we ignore the word Sarthe, which
means a pedlar, and these were going evidently to Tachkend, where these pedlars
swarm.

In this car the two Chinese have taken their places, opposite each other. The
young Celestial looks out of window. The old one--Ta-lao-ye, that is to say, a
person well advanced in years--is incessantly turning over the pages of his book.
This volume, a small 32mo, looks like our Annuaire du Bureau des Longitudes,
and is covered in plush, like a breviary, and when it is shut its covers are kept in


place by an elastic band. What astonishes me is that the proprietor of this little
book does not seem to read it from right to left. Is it not written in Chinese
characters? We must see into this!

On two adjoining seats are Ephrinell and Miss Horatia Bluett. Their talk is of
nothing but figures. I don't know if the practical American murmurs at the ear of
the practical Englishwoman the adorable verse which made the heart of Lydia
palpitate:

"Nee tecum possum vivere sine te,"

but I do know that Ephrinell can very well live without me. I have been quite
right in not reckoning on his company to charm away the tedium of the journey.
The Yankee has completely "left" me--that is the word--for this angular daughter
of Albion.

I reach the platform. I cross the gangway and I am at the door of the second
car.

In the right-hand corner is Baron Weissschnitzerdorfer. His long nose--this
Teuton is as short-sighted as a mole--rubs the lines of the book he reads. The
book is the time-table. The impatient traveler is ascertaining if the train passes
the stations at the stated time. Whenever it is behind there are new
recriminations and menaces against the Grand Transasiatic Company.

In this car there are also the Caternas, who have made themselves quite
comfortable. In his cheery way, the husband is talking with a good deal of
gesticulation, sometimes touching his wife's hands, sometimes putting his arms
round her waist; and then he turns his head toward the platform and says
something aside. Madame Caterna leans toward him, makes little confused
grimaces, and then leans back into the corner and seems to reply to her husband,
who in turn replies to her. And as I leave I hear the chorus of an operetta in the
deep voice of Monsieur Caterna.

In the third car, occupied by many Turkomans and three or four Russians, I
perceive Major Noltitz. He is talking with one of his countrymen. I will willingly
join in their conversation if they make me any advances, but I had better
maintain a certain reserve; the journey has only begun.

I then visit the dining car. It is a third longer than the other cars, a regular
dining room, with one long table. At the back is a pantry on one side, a kitchen
on the other, where the cook and steward are at work, both of them Russians.
This dining car appears to me capitally arranged. Passing through it, I reach the
second part of the train, where the second-class passengers are installed.
Kirghizes who do not look very intelligent with their depressed heads, their
prognathous jaws stuck well out in front, their little beards, flat Cossack noses
and very brown skins. These wretched fellows are Mahometans and belong


either to the Grand Horde wandering on the frontier between China and Siberia,
or to the Little Horde between the Ural Mountains and the Aral Sea. A second-
class car, or even a third-class car, is a palace for these people, accustomed to the
encampments on the Steppes, to the miserable "iourts" of villages. Neither their
beds nor their seats are as good as the stuffed benches on which they have seated
themselves with true Asiatic gravity.

With them are two or three Nogais going to Eastern Turkestan. Of a higher
race than the Kirghizes, being Tartars, it is from them that come the learned men
and professors who have made illustrious the opulent cities of Bokhara and
Samarkand. But science and its teaching do not yield much of a livelihood, even
when reduced to the mere necessaries of life, in these provinces of Central Asia.
And so these Nogais take employment as interpreters. Unfortunately, since the
diffusion of the Russian language, their trade is not very remunerative.

Now I know the places of my numbers, and I know where to find them when
I want them. As to those going through to Pekin, I have no doubt of Ephrinell
and Miss Horatia Bluett nor the German baron, nor the two Chinese, nor Major
Noltitz, nor the Caternas, nor even for the haughty gentleman whose bony
outline I perceive in the corner of the second car.

As to these travelers who are not going across the frontier, they are of most
perfect insignificance in my eyes. But among my companions I have not yet
found the hero of my chronicle! let us hope he will declare himself as we
proceed.

My intention is to take notes hour by hour--what did I say? To "minute" my
journey. Before the night closes in I go out on the platform of the car to have a
last look at the surrounding country. An hour with my cigar will take me to Kizil
Arvat, where the train has to stop for some time. In going from the second to the
first car I meet Major Noltitz. I step aside to let him pass. He salutes me with
that grace which distinguishes well-bred Russians. I return his salute. Our
meeting is restricted to this exchange of politeness, but the first step is taken.

Popof is not just now in his seat. The door of the luggage van being open, I
conclude that the guard has gone to talk with the driver. On the left of the van the
mysterious box is in its place. It is only half-past six as yet, and there is too
much daylight for me to risk the gratification of my curiosity.

The train advances through the open desert. This is the Kara Koum, the
Black Desert. It extends from Khiva over all Turkestan comprised between the
Persian frontier and the course of the Amou Daria. In reality the sands of the
Kara Koum are no more black than the waters of the Black Sea or than those of
the White Sea are white, those of the Red Sea red, or those of the Yellow River
yellow. But I like these colored distinctions, however erroneous they may be. In


landscapes the eye is caught by colors. And is there not a good deal of landscape
about geography?

It appears that this desert was formerly occupied by a huge central basin. It
has dried up, as the Caspian will dry up, and this evaporation is explained by the
powerful concentration of the solar rays on the surface of the territories between
the Sea of Aral and the Plateau of the Pamir.

The Kara Koum is formed of low sandy hills which the high winds are
constantly shifting and forming. These "barkans," as the Russians call them, vary
in height from thirty to ninety feet. They expose a wide surface to the northern
hurricanes which drive them gradually southward. And on this account there is a
well-justified fear for the safety of the Transcaspian. It had to be protected in
some efficacious way, and General Annenkof would have been much
embarrassed if provident Nature had not, at the same time as she gave the land
favorable for the railway to be laid along, given the means of stopping the
shifting of the barkanes.

Behind these sand hills grow a number of spring shrubs, clumps of tamarisk,
star thistles, and that Haloxylon ammodendron which Russians call, not so
scientifically, "saksaoul." Its deep, strong roots are as well adapted for binding
together the ground as those of Hippophaé rhamnoides, an arbutus of the
Eleagnaceous family, which is used for binding together the sands in southern
Europe.

To these plantations of saksaouls the engineers of the line have added in
different places a series of slopes of worked clay, and in the most dangerous
places a line of palisades.

These precautions are doubtless of use; but if the road is protected, the
passengers are hardly so, when the sand flies like a bullet hail, and the wind
sweeps up from the plain the whitish efflorescences of salt. It is a good thing for
us that we are not in the height of the hot season; and it is not in June or July or
August that I would advise you to take a trip on the Grand Transasiatic.

I am sorry that Major Noltitz does not think of coming out on the gangway to
breathe the fresh air of the Kara Koum. I would offer him one of those choice
regalias with which my case is well provided. He would tell me if these stations I
see on my time-table, Balla-Ischem, Aidine, Pereval, Kansandjik, Ouchak, are of
any interest--which they do not seem to be. But it would not do for me to disturb
his siesta. And yet his conversation ought to be interesting, for as a surgeon in
the Russian army he took part in the campaigns of Generals Skobeleff and
Annenkof. When our train ran through the little stations that it honors only with
a whistle, he could tell me if this one or that one had been the scene of any
incident of the war. As a Frenchman I am justified in questioning him about the


Russian expedition across Turkestan, and I have no doubt that my fellow
passenger will be pleased to gratify me. He is the only one I can really trust
besides Popof.

But why is Popof not in his seat? He also is not insensible to the charms of a
cigar. It would seem that his conversation with the engineer has not finished yet.

Ah! Here he is coming from the front of the luggage van. He comes out of it
and shuts the door; he remains for a moment and is about to take a seat. A hand
which holds a cigar, is stretched out toward him. Popof smiles and soon his
perfumed puffs are mingling voluptuously with mine.

For fifteen years I think I said our guard had been in the Transcaspian
service. He knows the country up to the Chinese frontier, and five or six times
already he has been over the whole line known as the Grand Transasiatic.

Popof was on duty on the section between Mikhailov and Kizil Arvat when
the line opened--a section which was begun in the December of 1880 and
finished in ten months, in November, 1881. Five years later the locomotive
entered Merv, on the 14th July, 1886, and eighteen months later it was welcomed
at Samarkand. Now the road through Turkestan joins the road through the
Celestial Empire, and the ribbon of iron extends without interruption from the
Caspian Sea to Pekin.

When Popof had given me this information, I asked if he knew anything of
our fellow travelers, I meant those who were going through to China. And in the
first place of Major Noltitz?

"The major," said Popof, "has lived a long time in the Turkestan provinces,
and he is going to Pekin to organize the staff of a hospital for our compatriots,
with the permission of the Czar, of course."

"T like this Major Noltitz," I said, "and I hope to make his acquaintance very
soon."

"He would be equally pleased to make yours," replied Popof.

"And these two Chinese, do you know them?"

"Not in the least, Monsieur Bombarnac; all I know is the name on the
luggage."

"What is that?"

"The younger man's name is Pan-Chao, the elder's is Tio-King. Probably
they have been traveling in Europe for some years. As to saying where they
come from, I cannot. I imagine that Pan-Chao belongs to some rich family, for
he is accompanied by his doctor."

"This Tio-King?"

"Yes, Doctor Tio-King.”

"And do they only speak Chinese?"


"Probably; I have not heard them speak any other language together."

On this information from Popof, I will keep to the number nine I have given
to young Pan-Chao, and to the ten with which I have labelled Doctor Tio-King.

"The American," began Popof.

"Ephrinell?" I exclaimed, "and Miss Horatia Bluett, the Englishwoman? Oh!
You can tell me nothing about them I don't know."

"Shall I tell you what I think about that couple, Monsieur Bombarnac?"

"What do you think?"

"That as soon as they reach Pekin, Miss Bluett will become Mrs. Ephrinell."

"And may Heaven bless their union, Popof, for they are really made for each
other."

I saw that on this subject Popof and I held similar ideas.

"And the two French people, that couple so affectionate." I asked, "who are
they?"

"Have they not told you?"

"No, Popof."

"You need not be anxious, Monsieur Bombarnac. Besides, if you wish to
know their profession, it is written at full length on all their luggage.

"And that is?"

"Stage people who are going to a theater in China."

Stage people! If that explains the attitudes, and mobile physiognomy, and
demonstrative gestures of Caterna, it does not explain his maritime allusions.

"And do you know what line these players are in?"

"The husband is comic lead."

"And the wife?"

"She is leading lady."

"And where are these lyrical people going?"

"To Shanghai, where they have an engagement at the French theater."

That is capital. I will talk about the theater, and behind the scenes, and such
matters, and, as Popof said, I shall soon make the acquaintance of the cheery
comedian and his charming wife. But it is not in their company that I shall
discover the hero of romance who is the object of my desire.

As to the scornful gentleman, our guide knew nothing beyond that his
luggage bore the address in full: Sir Francis Trevellyan, Trevellyan Hall,
Trevellyanshire.

"A gentleman who does not answer when he is spoken to!" added Popof.

Well, my number eight will have to be dumb man, and that will do very well.

"Now we get to the German," said I.

"Baron Weissschnitzerd6érfer?"


"He is going to Pekin, I think."

"To Pekin and beyond."

"Beyond?"

"Yes; he is on a trip round the world."

"A trip round the world?"

"In thirty-nine days."

And so after Mrs. Bisland who did the famous tour in seventy-three days,
and Train who did it in seventy, this German was attempting to do it in thirty-
nine?

True, the means of communication are more rapid the line is more direct, and
by using the Grand Transasiatic which puts Pekin within a fortnight of the
Prussian capital, the baron might halve the old time by Suez and Singapore--but-

"He will never do it!" I exclaimed.

"Why not?" asked Popof.

"Because he is always late. He nearly missed the train at Tiflis, he nearly
missed the boat at Baku--"

"But he did not miss the start from Uzun Ada."

"It doesn't matter, Popof. I shall be much surprised if this German beats an


American at globe trotting.”
ok


CHAPTER VII.

The train arrived at Kizil Arvat, two hundred and forty-two versts from the
Caspian, at thirteen minutes past seven in the evening instead of seven o'clock.
This slight delay provoked thirteen objurgations from the baron, one for each
minute.

We have two hours to wait at Kizil Arvat. Although the day is closing in, I
could not employ my time better than in visiting this little town, which contains
more than two thousand inhabitants, Russians, Persians and Turkomans. There is
not much to see, however, either within it or around it; there are no trees--not
even a palm tree--only pasturages and fields of cereals, watered by a narrow
stream. My good fortune furnished me with a companion, or I should rather say
a guide, in Major Noltitz.

Our acquaintance was made very simply. The major came up to me, and I
went up to him as soon as we set foot on the platform of the railway station.

"Sir," said I, "I am a Frenchman, Claudius Bombarnac, special correspondent
of the Twentieth Century, and you are Major Noltitz of the Russian army. You


are going to Pekin, so am I. I can speak your language, and it is very likely that
you can speak mine."

The major made a sign of assent.

"Well, Major Noltitz, instead of remaining strangers to each other during the
long transit of Central Asia, would it please you for us to become more than
mere traveling companions? You know all about this country that I do not know,
and it would be a pleasure for me to learn from you."

"Monsieur Bombarnac," replied the major in French, without a trace of
accent, "I quite agree with you."

Then he added with a smile:

"As to learning from me, one of your most eminent critics, if I remember
rightly, has said that the French only like to learn what they know."

"I see that you have read Sainte Beuve, Major Noltitz; perhaps this sceptical
academician was right in a general way. But for my part, I am an exception to
the rule, and I wish to learn what I do not know. And in all that concerns Russian
Turkestan, I am in a state of ignorance."

"I am entirely at your disposal," said the major, "and I will be happy to tell
you all about General Annenkof, for I was all through the work with him."

"IT thank you, Major Noltitz. I expected no less than the courtesy of a Russian
towards a Frenchman."

"And," said the major, "if you will allow me to quote that celebrated sentence
in the Danicheffs, 'It will be always thus so long as there are Frenchmen and
Russians.""

"The younger Dumas after Sainte Beuve?" I exclaimed. "I see, major, that I
am talking to a Parisian--"

"Of Petersburg, Monsieur Bombarnac."

And we cordially shook hands. A minute afterwards, we were on our way
through the town, and this is what Major Noltitz told me:

It was towards the end of 1885 that General Annenkof finished, at Kizil
Arvat, the first portion of this railway measuring about 140 miles, of which 90
were through a desert which did not yield a single drop of water. But before
telling me how this extraordinary work was accomplished, Major Noltitz
reminded me of the facts which had gradually prepared the conquest of
Turkestan and its definite incorporation with the Russian Empire.

As far back as 1854 the Russians had imposed a treaty of alliance on the
Khan of Khiva. Some years afterwards, eager to pursue their march towards the
east, the campaigns of 1860 and 1864 had given them the Khanats of Kokhand
and Bokhara. Two years later, Samarkand passed under their dominion after the
battles of Irdjar and Zera-Buleh.


There remained to be conquered the southern portion of Turkestan, and
chiefly the oasis of Akhal Tekke, which is contiguous to Persia. Generals
Sourakine and Lazareff attempted this in their expeditions of 1878 and 1879.
Their plans failed, and it was to the celebrated Skobeleff, the hero of Plevna, that
the czar confided the task of subduing the valiant Turkoman tribes.

Skobeleff landed at the port of Mikhailov--the port of Uzun Ada was not
then in existence--and it was in view of facilitating his march across the desert
that his second in command, Annenkof, constructed the strategic railway which
in ten months reached Kizil Arvat.

This is how the Russians built the line with a rapidity superior, as I have said,
to that of the Americans in the far west, a line that was to be of use for
commerce and for war.

To begin with, the general got together a construction train consisting of
thirty-four wagons. Four of these were two-decked for the officers, twenty more
had two decks and were used by the workmen and soldiers; one wagon served as
a dining room, four as kitchens, one as an ambulance, one as a telegraph office,
one as a forge, one as a provision store, and one was held in reserve. These were
his traveling workshops and also his barracks in which fifteen hundred
workmen, soldiers and otherwise, found their board and lodging. The train
advanced as the rails were laid. The workmen were divided into two brigades;
they each worked six hours a day, with the assistance of the country people who
lived in tents and numbered about fifteen thousand. A telegraph wire united the
works with Mikhailov, and from there a little Decauville engine worked the
trains which brought along the rails and sleepers.

In this way, helped by the horizontality of the ground, a day's work yielded
nearly five miles of track, whereas in the plains of the United States only about
half that rate was accomplished. Labor cost little; forty-five francs a month for
the men from the oasis, fifty centimes a day for those who came from Bokhara.

It was in this way that Skobeleff's soldiers were taken to Kizil Arvat, and
then eighty-four miles beyond to Gheok Tepe. This town did not surrender until
after the destruction of its ramparts and the massacre of twelve thousand of its
defenders; but the oasis of Akhal Tekke was in the power of the Russians. The
inhabitants of the Atek oasis were only too ready to submit, and that all the more
willingly as they had implored the help of the czar in their struggle with Kouli
Khan, the chief of the Mervians. These latter to the number of two hundred and
fifty thousand, followed their example, and the first locomotive entered Merv
station in July, 1886.

"And the English?" I asked Major Noltitz. "In what way have they looked
upon the progress of the Russians through Central Asia?"


"Jealously, of course. Think for a moment what it means when the Russian
railways are united with the Chinese, instead of the Indian. The Transcaspian in
connection with the line between Herat and Delhi! And consider that the English
have not been as fortunate in Afghanistan as we have been in Turkestan. You
have noticed the gentleman in our train?"

"I have. He is Sir Francis Trevellyan of Trevellyan Hall, Trevellyanshire."

"Well, Sir Francis Trevellyan has nothing but looks of contempt and shrugs
of the shoulder for all we have done. His nation's jealousy is incarnate in him,
and England will never be content that our railways should go from Europe to
the Pacific Ocean, while the British railways end at the Indian Ocean."

This interesting conversation had lasted for the hour and a half during which
we walked about the streets of Kizil Arvat. It was time to return to the station,
and we did so.

Of course, matters did not end here. It was agreed that the major should leave
his seat in the third car and occupy that next to mine in the first. We had already
been two inhabitants of the same town; well, we would become two neighbors in
the house, or, rather, two friends in the same room.

At nine o'clock the signal to start was given. The train leaving Kizil Arvat
went off in a southwesterly direction towards Askhabad, along the Persian
frontier.

For another half hour the major and I continued to talk of one thing or
another. He told me that if the sun had not set, I should have been able to see the
summits of the Great and Little Balkans of Asia which rise above the bay of
Krasnovodsk.

Already most of our companions had taken up their quarters for the night on
their seats, which by an ingenious mechanism could be transformed into beds, on
which you could stretch yourself at full length, lay your head on a pillow, wrap
yourself in rugs, and if you didn't sleep well it would be on account of a troubled
conscience.

Major Noltitz had nothing to reproach himself with apparently, for a few
minutes after he had said good night he was deep in the sleep of the just.

As for me, if I remained awake it was because I was troubled in my mind. I
was thinking of my famous packing case, of the man it contained, and this very
night I had resolved to enter into communication with him. I thought of the
people who had done this sort of thing before. In 1889, 1891, and 1892, an
Austrian tailor, Hermann Zeitung, had come from Vienna to Paris, from
Amsterdam to Brussels, from Antwerp to Christiania in a box, and two
sweethearts of Barcelona, Erres and Flora Anglora, had shared a box between
them from Spain into France.


But I must wait until Popof had retired to rest. The train would not stop until
it reached Gheok Tepe at one o'clock in the morning. During the run from Kizil
Arvat to Gheok Tepe I reckoned that Popof would have a good sleep, and then,
or never, I would put my plan into execution.

Hold! an idea! Suppose it is Zeitung who makes a trade of this sort of thing
and manages to make a little money out of public generosity? It ought to be
Zeitung, it must be! Confound it! he is not at all interesting! And here was I
reckoning on this fellow. Well, we shall see. I shall know him by his
photographs, and perhaps I may make use of him.

Half an hour went by, and the noise of a door shutting on the platform of the
car told me that our guard had just entered his little box. In spite of my desire to
visit the baggage car I waited patiently, for it was possible that Popof was not yet
sound asleep.

Within, all is quiet under the veiled light of the lamps.

Without, the night is very dark, and the rattle of the train mingles with the
whistling of the rather high wind.

I rise. I draw aside the curtain of one of the lamps. I look at my watch.

It is a few minutes past eleven. Still two hours to Gheok Tepe.

The moment has come. I glide between the seats to the door of the car. I open
it gently and shut it after me without being heard by my companions, without
waking any one.

Here I am on the platform, which shakes as the train travels. Amid the
unfathomable darkness which envelops the Kara Koum, I experience the feeling
of a night at sea when on shipboard.

A feeble light filters through the blind of the guard's box. Shall I wait till it is
extinct, or, as is very probable, will it not last till the morning?

Anyhow, Popof is not asleep, as I discover by the noise he makes in turning
over. I keep quiet, leaning against the balustrade of the platform.

Leaning forward my looks are attracted by the luminous ray thrown forward
by the headlight of the engine. It seems as though we are running on a road of
fire. Above me the clouds are racing across with great rapidity, and a few
constellations glitter through their rifts, Cassiopeia, the Little Bear, in the north,
and in the zenith Vega of Lyra.

At length absolute silence reigns on the platforms. Popof, who is in charge of
the train, has his eyes closed in sleep. Assured of safety I cross the gangway and
am in front of the baggage van.

The door is only fastened with a bar which is hung between two staples.

I open it and shut it behind me.

I do this without noise, for if I do not want to attract Popof's attention, I do


not want as yet to attract the attention of the man in the packing case.

Although the darkness is deep in the van, although there is no side window, I
know my position. I know where the case is placed; it is in the left comer as I
enter. The thing is not to knock against any other case--not against one of those
belonging to Ephrinell, for what a row there would be if I set all those artificial
teeth chattering!

Carefully feeling with feet and hands, I reach the case. No cat could have
been more gentle or more silent as I felt its edges.

I leaned over and placed my ear timidly against the outer panel.

There was no sound of breathing.

The products of the house of Strong, Bulbul & Co., of New York, could not
be more noiseless in their boxes.

A fear seizes upon me--the fear of seeing all my reporter's hopes vanish. Was
I deceived on board the Astara? That respiration, that sneeze; had I dreamed it
all? Was there no one in the case, not even Zeitung? Were these really glass
goods exported to Miss Zinca Klork, Avenue Cha-Coua, Pekin, China?

No! Feeble as it is, I detect a movement inside the case! It becomes more
distinct, and I ask if the panel is going to slide, if the prisoner is coming out of
his prison to breathe the fresh air?

What I had better do to see and not to be seen is to hide between two cases.
Thanks to the darkness there is nothing to fear.

Suddenly a slight cracking greets my ear. I am not the sport of an illusion; it
is the crack of a match being lighted.

Almost immediately a few feeble rays pierce the ventilation holes of the
case.

If I had had any doubts as to the position held by the prisoner in the scale of
being, I have none now. At the least it must be an ape who knows the use of fire,
and also the handling of matches. Travelers tell us that such animals exist, but
we have to take the statement on trust.

Why should I not confess it? A certain emotion came over me and I had to
take care I did not run away.

A minute elapsed. Nothing shows that the panel has been moved, nothing
gives me reason to suppose that the unknown is coming out.

Cautiously I wait. Then I have an idea to make something out of this light.
The case is lighted within; if I were to peep through those holes?

I creep toward the case. A single apprehension chills my brain. If the light
were suddenly extinguished!

I am against the panel, which I take care not to touch, and I put my eyes
close to one of the holes.


There is a man in the box, and it is not the Austrian tailor, Zeitung! Thank
Heaven! I will soon make him my No. 11.

The man's features I can make out clearly. He is from twenty-five to twenty-
six years of age. He does not shave, and his beard is brown. He is of the true
Roumanian type, and that confirms me in my notion regarding his Roumanian
correspondent. He is good-looking, although his face denotes great energy of
character, and he must be energetic to have shut himself up in a box like this for
such a long journey. But if he has nothing of the malefactor about him, I must
confess that he does not look like the hero I am in search of as the chief
personage in my story.

After all, they were not heroes, that Austrian and that Spaniard who traveled
in their packing cases. They were young men, very simple, very ordinary, and
yet they yielded columns of copy. And so this brave No. 11, with amplifications,
antonyms, diaphoreses, epitases, tropes, metaphors, and other figures of that sort,
I will beat out, I will enlarge, I will develop--as they develop a photographic
negative.

Besides to travel in a box from Tiflis to Pekin is quite another affair than
traveling from Vienna or Barcelona to Paris, as was done by Zeitung, Erres and
Flora Anglora.

I add that I will not betray my Roumanian; I will report him to no one. He
may rely on my discretion; he may reckon on my good offices if I can be of use
to him when he is found out.

But what is he doing now? Well, he is seated on the bottom of his case and
placidly eating his supper by the light of a little lamp. A box of preserves is on
his knee, biscuit is not wanting, and in a little cupboard I notice some full
bottles, besides a rug and overcoat hooked up on the wall.

Evidently No. 11 is quite at home. He is there in his cell like a snail in his
shell. His house goes with him; and he saves the thousand francs it would have
cost him to journey from Tiflis to Pekin, second-class. I know he is committing a
fraud, and that the law punishes such fraud. He can come out of his box when he
likes and take a walk in the van, or even at night venture on the platform. No! I
do not blame him, and when I think of his being sent to the pretty Roumanian, I
would willingly take his place.

An idea occurs to me which may not perhaps be as good as it seems. That is
to rap lightly on the box so as to enter into communication with my new
companion, and learn who he is, and whence he comes, for I know whither he
goes. An ardent curiosity devours me, I must gratify it. There are moments when
a special correspondent is metamorphosed into a daughter of Eve.

But how will the poor fellow take it? Very well, I am sure. I will tell him that


I am a Frenchman, and a Roumanian knows he can always trust a Frenchman. I
will offer him my services. I will propose to soften the rigors of his
imprisonment by my interviews, and to make up the scarcity of his meals by
little odds and ends. He will have nothing to fear from my imprudences.

I rap the panel.

The light suddenly goes out.

The prisoner has suspended his respiration.

I must reassure him.

"Open!" I say to him gently in Russian.

"Open--"

I cannot finish the sentence; for the train gives a sudden jump and slackens
speed.

But we cannot yet have reached Gheok Tepe?

There is a noise outside.

I rush out of the van and shut the door behind me.

It was time.

I have scarcely reached the platform before Popofs door opens, and without
seeing me he hurries through the van on to the engine.

Almost immediately the train resumes its normal speed and Popof reappears
a minute afterwards.

"What is the matter, Popof?"

"What is often the matter, Monsieur Bombarnac. We have smashed a
dromedary."

"Poor brute!"

"Poor brute? He might have thrown us off the line!"

"Stupid brute, then!"


CHAPTER VIII.

Before the train reaches Gheok Tepe I am back in the car. Confound this
dromedary! If he had not managed to get smashed so clumsily No. 11 would no
longer be unknown to me. He would have opened his panel, we would have
talked in a friendly way, and separated with a friendly shake of the hand. Now he
will be full of anxiety, he knows his fraud is discovered, that there is some one
who has reason to suspect his intentions, some one who may not hesitate to
betray his secret. And then, after being taken out of his case, he will be put under
guard at the next station, and it will be useless for Mademoiselle Zinca Klork to
expect him in the capital of the Chinese Empire!

Yes! It would be better for me to relieve his anxiety this very night. That is


impossible, for the train will soon stop at Gheok Tepe, and then at Askhabad
which it will leave in the first hour of daylight. I can no longer trust to Popof's
going to sleep.

I am absorbed in these reflections, when the locomotive stops in Gheok Tepe
Station at one o'clock in the morning. None of my companions have left their
beds.

I get out on to the platform and prowl around the van. It would be too risky
to try and get inside. I should have been glad to visit the town, but the darkness
prevents me from seeing anything. According to what Major Noltitz says it still
retains the traces of Skobeleffs terrible assault in 1880--dismantled walls,
bastions in ruins. I must content myself with having seen all that with the major's
eyes.

The train starts at two o'clock in the morning, after having been joined by a
few passengers who Popof tells me are Turkomans. I will have a look at them
when daylight comes.

For ten minutes I remained on the car platform and watched the heights of
the Persian frontier on the extreme limit of the horizon. Beyond the stretch of
verdant oasis watered by a number of creeks, we crossed wide cultivated plains
through which the line made frequent diversions.

Having discovered that Popof did not intend to go to sleep again, I went back
to my comer.

At three o'clock there was another stop. The name of Askhabad was shouted
along the platform. As I could not remain still I got out, leaving my companions
sound asleep, and I ventured into the town.

Askhabad is the headquarters of the Transcaspian, and I opportunely
remembered what Boulangier, the engineer, had said about it in the course of that
interesting journey he had made to Merv. All that I saw on the left as I went out
of the station, was the gloomy outline of the Turkoman Fort, dominating the new
town, the population of which has doubled since 1887. It forms a confused mass
behind a thick curtain of trees.

When I returned at half-past three, Popof was going through the luggage van,
I know not why. What must be the Roumanian's anxiety during this movement to
and fro in front of his box!

As soon as Popof reappeared I said to him: "Anything fresh?"

"Nothing, except the moming breeze!" said he.

"Very fresh!" said I. "Is there a refreshment bar in the station?"

"There is one for the convenience of the passengers."

"And for the convenience of the guards, I suppose? Come along, Popof."

And Popof did not want asking twice.


The bar was open, but there did not seem to be much to choose from. The
only liquor was "Koumiss," which is fermented mare's milk, and is the color of
faded ink, very nourishing, although very liquid. You must be a Tartar to
appreciate this koumiss. At least that is the effect it produced on me. But Popof
thought it excellent, and that was the important point.

Most of the Sarthes and Kirghizes who got out at Askhabad, have been
replaced by other second-class passengers, Afghan merchants and smugglers, the
latter particularly clever in their line of business. All the green tea consumed in
Central Asia is brought by them from China through India, and although the
transport is much longer, they sell it at a much lower price than the Russian tea. I
need not say that their luggage was examined with Muscovite minuteness.

The train started again at four o'clock. Our car was still a sleeper. I envied the
sleep of my companions, and as that was all I could do, I returned to the
platform.

The dawn was appearing in the east. Here and there were the ruins of the
ancient city, a citadel girdled with high ramparts and a succession of long
porticos extending over fifteen hundred yards. Running over a few
embankments, necessitated by the inequalities of the sandy ground, the train
reaches the horizontal steppe.

We are running at a speed of thirty miles an hour in a southwesterly
direction, along the Persian frontier. It is only beyond Douchak that the line
begins to leave it. During this three hours' run the two stations at which the train
stops are Gheours, the junction for the road to Mesched, whence the heights of
the Iran plateau are visible, and Artyk where water is abundant although slightly
brackish.

The train then traverses the oasis of the Atek, which is an important tributary
of the Caspian. Verdure and trees are everywhere. This oasis justifies its name,
and would not disgrace the Sahara. It extends to the station of Douchak at the six
hundred and sixtieth verst, which we reach at six o'clock in the morning.

We stop here two hours, that is to say, there are two hours for us to walk
about. I am off to look at Douchak with Major Noltitz as my cicerone.

A traveler precedes us out of the railway station; I recognize Sir Francis
Trevellyan. The major makes me notice that this gentleman's face is more sullen
than usual, his lip more scornful, his attitude more Anglo-Saxon.

"And do you know why, Monsieur Bombarnac? Because this station at
Douchak might be the terminus of a line from British India through the Afghan
frontier, Kandahar, the Bolan Pass and the Pendjeh oasis, that would unite the
two systems."

"And how long would the line be?"


"About six hundred miles. But the English will not meet the Russians in a
friendly way. But if we could put Calcutta within twelve days of London, what
an advantage that would be for their trade!"

Talking in this way the major and I "did" Douchak. Some years ago it was
foreseen how important this village would be. A branch line unites it with
Teheran in Persia, while there has, as yet, been no survey for a line to India.
While gentlemen cast in the mould of Sir Francis Trevellyan are in the majority
in the United Kingdom, the Asiatic network of railways will never be complete.

I was led to question the major regarding the safety of the Grand Transasiatic
across the provinces of Central Asia.

In Turkestan, he told me, the safety is well assured. The Russian police keep
constant watch over it; there is a regular police force at the stations, and as the
stations are not far apart, I don't think the travelers have much to fear from the
nomad tribes. Besides, the Turkomans are kept in their place by the Russian
administration. During the years the Transcaspian has been at work, there has
been no attack to hinder the train service.

"That is comforting, Major Noltitz. And as to the section between the frontier
and Pekin?"

"That is another matter," replied the major. "Over the Pamir plateau, up to
Kachgar, the road is carefully guarded; but beyond that, the Grand Transasiatic is
under Chinese control, and I have not much confidence in that."

"Are the stations very far from each other?" I asked.

"Very far, sometimes."

"And the Russians in charge of the train are replaced by Chinese, are they
not?"

"Yes, with the exception of Popof, who goes through with us."

"So that we shall have Chinese engine drivers and stokers? Well, major, that
seems rather alarming, and the safety of the travelers--"

"Let me undeceive you, Monsieur Bombarnac. These Chinese are just as
clever as we are. They are excellent mechanics, and it is the same with the
engineers who laid out the line through the Celestial Empire. They are certainly
a very intelligent race, and very fit for industrial progress."

"I think, major, that they will one day become masters of the world--after the
Slavs, of course!"

"I do not know what the future may have in store," said Major Noltitz, with a
smile. "But, returning to the Chinese, I say that they are of quick comprehension,
with an astonishing facility of assimilation. I have seen them at work, and I
speak from experience."

"Agreed," said I; "but if there is no danger under this head, are there not a lot


of scoundrels prowling about Mongolia and Northern China?"

"And you think these scoundrels will be daring enough to attack the train?"

"Exactly, major, and that is what makes me feel easy."

"What? Makes you feel easy?"

"Quite so, for my sole anxiety is that our journey may not be devoid of
incident."

"Really, Mr. Special Correspondent, I admire you. You must have incidents--

"As a doctor must have patients. Now a real good adventure--"

"Well, Monsieur Bombarnac, I am afraid you will be disappointed, as I have
heard that the company has treated several chiefs of the robber bands--"

"As the Greek Government treated Hadji Stavros in About's romance."

"Precisely; and who knows that if in their wisdom--"

"T don't believe it."

"Why not? It would be quite in the modern style, this way of assuring the
safety of the trains during the run through the Celestial Empire. Anyhow, there is
one of these highwaymen, who has retained his independence and liberty of
action, a certain Ki-Tsang."

"Who is he?"

"A bold bandit chief, half-Chinaman, half-Mongol. Having for some time
been a terror to Yunnan, he was being too closely pursued, and has now moved
into the northern provinces. His presence has ever been reported in that part of
Mongolia served by the Grand Transasiatic."

"Well, he ought to furnish a few paragraphs."

"The paragraphs Ki-Tsang will furnish you with may cost you too dearly."

"Bah! major, the Twentieth Century is quite rich enough to pay for its glory."

"To pay with its money, perhaps, but we may have to pay with our lives!
Luckily our companions have not heard you talk in this way, or they might come
in a body and demand your expulsion from the train. So be careful, and keep a
guard on your desires as a newspaper man in quest of adventures. Above all,
don't have anything to do with this Ki-Tsang. It would be all the better in the
interest of the passengers."

"But not of the passage, major."

We returned towards the station. The stoppage at Douchak had another half
hour to last. As I walked on the quay, I observed something going on which
would change the make-up of our train.

Another van had arrived from Teheran by the branch line to Mesphed, which
puts the Persian capital in communication with the Transcaspian.

This van was bolted and barred, and accompanied by a squad of Persian


police, whose orders seemed to be not to lose sight of it.

I don't know what made me think so, but it seemed as though this van had
something mysterious about it, and as the major had left me, I went and spoke to
Popof, who was watching over the proceedings.

"Popof, where is that van going?"

"To Pekin."

"And what has it got in it?"

"What has it got in it? An exalted personage."

"An exalted personage?"

"Are you surprised?"

"Tam. In this van?"

"Tt is his own idea."

"Well, Popof, when this exalted personage gets out perhaps you will let me
know?"

"He Will not get out."

"Why not?"

"Because he is dead."

"Dead?"

"Yes, and it is his body they are taking to Pekin, where he will be interred
with all the honors due to him."

So that we were to have an important personage in our train--in the shape of
a corpse, it is true. Never mind! I asked Popof to discover the name of the
defunct. He ought to be some mandarin of mark. As soon as I knew it I would
send a telegram to the Twentieth Century.

While I was looking at this van, a new passenger came up and examined it
with no less curiosity than I did.

This traveler was a fine-looking man of about forty, wearing gracefully the
costume of the richer Mongols, a tall fellow, with rather a gloomy look, a
military moustache, tawny complexion, and eyes that never shut.

"Here is a splendid fellow," I said to myself. "I don't know if he will turn out
the hero of the drama I am in search of, but, anyhow, I will number him twelve
in my traveling troupe."

This leading star, I soon learned from Popof, bore the name of Faruskiar. He
was accompanied by another Mongol, of inferior rank, of about the same age,
whose name was Ghangir. As they looked at the van being attached to the tail of
the train in front of the luggage van, they exchanged a few words. As soon as the
arrangements were complete the Persians took their places in the second-class
car, which preceded the mortuary van, so as to have the precious corpse always
under their surveillance.


At this moment there was a shout on the station platform I recognized the
voice. It was the Baron Weissschnitzerd6rfer shouting:

"Stop! stop!"

This time it was not a train on the start, but a hat in distress. A sudden gust
had swept through the station and borne off the baron's hat--a helmet-shaped hat
of a bluish color. It rolled on the platform, it rolled on the rails, it skimmed the
enclosure and went out over the wall, and its owner ran his hardest to stop it.

At the sight of this wild pursuit the Caternas held their sides, the young
Chinaman, Pan Chao, shouted with laughter, while Dr. Tio-King remained
imperturbably serious.

The German purple, puffling and panting, could do no more. Twice he had
got his hand on his hat, and twice it had escaped him, and now suddenly he fell
full length with his head lost under the folds of his overcoat; whereupon Caterna
began to sing the celebrated air from "Miss Helyett":

"Ah! the superb point of view--ew--ew--ew! Ah! the view unexpected by
you--you--you--you!"

I know nothing more annoying than a hat carried away by the wind, which
bounds hither and thither, and spins and jumps, and glides, and slides, and darts
off just as you think you are going to catch it. And if that should happen to me I
will forgive those who laugh at the comic endeavor.

But the baron was in no mood for forgiveness. He bounded here, and
bounded there, he jumped on to the line. They shouted to him, "Look out! look
out!" for the Merv was coming in at some speed. It brought death to the hat, the
engine smashed it pitilessly, and it was only a torn rag when it was handed to the
baron. And then began again a series of imprecations on the Grand Transasiatic.

The signal is given. The passengers, old and new, hurry to their places.
Among the new ones I notice three Mongols, of forbidding appearance, who get
into the second-class car.

As I put my foot on the platform I hear the young Chinese say to his
companion:

"Well, Dr. Tio-King, did you see the German with his performing hat? How I
laughed!"

And so Pan Chao speaks French. What do I say? Better than French--he
speaks Persian! Most extraordinary! I must have a talk with him.


CHAPTER IX.
We started to time. The baron could not complain this time. After all, I
understood his impatience; a minute's delay might cause him to lose the mail


boat from Tien Tsin to Japan.

The day looked promising, that is to say, there might have been a wind
strong enough to put out the sun as if it were a candle, such a hurricane as
sometimes stops the locomotives of the Grand Transasiatic, but to-day it is
blowing from the west, and will be supportable, as it blows the train along. We
can remain out on the platforms.

I want to enter into conversation with Pan Chao. Popof was right; he must be
the son of some family of distinction who has been spending some years in Paris
for education and amusement. He ought to be one of the most regular visitors at
the Twentieth Century "five o'clocks."

Meanwhile I will attend to other business. There is that man in the case. A
whole day will elapse before I can relieve his anxiety. In what a state he must be!
But as it would be unwise for me to enter the van during the day, I must wait
until night.

I must not forget that an interview with the Caternas is included in the
programme. There will be no difficulty in that, apparently.

What will not be so easy is to get into conversation with my No. 12, his
superb lordship Faruskiar. He seems rather stiff, does this Oriental.

Ah! There is a name I must know as soon as possible, that of the mandarin
returning to China in the form of a mortuary parcel. With a little ingenuity Popof
may manage to ascertain it from one of the Persians in charge of his Excellency.
If it would only be that of some grand functionary, the Pao-Wang, or the Ko-
Wang, or the viceroy of the two Kiangs, the Prince King in person!

For an hour the train is running through the oasis. We shall soon be in the
open desert. The soil is formed of alluvial beds extending up to the environs of
Merv. I must get accustomed to this monotony of the journey which will last up
to the frontier of Turkestan. Oasis and desert, desert and oasis. As we approach
the Pamir the scenery will change a little. There are picturesque bits of landscape
in that orographic knot which the Russians have had to cut as Alexander cut the
gordian knot that was worth something to the Macedonian conqueror of Asia.
Here is a good augury for the Russian conquest.

But I must wait for this crossing of the Pamir and its varied scenery. Beyond
lay the interminable plains of Chinese Turkestan, the immense sandy desert of
Gobi, where the monotony of the journey will begin again.

It is half-past ten. Breakfast will soon be served in the dining car. Let us take
a walk through the length of the train.

Where is Ephrinell? I do not see him at his post by the side of Miss Horatia
Bluett, whom I questioned on the subject after saluting her politely.

"Mr. Ephrinell has gone to give an eye to his cases," she replies.


In the rear of the second car Faruskiar and Ghangir have installed
themselves; they are alone at this moment, and are talking together in a low tone.

As IT return I meet Ephrinell, who is coming back to his traveling companion.
He shakes my hand Yankee fashion. I tell him that Miss Horatia Bluett has given
me news of him.

"Oh!" says he, "what a woman yonder! What a splendid saleswoman! One of
those English--"

"Who are good enough to be Americans!" I add.

"Wait a bit!" he replies, with a significant smile.

As I am going put, I notice that the two Chinamen are already in the dining
car, and that Dr. Tio-King's little book is on the table.

I do not consider it too much of a liberty for a reporter to pick up this little
book, to open it and to read the title, which is as follows:

The temperate and regular life, Or the art of living long in perfect health.
Translated from the Italian of Louis Cornaro, a Venetian noble. To which is
added the way of correcting a bad constitution, and enjoying perfect felicity to
the most advanced years. and to die only from the using up of the original
humidity in extreme old age. Salerno, 1782.

And this is the favorite reading of Dr. Tio-King! And that is why his
disrespectful pupil occasionally gives him the nickname of Cornaro!

I have not time to see anything else in this volume than Abstinentia adjicit
vitam; but this motto of the noble Venetian I have no intention of putting in
practice, at least at breakfast time.

There is no change in the order in which we sit down to table. I find myself
close to Major Noltitz, who is looking attentively at Faruskiar and _ his
companion, placed at the extremity of the table. We are asking ourselves who
this haughty Mongol could be.

"Ah!" said I, laughing at the thought which crossed my mind, "if that is--"

"Who?" asked the major.

"The chief of the brigands, the famous Ki-Tsang."

"Have your joke, Monsieur Bombarnac, but under your breath, I advise
you!"

"You see, major, he would then be an interesting personage and worth a long
interview!"

We enjoyed our meal as we talked. The breakfast was excellent, the
provisions having come freshly on board at Askhabad and Douchak. For drink
we had tea, and Crimean wine, and Kazan beer; for meat we had mutton cutlets
and excellent preserves; for dessert a melon with pears and grapes of the best
quality.


After breakfast I went to smoke my cigar on the platform behind the dining
car. Caterna almost immediately joins me. Evidently the estimable comedian has
seized the opportunity to enter into conversation with me.

His intelligent eyes, his smooth face, his cheeks accustomed to false
whiskers, his lips accustomed to false moustaches, his head accustomed to wigs
red, black, or gray, bald or hairy, according to his part, everything denoted the
actor made for the life of the boards. But he had such an open, cheery face, such
an honest look, so frank an attitude, that he was evidently a really good fellow.

"Sir," said he to me, "are two Frenchmen going all the way from Baku to
Pekin without making each other's acquaintance?"

"Sir," I replied, "when I meet a compatriot--"

"Who is a Parisian--"

"And consequently a Frenchman twice over," I added, "I am only too glad to
shake hands with him! And so, Monsieur Caterna--"

"You know my name?"

"As you know mine, I am sure."

"Of course, Monsieur Claudius Bombarnac, correspondent of the Twentieth
Century."

"At your service, believe me."

"A thousand thanks, Monsieur Bombarnac, and even ten thousand, as they
say in China, whither Madame Caterna and I are bound."

"To appear at Shanghai in the French troupe at the residency as--"

"You know all that, then?"

"A reporter!"

"Quite so."

"I may add, from sundry nautical phrases I have noticed, that you have been
to sea."

"I believe you, sir. Formerly coxswain of Admiral de Boissondy's launch on
board the Redoubtable."

"Then I beg to ask why you, a sailor, did not go by way of the sea?"

"Ah, there it is, Monsieur Bombarnac. Know that Madame Caterna, who is
incontestably the first leading lady of the provinces, and there is not one to beat
her as a waiting maid or in a man's part, cannot stand the sea. And when I heard
of the Grand Transasiatic, I said to her, 'Be easy, Caroline! Do not worry yourself
about the perfidious element. We will cross Russia, Turkestan, and China,
without leaving terra firma!’ And that pleased her, the little darling, so brave and
so devoted, so--I am at a loss for a word--well, a lady who will play the duenna
in case of need, rather than leave the manager in a mess! An artiste, a true
artiste!"


It was a pleasure to listen to Caterna; he was in steam, as the engineer says,
and the only thing to do was to let him blow off. Surprising as it may seem, he
adored his wife, and I believe she was equally fond of him. A well-matched
couple, evidently, from what I learned from my comedian, never embarrassed,
very wide awake, content with his lot, liking nothing so much as the theater--
above all the provincial theater--where he and his wife had played in drama,
vaudeville, comedy, operetta, opera comique, opera, spectacle, pantomime,
happy in the entertainment which began at five o'clock in the afternoon and
ended at one o'clock in the morning, in the grand theaters of the chief cities, in
the saloon of the mayor, in the barn of the village, without boots, without
patches, without orchestra, sometimes even without spectators--thus saving the
return of the money--professionals fit for anything, no matter what.

As a Parisian, Caterna must have been the wag of the forecastle when he was
at sea. As clever with his instrument of brass or wood, he possessed a most
varied and complete assortment of jokes, songs, monologues, and dialogues.
This he told me with an immense amount of attitude and gesture, now here, now
there, legs, arms, hands, and feet all going together. I should never feel dull in
the company of such a merry companion.

"And where were you before you left France?" I asked.

"At La Ferté-sous-Jouarre, where Madame Caterna achieved a genuine
success aS Elsa in ‘Lohengrin,’ which we played without music. But it is an
interesting piece, and it was well done."

"You must have been a good deal about the world, Monsieur Caterna?"

"I believe you; Russia, England, both Americas. Ah! Monsieur Claudius."

He already called me Claudius.

"Ah! Monsieur Claudius, there was a time when I was the idol of Buenos
Ayres, and the pet of Rio Janeiro! Do not think I would tell you an untruth! No! I
know myself. Bad at Paris, I am excellent in the provinces. In Paris you play for
yourself; in the provinces you play for the others! And then what a repertory!"

"My compliments, my dear compatriot!"

"I accept them, Monsieur Claudius, for I like my trade. What would you
haye? All the world cannot expect to be a senator or--a special correspondent."

"There, that is wicked, Monsieur Caterna," said I, with a laugh.

"No; it is the last word."

And while the unwearied actor ran on in this way, stations appeared one after
the other between the shrieks of the whistle, Kulka, Nisachurch, Kulla Minor
and others, not particularly cheerful to look at; then Bairam Ali at the seven
hundred and ninety-fifth verst and Kourlan Kala at the eight hundred and
fifteenth.


"And to tell you the truth," continued Caterna, "we have made a little money
by going about from town to town. At the bottom of our boxes are a few
Northern debentures, of which I think a good deal, and take much care, and they
have been honestly got, Monsieur Claudius. Although we live under a
democratic government, the rule of equality, the time is still far off when you
will see the noble father dining beside the prefect at the table of the judge of
appeal, and the actress open the ball with the prefect at the house of the general-
in-chief! Well! We can dine and dance among ourselves--"

"And be just as happy, Monsieur Caterna."

"Certainly no less, Monsieur Claudius," replied the future premier comic of
Shanghai, shaking an imaginary frill with the graceful ease of one of Louis XV.'s
noblemen.

At this point, Madame Caterna came up. She was in every way worthy of her
husband, sent into the world to reply to him in life as on the stage, one of those
genial theater folks, born one knows not where or how, but thoroughly genuine
and good-natured.

"I beg to introduce you to Caroline Caterna," said the actor, in much the
same tone as he would have introduced me to Patti or Sarah Bernhardt.

"Having shaken hands with your husband," said I, "I shall be happy to shake
hands with you, Madame Caterna."

"There you are, then," said the actress, "and without ceremony, foot to the
front, and no prompting."

"As you see, no nonsense about her, and the best of wives--"

"As he is the best of husbands."

"I believe I am, Monsieur Claudius," said the actor, "and why? Because I
believe that marriage consists entirely in the precept to which husbands should
always conform, and that is, that what the wife likes the husband should eat
often."

It will be understood that it was touching to see this honest give-and-take, so
different from the dry business style of the two commercials who were in
conversation in the adjoining car.

But here is Baron Weissschnitzerd6rfer, wearing a traveling cap, coming out
of the dining car, where I imagine he has not spent his time consulting the time-
table.

"The good man of the hat trick!" said Caterna, after the baron went back into
the car without favoring us with a salute.

"He is quite German enough!" said Madame Caterna.

"And to think that Henry Heine called those people sentimental oaks!" I
added.


"Then he could not have known that one!" said Caterna. "Oak, I admit, but
sentimental--"

"Do you know why the baron has patronized the Grand Transasiatic?" I
asked.

"To eat sauerkraut at Pekin!" said Caterna.

"Not at all. To rival Miss Nelly Bly. He is trying to get around the world in
thirty-nine days."

"Thirty-nine days!" exclaimed Gaterna. "You should say a hundred and
thirty-nine!"

And in a voice like a husky clarinet the actor struck up the well-known air
from the Cloches de Cormeville:

"I thrice have been around the world."

Adding, for the baron's benefit:

"He will not do the half."


CHAPTER X.

At a quarter-past twelve our train passed the station of Kari Bata, which
resembles one of the stations on the line from Naples to Sorrento, with its Italian
roofs. I noticed a vast Asiatico-Russian camp, the flags waving in the fresh
breeze. We have entered the Mervian oasis, eighty miles long and eight wide,
and containing about six hundred thousand hectares--there is nothing like being
precise at the finish. Right and left are cultivated fields, clumps of fine trees, an
uninterrupted succession of villages, huts among the thickets, fruit gardens
between the houses, flocks of sheep and herds of cattle among the pastures. All
this rich country is watered by the Mourgab--the White Water--or its tributaries,
and pheasants swarm like crows on the plains of Normandy. At one o'clock in
the afternoon the train stopped at Merv Station, over five hundred miles from
Uzun Ada.

The town has been often destroyed and rebuilt. The wars of Turkestan have
not spared it. Formerly, it seems, it was a haunt of robbers and bandits, and it is a
pity that the renowned Ki-Tsang did not live in those days. Perhaps he would
have become a Genghis Khan?

Major Noltitz told me of a Turkoman saying to the following effect: "If you
meet a Mervian and a viper, begin by killing the Mervian and leave the viper till
afterwards."

I fancy it would be better to begin with killing the viper now that the
Mervian has become a Russian.

We have seven hours to stop at Merv. I shall have time to visit this curious


town. Its physical and moral transformation has been profound, owing to the
somewhat arbitrary proceedings of the Russian administration. It is fortunate that
its fortress, five miles round, built by Nour Verdy in 1873, was not strong
enough to prevent its capture by the czar, so that the old nest of malefactors has
become one of the most important cities of the Transcaspian.

I said to Major Noltitz:

"If it is not trespassing on your kindness, may I ask you to go with me?"

"Willingly,"” he answered; "and as far as I am concerned, I shall be very
pleased to see Merv again."

We set out at a good pace.

"I ought to tell you," said the major, "that it is the new town we are going to
see."

"And why not the old one first? That would be more logical and more
chronological."

"Because old Merv is eighteen miles away, and you will hardly see it as you
pass. So you must refer to the accurate description given of it by your great
geographer Elisée Reclus."

And certainly readers will not lose anything by the change.

The distance from the station to new Merv is not great. But what an
abominable dust! The commercial town is built on the left of the river--a town in
the American style, which would please Ephrinell, wide streets straight as a line
crossing at right angles; straight boulevards with rows of trees; much bustle and
movement among the merchants in Oriental costume, in Jewish costume,
merchants of every kind; a number of camels and dromedaries, the latter much in
request for their powers of withstanding fatigue and which differ in their hinder
parts from their African congeners. Not many women along the sunny roads
which seem white hot. Some of the feminine types are, however, sufficiently
remarkable, dressed out in a quasi-military costume, wearing soft boots and a
cartouche belt in the Circassian style. You must take care of the stray dogs,
hungry brutes with long hair and disquieting fangs, of a breed reminding one of
the dogs of the Caucasus, and these animals--according to Boulangier the
engineer--have eaten a Russian general.

"Not entirely," replies the major, confirming the statement. "They left his
boots."

In the commercial quarter, in the depths of the gloomy ground floors,
inhabited by the Persians and the Jews, within the miserable shops are sold
carpets of incredible fineness, and colors artistically combined, woven mostly by
old women without any Jacquard cards.

On both banks of the Mourgab the Russians have their military


establishment. There parade the Turkoman soldiers in the service of the czar.
They wear the blue cap and the white epaulettes with their ordinary uniform, and
drill under the orders of Russian officers.

A wooden bridge, fifty yards long, crosses the river. It is practicable not only
for foot-passengers, but for trains, and telegraph wires are stretched above its
parapets.

On the opposite bank is the administrative town, which contains a
considerable number of civil servants, wearing the usual Russian cap.

In reality the most interesting place to see is a sort of annexe, a Tekke
village, in the middle of Merv, whose inhabitants have retained the villainous
characteristics of this decaying race, the muscular bodies, large ears, thick lips,
black beard. And this gives the last bit of local color to be found in the new
town.

At a turning in the commercial quarter we met the commercials, American
and English.

"Mr. Ephrinell," I said, "there is nothing curious in this modern Merv."

"On the contrary, Mr. Bombarnac, the town is almost Yankee, and it will
soon see the day when the Russians will give it tramways and gaslights!"

"That will come!"

"T hope it will, and then Merv will have a right to call itself a city."

"For my part, I should have preferred a visit to the old town, with its mosque,
its fortress, and its palace. But that is a little too far off, and the train does not
stop there, which I regret."

"Pooh!" said the Yankee. "What I regret is, that there is no business to be
done in these Turkoman countries! The men all have teeth--"

"And the women all have hair," added Horatia Bluett.

"Well, miss, buy their hair, and you will not lose your time."

"That is exactly what Holmes-Holme of London will do as soon as we have
exhausted the capillary stock of the Celestial Empire."

And thereupon the pair left us.

I then suggested to Major Noltitz--it was six o'clock--to dine at Merv, before
the departure of the train. He consented, but he was wrong to consent. An ill-
fortune took us to the Hotel Slav, which is very inferior to our dining car--at least
as regards its bill of fare. It contained, in particular, a national soup called
"borchtch," prepared with sour milk, which I would carefully refrain from
recommending to the gourmets of the Twentieth Century.

With regard to my newspaper, and that telegram relative to the mandarin our
train is "conveying" in the funereal acceptation of the word? Has Popof obtained
from the mutes who are on guard the name of this high personage?


Yes, at last! And hardly are we within the station than he runs up to me,
saying:

"T know the name."

"And it is?"

"Yen Lou, the great mandarin Yen Lou of Pekin."

"Thank you, Popof."

I rush to the telegraph office, and from there I send a telegram to the
Twentieth Century.

"Merv, 16th May, 7 p.m.

"Train, Grand Transasiatic, just leaving Merv. Took from Douchak the body
of the great mandarin Yen Lou coming from Persia to Pekin."

It cost a good deal, did this telegram, but you will admit it was well worth its
price.

The name of Yen Lou was immediately communicated to our fellow
travelers, and it seemed to me that my lord Faruskiar smiled when he heard it.

We left the station at eight o'clock precisely. Forty minutes afterwards we
passed near old Merv, and the night being dark I could see nothing of it. There
was, however, a fortress with square towers and a wall of some burned bricks,
and ruined tombs, and a palace and remains of mosques, and a collection of
archaeological things, which would have run to quite two hundred lines of small
text.

"Console yourself," said Major Noltitz. "Your satisfaction could not be
complete, for old Merv has been rebuilt four times. If you had seen the fourth
town, Bairam Ali of the Persian period, you would not have seen the third,
which was Mongol, still less the Musalman village of the second epoch, which
was Called Sultan Sandjar Kala, and still less the town of the first epoch. That
was Called by some Iskander Kala, in honor of Alexander the Macedonian, and
by others Ghiaour Kala, attributing its foundation to Zoroaster, the founder of the
Magian religion, a thousand years before Christ. So I should advise you to put
your regrets in the waste-paper basket."

And that is what I did, as I could do no better with them.

Our train is running northeast. The stations are twenty or thirty versts apart.
The names are not shouted, as we make no stop, and I have to discover them on
my time-table. Such are Keltchi, Ravina--why this Italian name in this Turkoman
province?--Peski, Repetek, etc. We cross the desert, the real desert without a
thread of water, where artesian wells have to be sunk to supply the reservoirs
along the line.

The major tells me that the engineers experienced immense difficulty in
fixing the sandhills on this part of the railway. If the palisades had not been


sloped obliquely, like the barbs of a feather, the line would have been covered by
the sand to such an extent as to stop the running of the trains. As soon as this
region of sandhills had been passed we were again on the level plain on which
the rails had been laid so easily.

Gradually my companions go to sleep, and our carriage is transformed into a
sleeping car.

I then return to my Roumanian. Ought I to attempt to see him to-night?
Undoubtedly; and not only to satisfy a very natural curiosity, but also to calm his
anxiety. In fact, knowing his secret is known to the person who spoke to him
through the panel of his case, suppose the idea occurred to him to get out at one
of the stations, give up his journey, and abandon his attempt to rejoin
Mademoiselle Zinca Klork, so as to escape the company's pursuit? That is
possible, after all, and my intervention may have done the poor fellow harm--to
say nothing of my losing No. 11, one of the most valuable in my collection.

I am resolved to visit him before the coming dawn. But, in order to be as
careful as possible, I will wait until the train has passed Tchardjoui, where it
ought to arrive at twenty-seven past two in the morning. There we shall stop a
quarter of an hour before proceeding towards the Amu-Daria. Popof will then
retire to his den, and I shall be able to slip into the van, without fear of being
seen.

How long the hours appear! Several times I have almost fallen asleep, and
twice or thrice I have had to go out into the fresh air on the platform.

The train enters Tchardjoui Station to the minute. It is an important town of
the Khanate of Bokhara, which the Transcaspian reached towards the end of
1886, seventeen months after the first sleeper was laid. We are not more than
twelve versts from the Amu-Daria, and beyond that river I shall enter on my
adventure.

I have said that the stop at Tchardjoui ought to last a quarter of an hour. A
few travelers alight, for they have booked to this town which contains about
thirty thousand inhabitants. Others get in to proceed to Bokhara and Samarkand,
but these are only second-class passengers. This produces a certain amount of
bustle on the platform.

I also get out and take a walk up and down by the side of the front van, and I
notice the door silently open and shut. A man creeps out on to the platform and
slips away through the station, which is dimly lighted by a few petroleum lamps.

It is my Roumanian. It can be no one else. He has not been seen, and there he
is, lost among the other travelers. Why this escape? Is it to renew his provisions
at the refreshment bar? On the contrary, is not his intention, as I am afraid it is,
to get away from us?


Shall I stop him? I will make myself known to him; promise to help him. I
will speak to him in French, in English, in German, in Russian--as he pleases. I
will say to him: "My friend, trust to my discretion; I will not betray you.
Provisions? I will bring them to you during the night. Encouragements? I will
heap them on you as I will the refreshments. Do not forget that Mademoiselle
Zinca Klork, evidently the most lovely of Roumanians, is expecting you at
Pekin, etc."

Behold me then following him without appearing to do so. Amid all this
hurry to and fro he is in little danger of being noticed. Neither Popof nor any of
the company's servants would suspect him to be a swindler. Is he going towards
the gate to escape me?

No! He only wants to stretch his legs better than he can do in the van. After
an imprisonment which has lasted since he left Baku--that is to say, about sixty
hours--he has earned ten minutes of freedom.

He is a man of middle height, lithe in his movements, and with a gliding kind
of walk. He could roll himself up like a cat and find quite room enough in his
case. He wears an old vest, his trousers are held up by a belt, and his cap is a fur
one--all of dark color.

I am at ease regarding his intentions. He returns towards the van, mounts the
platform, and shuts the door gently behind him. As soon as the train is on the
move I will knock at the panel, and this time--

More of the unexpected. Instead of waiting at Tchardjoui one-quarter of an
hour we have to wait three. A slight injury to one of the brakes of the engine has
had to be repaired, and, notwithstanding the German baron's remonstrances, we
do not leave the station before half-past three, as the day is beginning to dawn.

It follows from this that if I cannot visit the van I shall at least see the Amou-
Daria.

The Amou-Daria is the Oxus of the Ancients, the rival of the Indus and the
Ganges. It used to be a tributary of the Caspian, as shown on the maps, but now
it flows into the Sea of Aral. Fed by the snows and rains of the Pamir plateau, its
sluggish waters flow between low clay cliffs and banks of sand. It is the River-
Sea in the Turkoman tongue, and it is about two thousand five hundred
kilometres long.

The train crosses it by a bridge a league long, the line being a hundred feet
and more above its surface at low water, and the roadway trembles on the
thousand piles which support it, grouped in fives between each of the spans,
which are thirty feet wide.

In ten months, at a cost of thirty-five thousand roubles, General Annenkof
built this bridge, the most important one on the Grand Transasiatic.


The river is of a dull-yellow color. A few islands emerge from the current
here and there, as far as one can see.

Popof pointed out the stations for the guards on the parapet of the bridge.

"What are they for?" I asked.

"For the accommodation of a special staff, whose duty it is to give the alarm
in case of fire, and who are provided with fire-extinguishers."

This is a wise precaution. Not only have sparks from the engines set it on fire
in several places, but there are other disasters possible. A large number of boats,
for the most part laden with petroleum, pass up and down the Amou-Daria, and
it frequently happens that these become fire-ships. A constant watch is thus only
too well justified, for if the bridge were destroyed, its reconstruction would take
a year, during which the transport of passengers from one bank to the other
would not be without its difficulties.

At last the train is going slowly across the bridge. It is broad daylight. The
desert begins again at the second station, that of Karakoul. Beyond can be seen
the windings of an affluent of the Amou-Daria, the Zarafchane, "the river that
rolls with gold," the course of which extends up to the valley of the Sogd, in that
fertile oasis on which stands the city of Samarkand.

At five o'clock in the morning the train stops at the capital of the Khanate of
Bokhara, eleven hundred and seven versts from Uzun Ada.


CHAPTER XI.

The Khanates of Bokhara and Samarkand used to form Sogdiana, a Persian
satrapy inhabited by the Tadjiks and afterwards by the Usbegs, who invaded the
country at the close of the fifteenth century. But another invasion, much more
modern, is to be feared, that of the sands, now that the saksaouls intended to
bring the sandhills to a standstill, have almost completely disappeared.

Bokhara, the capital of the Khanate, is the Rome of Islam, the Noble City,
the City of Temples, the revered centre of the Mahometan religion. It was the
town with the seven gates, which an immense wall surrounded in the days of its
splendor, and its trade with China has always been considerable. Today it
contains eighty thousand inhabitants.

I was told this by Major Noltitz, who advised me to visit the town in which
he had lived several times. He could not accompany me, having several visits to
pay. We were to start again at eleven o'clock in the morning. Five hours only to
wait and the town some distance from the railway station! If the one were not
connected with the other by a Decauville--a French name that sounds well in
Sogdiana--time would fail for having even a slight glimpse of Bokhara.


It is agreed that the major will accompany me on the Decauville; and when
we reach our destination he will leave me to attend to his private affairs. I cannot
reckon on him. Is it possible that I shall have to do without the company of any
of my numbers?

Let us recapitulate. My Lord Faruskiar? Surely he will not have to worry
himself about the mandarin Yen Lou, shut up in this traveling catafalque! Fulk
Ephrinell and Miss Horatia Bluett? Useless to think of them when we are talking
about palaces, minarets, mosques and other archaeological inutilities. The actor
and the actress? Impossible, for Madame Caterna is tired, and Monsieur Caterna
will consider it his duty to stay with her. The two Celestials? They have already
left the railway station. Ah! Sir Francis Trevellyan. Why not? I am not a
Russian, and it is the Russians he cannot stand. I am not the man who conquered
Central Asia. I will try and open this closely shut gentleman.

I approach him; I bow; I am about to speak. He gives me a slight inclination
and turns on his heel and walks off! The animal!

But the Decauville gives its last whistle. The major and I occupy one of the
open carriages. Half an hour afterwards we are through the Dervaze gate, the
major leaves me, and here am I, wandering through the streets of Bokhara.

If I told the readers of the Twentieth Century that I visited the hundred
schools of the town, its three hundred mosques--almost as many mosques as
there are churches in Rome, they would not believe me, in spite of the
confidence that reporters invariably receive. And so I will confine myself to the
Strict truth.

As I passed along the dusty roads of the city, I entered at a venture any of the
buildings I found open. Here it was a bazaar where they sold cotton materials of
alternate colors called "al adjas," handkerchiefs as fine as spider webs, leather
marvelously worked, silks the rustle of which is called "tchakhtchukh,"” in
Bokhariot, a name that Meilhac and Halevy did wisely in not adopting for their
celebrated heroine. There it was a shop where you could buy sixteen sorts of tea,
eleven of which are green, that being the only kind used in the interior of China
and Central Asia, and among these the most sought after, the "louka," one leaf of
which will perfume a whole teapot.

Farther on I emerged on the quay of the Divanbeghi, reservoirs, bordering
one side of a square planted with elms. Not far off is the Arche, which is the
fortified palace of the emir and has a modern clock over the door. Arminius
Vambery thought the palace had a gloomy look, and so do I, although the bronze
cannon which defend the entrance appear more artistic than destructive. Do not
forget that the Bokhariot soldiers, who perambulate the streets in white breeches,
black tunics, astrakan caps, and enormous boots, are commanded by Russian


officers freely decorated with golden embroidery.

Near the palace to the right is the largest mosque of the town, the mosque of
Mesjidi Kelan, which was built by Abdallah Khan Sheibani. It is a world of
cupolas, clock towers, and minarets, which the storks appear to make their home,
and there are thousands of these birds in the town.

Rambling on at a venture I reach the shores of the Zarafchane on the
northeast of the town. Its fresh limpid waters fill its bed once or twice a
fortnight. Excellent this for health! When the waters appear men, women,
children, dogs, bipeds, quadrupeds, bathe together in tumultuous
promiscuousness, of which I can give no idea, nor recommend as an example.

Going northwest towards the centre of the city, I came across groups of
dervishes with pointed hats, a big stick in their hands, their hair straggling in the
breeze, stopping occasionally to take their part in a dance which would not have
disgraced the fanatics of the Elysée Montmartre during a chant, literally
vociferated, and accentuated by the most characteristic steps.

Let us not forget that I went through the book market. There are no less than
twenty-six shops where printed books and manuscripts are sold, not by weight
like tea or by the box like vegetables, but in the ordinary way. As to the
numerous "medresses," the colleges which have given Bokhara its renown as a
university--I must confess that I did not visit one. Weary and worn I sat down
under the elms of the Divanbeghi quay. There, enormous samovars are
continually on the boil, and for a "tenghe," or six pence three farthings, I
refreshed myself with "shivin," a tea of superior quality which only in the
slightest degree resembles that we consume in Europe, which has already been
used, so they say, to clean the carpets in the Celestial Empire.

That is the only remembrance I retain of the Rome of Turkestan. Besides, as
I was not able to stay a month there, it was as well to stay there only a few hours.

At half-past ten, accompanied by Major Noltitz, whom I found at the
terminus of the Decauville, I alighted at the railway station, the warehouses of
which are crowded with bales of Bokhariot cotton, and packs of Mervian wool.

I see at a glance that all my numbers are on the platform, including my
German baron. In the rear of the train the Persians are keeping faithful guard
round the mandarin Yen Lou. It seems that three of our traveling companions are
observing them with persistent curiosity; these are the suspicious-looking
Mongols we picked up at Douchak. As I pass near them I fancy that Faruskiar
makes a signal to them, which I do not understand. Does he know them?
Anyhow, this circumstance rather puzzles me.

The train is no sooner off than the passengers go to the dining car. The places
next to mine and the major's, which had been occupied since the start, are now


vacant, and the young Chinaman, followed by Dr. Tio-King, take advantage of it
to come near us. Pan Chao knows I am on the staff of the Twentieth Century, and
he is apparently as desirous of talking to me as I am of talking to him.

I am not mistaken. He is a true Parisian of the boulevard, in the clothes of a
Celestial. He has spent three years in the world where people amuse themselves,
and also in the world where they learn. The only son of a rich merchant in Pekin,
he has traveled under the wing of this Tio-King, a doctor of some sort, who is
really the most stupid of baboons, and of whom his pupil makes a good deal of
fun.

Dr. Tio-King, since he discovered Cornaro's little book on the quays of the
Seine, has been seeking to make his existence conform to the "art of living long
in perfect health." This credulous Chinaman of the Chinese had become
thoroughly absorbed in the study of the precepts so magisterially laid down by
the noble Venetian. And Pan Chao is always chaffing him thereupon, though the
good man takes no notice.

We were not long before we had a few specimens of his monomania, for the
doctor, like his pupil, spoke very good French.

"Before we begin," said Pan Chao, "tell me, doctor, how many fundamental
rules there are for finding the correct amounts of food and drink?"

"Seven, my young friend," replied Tio-King with the greatest seriousness.
"The first is to take only just so much nourishment as to enable you to perform
the purely spiritual functions."

"And the second?"

"The second is to take only such an amount of nourishment as will not cause
you to feel any dullness, or heaviness, or bodily lassitude. The third--"

"Ah! We will wait there, to-day, if you don't mind, doctor," replied Pan Chao.
"Here is a certain maintuy, which seems rather good, and--"

"Take care, my dear pupil! That is a sort of pudding made of hashed meat
mixed with fat and spices. I fear it may be heavy--"

"Then, doctor, I would advise you not to eat it. For my part, I will follow
these gentlemen.”

And Pan Chao did--and rightly so, for the maintuy was delicious--while
Doctor Tio-King contented himself with the lightest dish on the bill of fare. It
appeared from what Major Noltitz said that these maintuys fried in fat are even
more savory. And why should they not be, considering that they take the name of
"zenbusis," which signifies "women's kisses?"

When Caterna heard this flattering phrase, he expressed his regret that
zenbusis did not figure on the breakfast table. To which his wife replied by so
tender a look that I ventured to say to him:


"You can find zenbusis elsewhere than in Central Asia, it seems to me."

"Yes," he replied, "they are to be met with wherever there are lovable women
to make them."

And Pan Chao added, with a laugh:

"And it is again at Paris that they make them the best."

He spoke like a man of experience, did my young Celestial.

I looked at Pan Chao; I admired him.

How he eats! What an appetite! Not of much use to him are the observations
of the doctor on the immoderate consumption of his radical humidity.

The breakfast continued pleasantly. Conversation turned on the work of the
Russians in Asia. Pan Chao seemed to me well posted up in their progress. Not
only have they made the Transcaspian, but the Transsiberian, surveyed in 1888,
is being made, and is already considerably advanced. For the first route through
Iscim, Omsk, Tomsk, Krasnojarsk, Nijni-Ufimsk, and Irkutsk, a second route has
been substituted more to the south, passing by Orenburg, Akmolinsk,
Minoussinsk, Abatoni and Vladivostock. When these six thousand kilometres of
rails are laid, Petersburg will be within six days of the Japan Sea. And this
Transsiberian, which will exceed in length the Transcontinental of the United
States, will cost no more than seven hundred and fifty millions.

It will be easily imagined that this conversation on the Russian enterprise is
not very pleasing to Sir Francis Trevellyan. Although he says not a word and
does not lift his eyes from the plate, his long face flushes a little.

"Well, gentlemen," said I, "what we see is nothing to what our nephews will
see. We are traveling to-day on the Grand Transasiatic. But what will it be when
the Grand Transasiatic is in connection with the Grand Transafrican."

"And how is Asia to be united by railway with Africa?" asked Major Noltitz.

"Through Russia, Turkey, Italy, France and Spain. Travelers will go from
Pekin to the Cape of Good Hope without change of carriage."

"And the Straits of Gibraltar?" asked Pan Chao.

At this Sir Francis Trevellyan raised his ears.

"Yes, Gibraltar?" said the major.

"Go under it!" said I. "A tunnel fifteen kilometres long is a mere nothing!
There will be no English Parliament to oppose it as there is to oppose that
between Dover and Calais! It will all be done some day, all--and that will justify
the vein:

"Omnia jam fieri quae posse negabam."

My sample of Latin erudition was only understood by Major Noltitz, and I
heard Caterna say to his wife:

"That is volapuk."


"There is no doubt," said Pan Chap, "that the Emperor of China has been
well advised in giving his hand to the Russians instead of the English. Instead of
building strategic railways in Manchouria, which would never have had the
approbation of the czar, the Son of Heaven has preferred to continue the
Transcaspian across China and Chinese Turkestan."

"And he has done wisely," said the major. "With the English it is only the
trade of India that goes to Europe, with the Russians it is that of the whole
Asiatic continent."

I look at Sir Francis Trevellyan. The color heightens on his cheeks, but he
makes no movement. I ask if these attacks in a language he understands perfectly
will not oblige him to speak out. And yet I should have been very much
embarrassed if I had had to bet on or against it.

Major Noltitz then resumed the conversation by pointing out the
incontestable advantages of the Transasiatic with regard to the trade between
Grand Asia and Europe in the security and rapidity of its communications. The
old hatreds will gradually disappear under European influence, and in that
respect alone Russia deserves the approbation of every civilized nation. Is there
not a justification for those fine words of Skobeleff after the capture of Gheok
Tepe, when the conquered feared reprisals from the victors: "In Central Asian
politics we know no outcasts?"

"And in that policy," said the major, "lies our superiority over England."

"No one can be superior to the English."

Such was the phrase I expected from Sir Francis Trevellyan--the phrase I
understand English gentlemen always use when traveling about the world. But
he said nothing. But when I rose to propose a toast to the Emperor of Russia and
the Russians, and the Emperor of China and the Chinese, Sir Francis Trevellyan
abruptly left the table. Assuredly I was not to have the pleasure of hearing his
voice to-day.

I need not say that during all this talk the Baron Weissschnitzerdérfer was
fully occupied in clearing dish after dish, to the extreme amazement of Doctor
Tio-King. Here was a German who had never read the precepts of Cornaro, or, if
he had read them, transgressed them in the most outrageous fashion.

For the same reason, I suppose, neither Faruskiar nor Ghangir took part in it,
for they only exchanged a few words in Chinese.

But I noted rather a strange circumstance which did not escape the major.

We were talking about the safety of the Grand Transasiatic across Central
Asia, and Pan Chao had said that the road was not so safe as it might be beyond
the Turkestan frontier, as, in fact, Major Noltitz had told me. I was then led to
ask if he had ever heard of the famous Ki Tsang before his departure from


Europe.

"Often," he said, "for Ki Tsang was then in the Yunnan provinces. I hope we
shall not meet him on our road."

My pronunciation of the name of the famous bandit was evidently incorrect,
for I hardly understood Pan Chao when he repeated it with the accent of his
native tongue.

But one thing I can say, and that is that when he uttered the name of Ki
Tsang, Faruskiar knitted his brows and his eyes flashed. Then, with a look at his
companion, he resumed his habitual indifference to all that was being said
around him.

Assuredly I shall have some difficulty in making the acquaintance of this
man. These Mongols are as close as a safe, and when you have not the word it is
difficult to open them.

The train is running at high speed. In the ordinary service, when it stops at
the eleven stations between Bokhara and Samarkand, it takes a whole day over
the distance. This time it took but three hours to cover the two hundred
kilometres which separate the two towns, and at two o'clock in the afternoon it
entered the illustrious city of Tamerlane.


CHAPTER XII.

Samarkand is situated in the rich oasis watered by the Zarafchane in the
valley of Sogd. A small pamphlet I bought at the railway station informs me that
this great city is one of the four sites in which geographers "agree" to place the
terrestrial paradise. I leave this discussion to the exegetists of the profession.

Burned by the armies of Cyrus in B.C. 329, Samarkand was in part destroyed
by Genghis Khan, about 1219. When it had become the capital of Tamerlane, its
position, which certainly could not be improved upon, did not prevent its being
ravaged by the nomads of the eighteenth century. Such alternations of grandeur
and ruin have been the fate of all the important towns of Central Asia.

We had five hours to stop at Samarkand during the day, and that promised
something pleasant and several pages of copy. But there was no time to lose. As
usual, the town is double; one half, built by the Russians, is quite modern, with
its verdant parks, its avenues of birches, its palaces, its cottages; the other is the
old town, still rich in magnificent remains of its splendor, and requiring many
weeks to be conscientiously studied.

This time I shall not be alone. Major Noltitz is free; he will accompany me.
We had already left the station when the Caternas presented themselves.

"Are you going for a run round the town, Monsieur Claudius?" asked the


actor, with a comprehensive gesture to show the vast surroundings of
Samarkand.

"Such is our intention."

"Will Major Noltitz and you allow me to join you?"

"How so?"

"With Madame Caterna, for I do nothing without her."

"Our explorations will be so much the more agreeable," said the major, with
a bow to the charming actress.

"And," I added, with a view to save fatigue and gain time, "my dear friends,
allow me to offer you an arba."

"An arba!" exclaimed Caterna, with a swing of his hips. "What may that be,
an arba?"

"One of the local vehicles."

"Let us have an arba."

We entered one of the boxes on wheels which were on the rank in front of
the railway station. Under promise of a good "silao," that is to say, something to
drink, the yemtchik or coachman undertook to give wings to his two doves,
otherwise his two little horses, and we went off at a good pace.

On the left we leave the Russian town, arranged like a fan, the governor's
house, surrounded by beautiful gardens, the public park and its shady walks,
then the house of the chief of the district which is just on the boundary of the old
town.

As we passed, the major showed us the fortress, round which our arba
turned. There are the graves of the Russian soldiers who died in the attack in
1868, near the ancient palace of the Emir of Bokhara.

From this point, by a straight narrow road, our arba reached the Righistan
square, which, as my pamphlet says, "must not be confounded with the square of
the same name at Bokhara."

It is a fine quadrilateral, perhaps a little spoiled by the fact that the Russians
have paved it and ornamented it with lamps--which would certainly, please
Ephrinell, if he decides upon visiting Samarkand. On three sides of the square
are the well-preserved ruins of three medresses, where the mollahs give children
a good education. These medresses--there are seventeen of these colleges at
Samarkand, besides eighty-five mosques--are called Tilla-Kari, Chir Dar and
Oulong Beg.

In a general way they resemble each other; a portico in the middle leading to
interior courts, built of enameled brick, tinted pale blue or pale yellow,
arabesques designed in gold lines on a ground of turquoise blue, the dominant
color; leaning minarets threatening to fall and never falling, luckily for their


coating of enamel, which the intrepid traveller Madame De Ujfalvy-Bourdon,
declares to be much superior to the finest of our crackle enamels--and these are
not vases to put on a mantelpiece or on a stand, but minarets of good height.

These marvels are still in the state described by Marco Polo, the Venetian
traveler of the thirteenth century.

"Well, Monsieur Bombarnac," asked the major, "do you not admire the
square?"

"It is superb," I say.

"Yes," says the actor, "what a splendid scene it would make for a ballet,
Caroline! That mosque, with a garden alongside, and that other one with a court-


W


"You are right, Adolphe,” said his wife; "but we would have to put those
towers up straight and have a few luminous fountains."

"Excellent notion, Caroline! Write us a drama, Monsieur Claudius, a
spectacle piece, with a third act in this square. As for the title--"

"Tamerlane is at once suggested!" I reply. The actor made a significant
grimace. The conqueror of Asia seemed to him to be wanting in actuality. And
leaning toward his wife, Caterna hastened to say:

"As a scene, I have seen a better at the Porte-Saint Martin, in the Fils de la
Nuit--"

"And I have at the Chatelet in Michael Strogoff."

We cannot do better than leave our comedians alone. They look at everything
from the theatrical point of view. They prefer the air gauze and the sky-blue
foliage, the branches of the stage trees, the agitated canvas of the ocean waves,
the prospectives of the drop scene, to the sites the curtain represents, a set scene
by Cambon or Rubé or Jambon to no matter what landscape; in short, they
would rather have art than nature. And I am not the man to try and change their
opinions on the subject.

As I have mentioned the name of Tamerlane, I asked Major Noltitz if we
were going to visit the tomb of the famous Tartar. The major replied that we
would see it aS we returned; and our itinerary brought us in front of the
Samarkand bazaar.

The arba stopped at one of the entrances to this vast rotunda, after taking us
in and out through the old town, the houses of which consist of only one story,
and seem very comfortless.

Here is the bazaar in which are accumulated enormous quantities of woollen
stuffs, velvet-pile carpets in the brightest of colors, shawls of graceful patterns,
all thrown anyhow on the counters of the shops. Before these samples the sellers
and buyers stand, noisily arriving at the lowest price. Among the fabrics is a silk


tissue known as Kanaous, which is held in high esteem by the Samarkand ladies,
although they are very far from appreciating the similar product of Lyons
manufacture, which it excels neither in quality nor appearance.

Madame Caterna appeared extraordinarily tempted, as if she were among the
counters of the Bon Marché or the Louvre.

"That stuff would do well for my costume in the Grande Duchesse!" she
said.

"And those slippers would suit me down to the ground as Ali Bajou in the
Caid!" said Caterna.

And while the actress was investing in a remnant of Kanaous, the actor paid
for a pair of those green slippers which the Turkomans wear when they enter a
mosque. But this was not without recourse to the kindness of the major, who
acted as interpreter between the Caternas and the merchant, whose "Yoks!
Yoks!" sounded like a lot of crackers in his large mouth.

The arba started again and went off toward the square of Ribi-Khanym,
where stands the mosque of that name which was that of one of Tamerlane's
wives. If the square is not as regular as that of Righistan, it is in my opinion
rather more picturesque. There are strangely grouped ruins, the remains of
arcades, half-unroofed cupolas, columns without capitals, the shafts of which
have retained all the brightness of their enamelling; then a long row of elliptical
porticoes closing in one side of the vast quadrilateral. The effect is really grand,
for these old monuments of the splendor of Samarkand stand out from a
background of sky and verdure that you would seek in vain, even at the Grand
Opera, if our actor does not object. But I must confess we experienced a deeper
impression when, toward the northeast of the town, our arba deposited us in
front of the finest of the mosques of Central Asia, which dates from the year 795
of the Hegira (1392 of our era).

I cannot, writing straight away, give you an idea of this marvel. If I were to
thread the words, mosaics, pediments, spandrels, bas-reliefs, niches, enamels,
corbels, all on a string in a sentence, the picture would still be incomplete. It is
strokes of the brush that are wanted, not strokes of the pen. Imagination remains
abashed at the remains of the most splendid architecture left us by Asiatic
genius.

It is in the farthest depths of this mosque that the faithful go to worship at the
tomb of Kassimben-Abbas, a venerated Mussulman saint, and we are told that if
we open the tomb a living man will come forth from it in all his glory. But the
experiment has not been made as yet, and we prefer to believe in the legend.

We had to make an effort to throw off our contemplative mood; and
fortunately the Caternas did not trouble our ecstasy by evoking any of their


recollections of the theater. Doubtless they had shared in our impressions.

We resumed our seats in the arba, and the yemtchik took us at the gallop of
his doves along shady roads which the Russian administration keeps up with
care.

Along these roads we met and passed many figures worthy of notice. Their
costumes were varied enough, "Khalats," in startling colors, and their heads
enturbaned most coquettishly. In a population of forty thousand there was, of
course, a great mingling of races. Most of them seemed to be Tadjiks of Iranian
origin. They are fine strong fellows, whose white skin has disappeared beneath
the tan of the open air and the unclouded sun. Here is what Madame de Ujfalvy-
Bourdon says of them in her interesting book: "Their hair is generally black, as
is also their beard, which is very abundant. Their eyes are never turned up at the
corners, and are almost always brown. The nose is very handsome, the lips are
not thick, the teeth are small. The forehead is high, broad, and the general shape
of the face is oval."

And I cannot refrain from mentioning a note of approval from Caterna when
he saw one of these Tadjiks superbly draped in his many-colored Khalat.

"What a splendid lead! What an admirable Melingue! You can see him in
Richepins's Nana Sahib or Meurice's Schamyl."

"He would make a lot of money! replied Madame Caterna.

"He just would--I believe you, Caroline!" replied the enthusiastic actor.

And for him, as for all other theatrical folks, is not the money the most
serious and the least disputable manifestation of the dramatic art?

It was already five o clock, and in this incomparable city of Samarkand scene
succeeded scene. There! I am getting into that way of looking at it now.
Certainly the spectacle should finish before midnight. But as we start at eight
o'clock, we shall have to lose the end of the piece. But as I considered that, for
the honor of special correspondents in general, it would never do to have been at
Samarkand without seeing Tamerlane's tomb, our arba returned to the southwest,
and drew up near the mosque of Gour Emir, close to the Russian town. What a
sordid neighborhood, what a heap of mud huts and straw huts, what an
agglomeration of miserable hovels we have just been through!

The mosque has a grand appearance. It is crowned with its dome, in which
the raw blue of the turquoise is the chief color, and which looks like a Persian
cap; and on its only minaret, which has now lost its head, there glitter the
enamelled arabesques which have retained their ancient purity.

We visited the central hall beneath the cupola. There stands the tomb of the
lame Timour the Conqueror. Surrounded by the four tombs of his sons and his
patron saint, beneath a stone of black jade covered with inscriptions, whiten the


bones of Tamerlane, in whose name is gathered the whole fourteenth century of
Asiatic history. The walls of the hall are covered with slabs of jade, on which are
engraven innumerable scrolls of foliage, and in the southwest stands a little
column marking the direction of Mecca. Madame De Ujfalvy-Bourdon has justly
compared this part of the mosque of Gour Emir to a sanctuary, and we had the
same impression. This impression took a still more religious tone when, by a
dark and narrow stairway, we descended to the crypt in which are the tombs of
Tamerlane's wives and daughters.

"But who was this Tamerlane?" asked Caterna. "This Tamerlane everybody
is talking about."

"Tamerlane," replied Major Noltitz, "was one of the greatest conquerors of
the world, perhaps the greatest, if you measure greatness by the extent of the
conquests. Asia to the east of the Caspian Sea, Persia and the provinces to the
north of it, Russia to the Sea of Azof, India, Syria, Asia Minor, China, on which
he threw two hundred thousand men--he had a whole continent as the theater of
his wars."

"And he was lame!" said Madame Caterna.

"Yes, madame, like Genseric, like Shakespeare, like Byron, like Walter Scott,
like Talleyrand, but that did not hinder his getting along in the world. But how
fanatic and bloodthirsty he was! History affirms that at Delhi he massacred a
hundred thousand captives, and at Bagdad he erected an obelisk of eighty
thousand heads."

"T like the one in the Place de la Concorde better," said Caterna, "and that is
only in one piece."

At this observation we left the mosque of Gour Emir, and as it was time to
"hurry up," as our actor said, the arba was driven briskly toward the station.

For my part, in spite of the observations of the Caternas, I was fully in tone
with the local color due to the marvels of Samarkand, when I was roughly
shaken back into modern reality.

In the streets--yes--in the streets near the railway station, in the very center of
Tamerlane's capital, I passed two bicyclists.

"Ah!" exclaimed Caterna. "Messrs. Wheeler!"

And they were Turkomans!

After that nothing more could be done than leave a town so dishonored by
the masterpiece of mechanical locomotion, and that was what we did at eight
o'clock.


CHAPTER XIII.


We dined an hour after the train left. In the dining car were several
newcomers, among others two negroes whom Caterna began to speak of as
darkies.

None of these travelers, Popof told me, would cross the Russo-Chinese
frontier, so that they interested me little or not at all.

During dinner, at which all my numbers were present--I have twelve now,
and I do not suppose I shall go beyond that--I noticed that Major Noltitz
continued to keep his eye on his lordship Faruskiar. Had he begun to suspect
him? Was it of any importance in his opinion that this Mongol seemed to know,
without appearing to do so, the three second-class travelers, who were also
Mongols? Was his imagination working with the same activity as mine, and was
he taking seriously what was only a joke on my part? That I, a man of letters, a
chronicler in search of scenes and incidents, should be pleased to see in his
personage a rival of the famous Ki Tsang, or Ki Tsang himself, could be
understood; but that he, a serious man, doctor in the Russian army, should
abandon himself to such speculations no one would believe. Never mind now,
we shall have something more to say about it by and by.

As for me, I had soon forgotten all about the Mongol for the man in the case.
Tired as I am after that long run through Samarkand, if I get a chance to visit him
to-night I will.

Dinner being over, we all begin to make ourselves comfortable for the night,
with the intention of sleeping till we reach Tachkend.

The distance from Samarkand to Tachkend is three hundred kilometres. The
train will not get in there before seven o'clock in the morning. It will stop three
times at small stations for water and fuel--circumstances favorable to the success
of my project. I add that the night is dark, the sky overcast, no moon, no stars. It
threatens rain; the wind is freshening. It is no time for walking on platforms, and
nobody walks there. It is important to choose the moment when Popof is sound
asleep.

It is not necessary for the interview to be a long one. That the gallant fellow
should be reassured--that is the essential point--and he will be, as soon as I have
made his acquaintance. A little information concerning him, concerning
Mademoiselle Zinca Klork, whence he comes, why he is going to Pekin, why he
chose such a mode of transport, his provisions for the journey, how he gets into
the case, his age, his trade, his birthplace, what he has done in the past, what he
hopes to do in the future, etc., etc., and I have done all that a conscientious
reporter can do. That is what I want to know; that is what I will ask him. It is not
so very much.

And in the first place let us wait until the car is asleep. That will not be long,


for my companions are more or less fatigued by the hours they have spent in
Samarkand. The beds were ready immediately after dinner. A few of the
passengers tried a smoke on the platform, but the gust drove them in very
quickly. They have all taken up their places under the curtained lamps, and
toward half-past ten the respiration of some and the snoring of others are
blended with the continued grinding of the train on the steel rails.

I remained outside last of all, and Popof exchanged a few words with me.

"We shall not be disturbed to-night," he said to me, "and I would advise you
to make the most of it. To-morrow night we shall be running through the defiles
of the Pamir, and we shall not travel so quietly, I am afraid."

"Thanks, Popof, I will take your advice, and sleep like a marmot."

Popof wished me good night and went into his cabin.

I saw no use in going back into the car, and remained on the platform. It was
impossible to see anything either to the left or right of the line. The oasis of
Samarkand had already been passed, and the rails were now laid across a long
horizontal plain. Many hours would elapse before the train reached the Syr
Daria, over which the line passes by a bridge like that over the Amou-Daria, but
of less importance.

It was about half-past eleven when I decided to open the door of the van,
which I shut behind me.

I knew that the young Roumanian was not always shut up in his box, and the
fancy might just have taken him to stretch his limbs by walking from one end to
the other of the van.

The darkness is complete. No jet of light filters through the holes of the case.
That seems all the better for me. It is as well that my No. 11 should not be
surprised by too sudden an apparition. He is doubtless asleep. I will give two
little knocks on the panel, I will awake him, and we will explain matters before
he can move.

I feel as I go. My hand touches the case; I place my ear against the panel and
I listen.

There is not a stir, not a breath! Is my man not here? Has he got away? Has
he slipped out at one of the stations without my seeing him? Has my news gone
with him? Really, I am most uneasy; I listen attentively.

No! He has not gone. He is in the case. I hear distinctly his regular and
prolonged respiration. He sleeps. He sleeps the sleep of the innocent, to which he
has no right, for he ought to sleep the sleep of the swindler of the Grand
Transasiatic.

I am just going to knock when the locomotive's whistle emits its strident
crow, as we pass through a station. But the train is not going to stop, I know, and


I wait until the whistling has ceased.

I then give a gentle knock on the panel.

There is no reply.

However, the sound of breathing is not so marked as before.

I knock more loudly.

This time it is followed by an involuntary movement of surprise and fright.

"Open, open!" I say in Russian.

There is no reply.

"Open!" I say again. "It is a friend who speaks. You have nothing to fear!"

If the panel is not lowered, as I had hoped, there is the crack of a match
being lighted and a feeble light appears in the case.

I look at the prisoner through the holes in the side.

There is a look of alarm on his face; his eyes are haggard. He does not know
whether he is asleep or awake.

"Open, my friend, I say, open and have confidence. I have discovered your
secret. I shall say nothing about it. On the other hand, I may be of use to you."

The poor man looks more at ease, although he does not move.

"You are a Roumanian, I think," I add, "and I am a Frenchman."

"Frenchman? You are a Frenchman?"

And this reply was given in my own language, with a foreign accent.

One more bond between us.

The panel slips along its groove, and by the light of a little lamp I can
examine my No. 11, to whom I shall be able to give a less arithmetical
designation.

"No one can see us, nor hear us?" he asked in a half-stifled voice.

"No one."

"The guard?"

"Asleep."

My new friend takes my hands, he clasps them. I feel that he seeks a support.
He understands he can depend on me. And he murmurs:

"Do not betray me--do not betray me."

"Betray you, my boy? Did not the French newspapers sympathize with that
little Austrian tailor, with those two Spanish sweethearts, who sent themselves
by train in the way you are doing? Were not subscriptions opened in their favor?
And can you believe that I, a journalist--"

"You are a journalist?"

"Claudius Bombarnac, special correspondent of the Twentieth Century."

"A French journal--"

"Yes, I tell you."


"And you are going to Pekin?"

"Through to Pekin."

"Ah! Monsieur Bombarnac, Providence has sent you onto my road."

"No, it was the managers of my journal, and they delegated to me the powers


they hold from Providence, courage and confidence. Anything I can do for you I
will."


"Thanks, thanks."

"What is your name?"

"Kinko."

"Kinko? Excellent name!"

"Excellent?"

"For my articles! You are a Roumanian, are you not?"

"Roumanian of Bucharest."

"But you have lived in France?"

"Four years in Paris, where I was apprentice to an upholsterer in the


Faubourg Saint Antoine."


fo


T


"And you went back to Bucharest?"

"Yes, to work at my trade there until the day came when it was impossible
me to resist the desire to leave--"

"To leave? Why?"

"To marry!"

"To marry--Mademoiselle Zinca--"

"Zinca?"

"Yes, Mademoiselle Zinca Klork, Avenue Cha-Coua, Pekin, China!"

"You know?"

"Certainly. The address is on the box."

"True."

"As to Mademoiselle Zinca Klork--"

"She is a young Roumanian. I knew her in Paris, where she was learning the


trade of a milliner. Oh, charming--"


"T am sure upon it. You need not dwell on that."
"She also returned to Bucharest, until she was invited to take the


management of a dressmaker's at Pekin. We loved, monsieur; she went--and we
were separated for a year. Three weeks ago she wrote to me. She was getting on
over there. If I could go out to her, I would do well. We should get married
without delay. She had saved something. I would soon earn as much as she had.
And here I am on the road--in my turn--for China."


"In this box?"
"What would you have, Monsieur Bombarnac?" asked Kinko, reddening. "I


had only money enough to buy a packing case, a few provisions, and get myself
sent off by an obliging friend. It costs a thousand francs to go from Tiflis to
Pekin. But as soon as I have gained them, the company will be repaid, I assure
you."

"I believe you, Kinko, I believe you; and on your arrival at Pekin?"

"Zinca has been informed. The box will be taken to Avenue Cha-Coua, and
she--"

"Will pay the carriage?"

"Yes."

"And with pleasure, I will answer for it."

"You may be sure of it, for we love each other so much."

"And besides, Kinko, what would one not do for a sweetheart who consents
to shut himself up in a box for a fortnight, and arrives labelled 'Glass,' 'Fragile,'
‘Beware of damp--"

"Ah, you are making fun of a poor fellow."

"Not at all; and you may rest assured I will neglect nothing which will enable
you to arrive dry and in one piece at Mademoiselle Zinca Klork's--in short, in a
perfect state of preservation!"

"Again I thank you," said Kinko, pressing my hands. "Believe me, you will
not find me ungrateful."

"Ah! friend Kinko, I shall be paid, and more than paid!"

"And how?"

"By relating, as soon as I can do so without danger to you, the particulars of
your journey from Tiflis to Pekin. Think now--what a heading for a column:

'A LOVER IN A BOX! ZINCA AND KINKO!! 1,500 LEAGUES
THROUGH CENTRAL ASIA IN ALUGGAGE VAN!!!"

The young Roumanian could not help smiling.

"You need not be in too much of a hurry!" he said.

"Never fear! Prudence and discretion, as they say at the matrimonial
agencies."

Then I went to the door of the van to see that we were in no danger of
surprise, and then the conversation was resumed. Naturally, Kinko asked me
how I had discovered his secret. I told him all that had passed on the steamer
during the voyage across the Caspian. His breathing had betrayed him. The idea
that at first I took him for a wild beast seemed to amuse him. A wild beast! A
faithful poodle, rather! Then with a sneeze he went up the animal scale to human
rank.

"But," said he to me, lowering his voice, "two nights ago I thought all was
lost. The van was closed. I had just lighted my little lamp, and had begun my


supper when a knock came against the panel--"

"I did that, Kinko, I did that. And that night we should have become
acquainted if the train had not run into a dromedary."

"It was you! I breathe again!" said Kinko. "In what dreams I have lived! It
was known that some one was hidden in this box. I saw myself discovered,
handed over to the police, taken to prison at Merv or Bokhara, and my little
Zinca waiting for me in vain; and never should I see her again, unless I resumed
the journey on foot. Well, I would have resumed, yes, I would."

And he said it with such an air of resolution that it was impossible not to see
that the young Roumanian had unusual spirit.

"Brave Kinko!" I answered. "I am awfully sorry to have caused you such
apprehensions. Now you are at ease again, and I fancy your chances have
improved now we have made friends."

I then asked Kinko to show me how he managed in his box.

Nothing could be simpler or better arranged. At the bottom was a seat on
which he sat with the necessary space for him to stretch his legs when he placed
them obliquely; under the seat, shut in by a lid, were a few provisions, and table
utensils reduced to a simple pocket knife and metal mug; an overcoat and a rug
hung from a nail, and the little lamp he used at nighttime was hooked onto one
of the walls.

The sliding panel allowed the prisoner to leave his prison occasionally. But if
the case had been placed among other packages, if the porters had not deposited
it with the precautions due to its fragility, he would not have been able to work
the panel, and would have had to make a friend somehow before the end of the
journey. Fortunately, there is a special Providence for lovers, and divine
intervention in favor of Kinko and Zinca Klork was manifested in all its
plenitude. He told me that very night he had taken a walk either in the van or
else on the station platform where the train had stopped.

"I know that, Kinko. That was at Bokhara. I saw you!"

"You saw me?"

"Yes, and I thought you were trying to get away. But if I saw you, it was
because I knew of your presence in the van, and I was there watching you, no
one else having an idea of spying on you. Nevertheless, it was dangerous; do not
do it again; let me replenish your larder when I get an opportunity."

"Thank you, Monsieur Bombarnac, thank you! I do not believe I am in
danger of being discovered, unless at the Chinese frontier--or rather at Kachgar."

"And why?"

"The custom house is very keen on goods going into China. I am afraid they
will come round the packages, and that my box--"


"In fact, Kinko," I replied, "there are a few difficult hours for you."

"If they find me out?"

"I shall be there, and I will do all I can to prevent anything unpleasant
happening.”

"Ah! Monsieur Bombarnac!" exclaimed Kinko, in a burst of gratitude. "How
can I repay you?"

"Very easily, Kinko."

"And in what way?"

"Ask me to your marriage with the lovely Zinca."

"T will! And Zinca will embrace you."

"She will be only doing her duty, friend Kinko, and I shall be only doing
mine in returning two kisses for one."

We exchanged a last grip of the hand; and, really, I think there were tears in
the good fellow's eyes when I left him. He put out his lamp, he pushed back the
panel, then through the case I heard one more "thanks" and an "au revoir."

I came out of the van, I shut the door, I assured myself that Popof was still
asleep. In a few minutes, after a breath or two of the night air, I go into my place
near Major Noltitz.

And before I close my eyes my last thought is that, thanks to the appearance
of the episodic Kinko, the journey of their energetic "Special" will not be
displeasing to my readers.


CHAPTER XIV.

In 1870 the Russians endeavored without success to establish a fair at
Tachkend which would rival that at Nijni-Novgorod. Some twenty years later the
attempt would have succeeded, and as a matter of fact the fair now exists, owing
to the making of the Transcaspian to unite Samarkand and Tachkend.

And now not only do merchants with their merchandise crowd into this
town, but pilgrims with their pilgrimage outfits. And there will be quite a
procession, or rather an exodus, when the time comes for the Mussulman faithful
to ride to Mecca by railway.

Meanwhile we are at Tachkend, and the time-table shows that we stop here
two hours and a half.

Of course I shall not have time to visit the town, which would be worth my
while to do. But I must confess that these cities of Turkestan are very much
alike, and to have seen one is to have seen another, unless we can go into details.

Crossing a fertile region where poplars like distaffs rise gracefully erect,
skirting fields bristling with vines, running by gardens where fruit trees abound,


our train stops at the new town.

As is inevitable since the Russian conquest, there are two towns side by side
at Tachkend as at Samarkand, as at Bokhara, as at Merv. Here the old town has
tortuous streets, houses of mud and clay, bazaars of poor appearance,
caravanserais built of bricks dried in the sun, a few mosques, and schools as
numerous as if the czar had decreed by ukase that everything French should be
imitated. It is true that the scholars are wanting, but there is no want of schools.

The population of Tachkend does not differ very much from that met with in
other parts of Turkestan. It comprises Sarthes, Usbegs, Tadjiks, Khirgizes,
Nogais, Israelites, a few Afghans and Hindoos and--as may be naturally
supposed--a fair supply of Russians.

It is perhaps at Tachkend that the Jews are gathered in the greatest numbers.
And from the day that the town passed under Russian administration their
situation has considerably improved. From that epoch dates the complete civil
and political liberty they now enjoy.

I have only two hours to spare in visiting the town, and I do my work in true
reporter style. You should have seen me dashing through the grand bazaar, a
mere wooden building, which is crammed with Oriental stuffs, silk goods, metal
ware, specimens of Chinese manufacture, including some very fine examples of
porcelain.

In the streets of old Tachkend a certain number of women are to be met with.
I need hardly say that there are no slaves in this country, much to the displeasure
of the Mussulmans. Nowadays woman is free--even in her household.

"An old Turkoman," said Major Noltitz, "once told me that a husband's
power is at an end now that he cannot thrash his wife without being threatened
with an appeal to the czar; and that marriage is at an end!"

I do not know if the fair sex is still beaten, but the husbands know what they
may expect if they knock their wives about. Will it be believed that these
peculiar Orientals can see no progress in this prohibition to beat their wives?
Perhaps they remember that the Terrestrial Paradise is not far off--a beautiful
garden between the Tigris and Euphrates, unless it was between the Amou and
the Syr-Daria. Perhaps they have not forgotten that mother Eve lived in this
preadamite garden, and that if she had been thrashed a little before her first fault,
she would probably not have committed it. But we need not enlarge on that.

I did not hear, as Madam Ujfalvy-Bourdon did, the band playing the
Pompiers de Nanterre in the governor-general's garden. No! On this occasion
they were playing Le Pere la Victoire, and if these are not national airs they are
none the less agreeable to French ears.

We left Tachkend at precisely eleven o'clock in the morning. The country


through which the Grand Transasiatic is now running is not so monotonous. The
plain begins to undulate, for we are approaching the outer ramifications of the
eastern orographic system. We are nearing the tableland of the Pamirs. At the
same time we continue at normal speed along this section of a hundred and fifty
kilometres which separates us from Khodjend.

As soon as we are on the move I begin to think of Kinko. His little love
romance has touched me to the heart. This sweetheart who sent himself off--this
other sweetheart who is going to pay the expenses--I am sure Major Noltitz
would be interested in these two turtle doves, one of which is in a cage; he
would not be too hard on this defrauder of the company, he would be incapable
of betraying him. Consequently I have a great desire to tell him of my expedition
into the baggage van. But the secret is not mine. I must do nothing that might get
Kinko into trouble.

And so I am silent, and to-night I will, if possible, take a few provisions to
my packing case--to my snail in his shell, let us say. And is not the young
Roumanian like a snail in his shell, for it is as much as he can do to get out of it?

We reach Khodjend about three in the afternoon. The country is fertile,
green, carefully cultivated. It is a succession of kitchen gardens, which seem to
be well-kept immense fields sown with clover, which yield four or five crops a
year. The roads near the town are bordered with long rows of mulberry trees,
which diversify the view with eccentric branches.

Again, this pair of cities, old and new. Both of them had only thirty thousand
inhabitants in 1868 and they have from forty-five to fifty thousand now. Is it the
influence of the surroundings which produces the increase of the birth rate? Is
the province affected by the prolific example of the Celestial Empire? No! It is
the progress of trade, the concentration of merchants of all nations onto these
new markets.

Our halt at Khodjend has lasted three hours. I have made my professional
visit and walked on the banks of the Syr-Dana. This river, which bathes the foot
of the high mountains of Mogol-Taou, is crossed by a bridge, the middle section
of which gives passage to ships of moderate tonnage.

The weather is very warm. The town being protected by its shelter of
mountains, the breezes of the steppe cannot reach it, and it is one of the hottest
places in Turkestan.

I met the Caternas, delighted with their excursion. The actor said to me in a
tone of the best humor:

"Never shall I forget Khodjend, Monsieur Claudius."

"And why will you never forget Khodjend, Monsieur Caterna?"

"Do you see these peaches?" he asked, showing me the fruit he was carrying.


"They are magnificent--"

"And not dear! A kilo for four kopeks--that is to say, twelve centimes!"

"Eh!" T answer. "That shows that peaches are rather common in this country.
That is the Asiatic apple and it was one of those apples that Mrs. Adam took a
bite at--"

"Then I excuse her!" said Madame Caterna, munching away at one of these
delicious peaches.

After leaving Tachkend the railway had curved toward the south, so as to
reach Khodjend; but after leaving town it curved to the east in the direction of
Kokhan. It is at Tachkend that it is nearest to the Transsiberian, and a branch line
is being made to Semipalatinsk to unite the railway systems of Central and
Northern Asia.

Beyond we shall run due east, and by Marghelan and Och pass through the
gorges of the Pamirs so as to reach the Turkesto-Chinese frontier.

The train had only just started when the travelers took their seats at the table,
where I failed to notice any fresh arrival. We shall not pick up any more until we
reach Kachgar. There the Russian cookery will give place to the Chinese, and
although the name does not recall the nectar and ambrosia of Olympus, it is
probable that we shall not lose by the change.

Ephrinell is in his usual place. Without going as far as familiarity, it is
obvious that a close intimacy, founded on a similarity in tastes and aptitudes
exists between Miss Horatia Bluett and the Yankee. There is no doubt, in our
opinion, but what it will end in a wedding as soon as the train arrives. Both will
have their romance of the rail. Frankly, I like that of Kinko and Zinca Klork
much better. It is true the pretty Roumanian is not here!

We are all very friendly, and by "we" I mean my most sympathetic numbers,
the major, the Caternas, young Pan Chao, who replies with very Parisian
pleasantries to the actor's fooleries.

The dinner is a pleasant one and a good one. We learn what is the fourth rule
formulated by Cornaco, that Venetian noble, and with the object of determining
the right amount for drinking and eating. Pan Chao pressed the doctor on this
subject, and Tio-King replied, with a seriousness truly buddhic:

"The rule is founded on the quantity of nourishment proportionate for each
temperament as regards the difference of ages, and the strength and the food of
various kinds."

"And for your temperament, doctor?" asked Caterna, "what is the right
quantity?"

"Fourteen ounces of solid or liquid--"

"An hour?"


"No, sir, a day," replied Tio-King. "And it was in this manner that the
illustrious Cornaro lived from the age of thirty-six, so as to leave himself enough
strength of body and mind to write his fourth treatise when he was eighty-five,
and to live to a hundred and two."

"In that case, give me my fifth cutlet," said Pan Ghao, with a burst of
laughter.

There is nothing more agreeable than to talk before a well-served table; but I
must not forget to complete my notes regarding Kokham. We were not due there
till nine o'clock, and that would be in the nighttime. And so I asked the major to
give me some information regarding this town, which is the last of any
importance in Russian Turkestan.

"I know it all the better," said the major, "from having been in garrison there
for fifteen months. It is a pity you have not time to visit it, for it remains very
Asiatic, and there has not been time yet for it to grow a modern town. There is a
square there unrivalled in Asia, a palace in great style, that of the old Khan of
Khondajar, situated on a mound about a hundred yards high, and in which the
governor has left his Sarthe artillery. It is considered wonderful, and there is
good reason for it. You will lose by not going there a rare opportunity of
bringing in the high-flown words of your language in description: the reception
hall transformed into a Russian church, a labyrinth of rooms with the floors of
the precious Karagatch wood, the rose pavilion, in which visitors receive a truly
Oriental hospitality, the interior court of Moorish decoration recalling the
adorable architectural fancies of the Alhambra, the terraces with their splendid
views, the harem where the thousand wives of the Sultan--a hundred more than
Solomon--live in peace together, the lacework of the fronts, the gardens with
their shady walks under the ancient vines--that is what you would have seen--"

"And which I have already seen with your eyes, dear major," said I. "My
readers will not complain. Pray tell me if there are any bazaars in ."

"A Turkestan town without bazaars would be like London without its docks."

"And Paris without its theaters!" said the actor.

"Yes; there are bazaars at Kokhan, one of them on the Sokh bridge, the two
arms of which traverse the town and in it the finest fabrics of Asia are sold for
tillahs of gold, which are worth three roubles and sixty kopeks of our money."

"I am sure, major, that you are going to mention mosques after bazaars."

"Certainly."

"And medresses?"

"Certainly; but you must understand that some of them are as good as the
mosques and medresses of Samarkand of Bokhara."

I took advantage of the kindness of Major Noltitz and thanks to him, the


readers of the Twentieth Century need not spend a night in Kokhan. I will leave
my pen inundated with the solar rays of this city of which I could only see a
vague outline.

The dinner lasted till rather late, and terminated in an unexpected manner by
an offer from Caterna to recite a monologue.

I need scarcely say that the offer was gladly accepted.

Our train more and more resembled a small rolling town It had even its
casino, this dining-car in which we were gathered at the moment. And it was
thus in the eastern part of Turkestan, four hundred kilometres from the Pamir
plateau, at dessert after our excellent dinner served in a saloon of the Grand
Transasiatic, that the Obsession was given with remarkable talent by Monsieur
Caterna, grand premier comique, engaged at Shanghai theater for the
approaching season.

"Monsieur," said Pan Chao, "my sincere compliments. I have heard young
Coquelin--"

"A master, monsieur; a master!" said Caterna.

"Whom you approach--"

"Respectfully--very respectfully!"

The bravos lavished on Caterna had no effect on Sir Francis Trevellyan, who
had been occupying himself with onomatopic exclamations regarding the dinner,
which he considered execrable. He was not amused--not even sadly, as his
countrymen have been for four hundred years, according to Froissart. And yet
nobody took any notice of this grumbling gentleman's recriminations.

Baron Weissschnitzerdorfer had not understood a single word of this little
masterpiece, and had he understood it, he would not have been able to appreciate
this sample of Parisian monologomania.

As to my lord Faruskiar and his inseparable Ghangir, it seemed that in spite
of their traditional reserve, the surprising grimaces, the significant gestures, the
comical intonations, had interested them to a certain extent.

The actor had noticed it, and appreciated this silent admiration.

As he rose from the table he said to me:

"He is magnificent, this seigneur! What dignity! What a presence! What a
type of the farthest East! I like his companion less--a third-rate fellow at the
outside! But this superb Mongol! Caroline, cannot you imagine him as 'Morales'
in the Pirates of the Savannah?"

"Not in that costume, at any rate," said I.

"Why not, Monsieur Claudius? One day at Perpignan I played ‘Colonel de
Montéclin' in the Closerie des Genets in the costume of a Japanese officer--"

"And he was applauded!" added Madame Caterna.


During dinner the train had passed Kastakos station, situated in the center of
a mountainous region. The road curved a good deal, and ran over viaducts and
through tunnels--as we could tell by the noise.

A little time afterward Popof told us that we were in the territory of
Ferganah, the name of the ancient khanate of Kokhan, which was annexed by
Russia in 1876, with the seven districts that compose it. These districts, in which
Sarthes are in the majority, are administered by prefects, sub-prefects, and
mayors. Come, then, to Ferganah, to find all the machinery of the constitution of
the year VIII.

Beyond there is an immense steppe, extending before our train. Madame de
Ujfalvy-Bourdon has justly compared it to a billiard table, so perfect in its
horizontality. Only it is not an ivory ball which is rolling over its surface, but an
express of the Grand Transasiatic running at sixty kilometres an hour.

Leaving the station of Tchontchai behind, we enter station at nine o'clock in
the evening. The stoppage is to last two hours. We get out onto the platform.

As we are leaving the car I am near Major Noltitz, who asks young Pan
Chao:

"Have you ever heard of this mandarin Yen Lou, whose body is being taken
to Pekin?"

"Never, major."

"But he ought to be a personage of consideration, to be treated with the
honor he gets."

"That is possible," said Pan Chao; "but we have so many personages of
consideration in the Celestial Empire."

"And so, this mandarin, Yen Lou?"

"T never heard him mentioned."

Why did Major Noltitz ask the Chinaman this question? What was he
thinking about?


CHAPTER XV.

Kokhan, two hours to stop. It is night. The majority of the travelers have
already taken up their sleeping quarters in the car, and do not care to alight.

Here am I on the platform, walking the deck as I smoke. This is rather an
important station, and from the engine house comes a more powerful locomotive
than those which have brought the train along since we left Uzun Ada. These
early engines were all very well as long as the line lay over an almost horizontal
plain. But now we are among the gorges of the Pamir plateau, there are gradients
of such steepness as to require more engine power.


I watch the proceedings, and when the locomotive has been detached with its
tender, the baggage van--with Kinko in--is at the head of the train.

The idea occurs to me that the young Roumanian may perhaps venture out
on the platform. It would be an imprudence for he runs the risk of being seen by
the police, the "gardovois," who move about taking a good look at the
passengers. What my No. 11 had better do is to remain in his box, or at least in
his van. I will go and get a few provisions, liquid and solid, and take them to
him, even before the departure of the train, if it is possible to do so without fear
of being noticed.

The refreshment room at the station is open, and Popof is not there. If he was
to see me making purchases he would be astonished, as the dining car contains
everything we might want.

At the bar I get a little cold meat, some bread, and a bottle of vodka.

The station is not well lighted. A few lamps give only a feeble light. Popof is
busy with one of the railway men. The new engine has not yet been attached to
the train. The moment seems favorable. It is useless to wait until we have left. If
I can reach Kinko I shall be able to sleep through the night--and that will be
welcome, I admit.

I step onto the train, and after assuring myself that no one is watching me, I
enter the baggage van, saying as I do so:

"Tt is I."

In fact it is as well to warn Kinko in case he is out of his box.

But he had not thought of getting out, and I advise him to be very careful.

He is very pleased at the provisions, for they are a change to his usual diet.

"I do not know how to thank you, Monsieur Bombarnac," he says to me.

"If you do not know, friend Kinko," I reply, "do not do it; that is very
simple."

"How long do we stop at ?"

"Two hours."

"And when shall we be at the frontier?"

"To-morrow, about one in the afternoon."

"And at Kachgar?"

"Fifteen hours afterward, in the night of the nineteenth."

"There the danger is, Monsieur Bombarnac."

"Yes, Kinko; for if it is difficult to enter the Russian possessions, it is no less
difficult to get out of them, when the Chinese are at the gates. Their officials will
give us a good look over before they will let us pass. At the same time they
examine the passengers much more closely than they do their baggage. And as
this van is reserved for the luggage going through to Pekin, I do not think you


have much to fear. So good night. As a matter of precaution, I would rather not
prolong my visit."

"Good night, Monsieur Bombarnac, good night."

I have come out, I have regained my couch, and I really did not hear the
starting signal when the train began to move.

The only station of any importance which the railway passed before sunrise,
was that of Marghelan, where the stoppage was a short one.

Marghelan, a populous town--sixty thousand inhabitants--is the real capital
of Ferganah. That is owing to the fact that does not enjoy a good reputation for
salubrity. It is of course, a double town, one town Russian, the other Turkoman.
The latter has no ancient monuments, and no curiosities, and my readers must
pardon my not having interrupted my sleep to give them a glance at it.

Following the valley of Schakhimardan, the train has reached a sort of steppe
and been able to resume its normal speed.

At three o'clock in the morning we halt for forty-five minutes at Och station.

There I failed in my duty as a reporter, and I saw nothing. My excuse is that
there was nothing to see.

Beyond this station the road reaches the frontier which divides Russian
Turkestan from the Pamir plateau and the vast territory of the Kara-Khirghizes.

This part of Central Asia is continually being troubled by Plutonian
disturbances beneath its surface. Northern Turkestan has frequently suffered
from earthquake--the terrible experience of 1887 will not have been forgotten--
and at Tachkend, as at Samarkand, I saw the traces of these commotions. In fact,
minor oscillations are continually being observed, and this volcanic action takes
place all along the fault, where lay the stores of petroleum and naphtha, from the
Caspian Sea to the Pamir plateau.

In short, this region is one of the most interesting parts of Central Asia that a
tourist can visit. If Major Noltitz had never been beyond Och station, at the foot
of the plateau, he knew the district from having studied it on the modern maps
and in the most recent books of travels. Among these I would mention those of
Capus and Bonvalot--again two French names I am happy to salute out of
France. The major is, nevertheless, anxious to see the country for himself, and
although it is not yet six o'clock in the morning, we are both out on the gangway,
glasses in hand, maps under our eyes.

The Pamir, or Bam-i-Douniah, is commonly called the "Roof of the World."
From it radiate the mighty chains of the Thian Shan, of the Kuen Lun, of the
Kara Korum, of the Himalaya, of the Hindoo Koosh. This orographic system,
four hundred kilometres across, which remained for so many years an
impassable barrier, has been surmounted by Russian tenacity. The Sclav race and


the Yellow race have come into contact.

We may as well have a little book learning on the subject; but it is not I that
speak, but Major Noltitz.

The travelers of the Aryan people have all attempted to explore the plateau
of the Pamir. Without going back to Marco Polo in the thirteenth century, what
do we find? The English with Forsyth, Douglas, Biddulph, Younghusband, and
the celebrated Gordon who died on the Upper Nile; the Russians with
Fendchenko, Skobeleff, Prjevalsky, Grombtchevsky, General Pevtzoff, Prince
Galitzin, the brothers Groum-Grjimailo; the French with Auvergne, Bonvalot,
Capus, Papin, Breteuil, Blanc, Ridgway, O'Connor, Dutreuil de Rhins, Joseph
Martin, Grenard, Edouard Blanc; the Swedes with Doctor Swen-Hedin.

This Roof of the World, one would say that some devil on two sticks had
lifted it up in his magic hand to let us see its mysteries. We know now that it
consists of an inextricable entanglement of valleys, the mean altitude of which
exceeds three thousand metres; we know that it is dominated by the peaks of
Gouroumdi and Kauffmann, twenty-two thousand feet high, and the peak of
Tagarma, which is twenty-seven thousand feet; we know that it sends off to the
west the Oxus and the Amou Daria, and to the east the Tarim; we know that it
chiefly consists of primary rocks, in which are patches of schist and quartz, red
sands of secondary age, and the clayey, sandy loess of the quaternary period
which is so abundant in Central Asia.

The difficulties the Grand Transasiatic had in crossing this plateau were
extraordinary. It was a challenge from the genius of man to nature, and the
victory remained with genius. Through the gently sloping passes which the
Kirghizes call "bels," viaducts, bridges, embankments, cuttings, tunnels had to
be made to carry the line. Here are sharp curves, gradients which require the
most powerful locomotives, here and there stationary engines to haul up the train
with cables, in a word, a herculean labor, superior to the works of the American
engineers in the defiles of the Sierra Nevada and the Rocky Mountains.

The desolate aspect of these territories makes a deep impression on the
imagination. As the train gains the higher altitudes, this impression is all the
more vivid. There are no towns, no villages--nothing but a few scattered huts, in
which the Pamirian lives a solitary existence with his family, his horses, his
herds of yaks, or "koutars," which are cattle with horses’ tails, his diminutive
sheep, his thick-haired goats. The moulting of these animals, if we may so
phrase it, is a natural consequence of the climate, and they change the dressing
gown of winter for the white fur coat of summer. It is the same with the dog,
whose coat becomes whiter in the hot season.

As the passes are ascended, wide breaks in the ranges yield frequent


glimpses of the more distant portions of the plateau. In many places are clumps
of birches and junipers, which are the principal trees of the Pamir, and on the
undulating plains grow tamarisks and sedges and mugwort, and a sort of reed
very abundant by the sides of the saline pools, and a dwarf labiate called
"terskenne" by the Kirghizes.

The major mentioned certain animals which constitute a somewhat varied
fauna on the heights of the Pamir. It is even necessary to keep an eye on the
platforms of the cars in case a stray panther or bear might seek a ride without
any right to travel either first or second class. During the day our companions
were on the lookout from both ends of the cars. What shouts arose when
plantigrades or felines capered along the line with intentions that certainly
seemed suspicious! A few revolver shots were discharged, without much
necessity perhaps, but they amused as well as reassured the travelers. In the
afternoon we were witnesses of a magnificent shot, which killed instantly an
enormous panther just as he was landing on the side step of the third carriage.

"It is thine, Marguerite!" exclaimed Caterna. And could he have better
expressed his admiration than in appropriating the celebrated reply of Buridan to
the Dauphine's wife--and not the queen of France, as is wrongly stated in the
famous drama of the Tour de Nesle?

It was our superb Mongol to whom we were indebted for this marksman's
masterpiece.

"What a hand and what an eye!" said I to the major, who continued to look
on Faruskiar with suspicion.

Among the other animals of the Pamirian fauna appeared wolves and foxes,
and flocks of those large wild sheep with gnarled and gracefully curved horns,
which are known to the natives as arkars. High in the sky flew the vultures,
bearded and unbearded, and amid the clouds of white vapor we left behind us
were many crows and pigeons and turtledoves and wagtails.

The day passed without adventure. At six o'clock in the evening we crossed
the frontier, after a run of nearly two thousand three hundred kilometres,
accomplished in four days since leaving Uzun Ada. Two hundred and fifty
kilometres beyond we shall be at Kachgar. Although we are now in Chinese
Turkestan, it will not be till we reach that town that we shall have our first
experience of Chinese administration.

Dinner over about nine o'clock, we stretched ourselves on our beds, in the
hope, or rather the conviction, that the night will be as calm as the preceding
one.

It was not to be so.

At first the train was running down the slopes of the Pamir at great speed.


Then it resumed its normal rate along the level.

It was about one in the morning when I was suddenly awakened.

At the same time Major Noltitz and most of our companions jumped up.

There were loud shouts in the rear of the train.

What had happened?

Anxiety seized upon the travelers--that confused, unreasonable anxiety
caused by the slightest incident on a railroad.

"What is the matter? What is the matter?"

These words were uttered in alarm from all sides and in different languages.

My first thought was that we were attacked. I thought of the famous Ki-
Tsang, the Mongol pirate, whose help I had so imprudently called upon--for my
chronicle.

In a moment the train began to slow, evidently preparing to stop.

Popof came into the van, and I asked him what had happened.

"An accident," he replied.

"Serious?"

"No, a coupling has broken, and the two last vans are left behind."

As soon as the train pulls up, a dozen travelers, of whom I am one, get out
onto the track.

By the light of the lantern it is easy to see that the breakage is not due to
malevolence. But it is none the less true that the two last vans, the mortuary van
and the rear van occupied by the goods guard, are missing. How far off are they?
Nobody knows.

You should have heard the shouts of the Persian guards engaged in escorting
the remains of Yen Lou, for which they were responsible! The travelers in their
van, like themselves, had not noticed when the coupling broke. It might be an
hour, two hours, since the accident.

What ought to be done was clear enough. The train must be run backward
and pick up the lost vans.

Nothing could be more simple. But--and this surprised me--the behavior of
my lord Faruskiar seemed very strange. He insisted in the most pressing manner
that not a moment should be lost. He spoke to Popof, to the driver, to the stoker,
and for the first time I discovered that he spoke Russian remarkably well.

There was no room for discussion. We were all agreed on the necessity of a
retrograde movement.

Only the German baron protested. More delays! A waste of time for the sake
of a mandarin--and a dead mandarin!

He had to walk about and bear it. As to Sir Francis Trevellyan, he merely
shrugged his shoulders, as much as to say: "What management! What couplings!


We should not get this sort of thing on an Anglo-Indian line!"

Major Noltitz was as much struck as I was at the behavior of my lord
Faruskiar. This Mongol, usually so calm, so impassible, with his cool look
beneath his motionless eyelid, had become a prey to a sort of furious anxiety
which he appeared incapable of controlling. His companion was as excited as he
was. But what was there in these two missing vans which could be of interest to
them? They had not even any luggage in the rear van! Was it the mandarin, Yen
Lou? Was it for that reason that at Donchak they had so carefully watched the
van which contained the corpse? I could see clearly enough that the major
thought it all very suspicious.

The train began to run back as soon as we had taken our places. The German
baron attempted to curse, but Faruskiar gave him such a look that he did not care
to get another, and stowed himself away in the corner.

Dawn appeared in the east when the two wagons were found a kilometre off,
and the train gently slowed up to them after an hour's run.

Faruskiar and Ghangir went to help in coupling on the vans, which was done
as firmly as possible. Major Noltitz and I noticed that they exchanged a few
words with the other Mongols. After all, there was nothing astonishing in that,
for they were countrymen of theirs.

We resume our seats in the train, and the engineer tries to make up for lost
time.

Nevertheless, the train does not arrive at Kachgar without a long delay, and it


is half-past four in the morning when we enter the capital of Chinese Turkestan.
ok


CHAPTER XVI.

Kachgaria is Oriental Turkestan which is gradually being metamorphosed
into Russian Turkestan.

The writers in the New Review have said: "Central Asia will only be a great
country when the Muscovite administration have laid hands on Tibet, or when
the Russians lord it at Kachgar."

Well, that is a thing half done! The piercing of the Pamir has joined the
Russian railway with the Chinese line which runs from one frontier of the
Celestial Empire to the other. The capital of Kachgaria is now as much Russian
as Chinese. The Sclav race and the Yellow race have rubbed elbows and live in
peace. How long will it last? To others leave the future; I am content with the
present.

We arrive at half-past four; we leave at eleven. The Grand Transasiatic shows


itself generous. I shall have time to see Kachgar, on condition of allowing myself
an hour less than the time stated.

For what was not done at the frontier has to be done at Kachgar. Russians
and Chinese are one as bad as the other when there are vexing formalities;
papers to verify, passports to sign, etc., etc. It is the same sort of meddling,
minute and over-fastidious, and we must put up with it. We must not forget the
terrible threat of the formula the functionary of the Celestial Empire affixes to
his acts--"Tremble and obey!" I am disposed to obey, and I am prepared to
appear before the authorities of the frontier. I remember the fears of Kinko, and
it is with regard to him that the trembling is to be done, if the examination of the
travelers extends to their packages and luggage.

Before we reached Kachgar, Major Noltitz said to me:

"Do not imagine that Chinese Turkestan differs very much from Russian
Turkestan. We are not in the land of pagodas, junks, flower boats, yamens, hongs
and porcelain towers. Like Bokhara, Merv and Samarkand, Kachgar is a double
town. It is with the Central Asian cities as it is with certain stars, only they do
not revolve round one another."

The major's remark was very true. It was not so long ago since emirs reigned
over Kachgaria, since the monarchy of Mohammed Yakoub extended over the
whole of Turkestan, since the Chinese who wished to live here had to adjure the
religion of Buddha and Confucius and become converts to Mahometanism, that
is, if they wished to be respectable. What would you have? In these days we are
always too late, and those marvels of the Oriental cosmorama, those curious
manners, those masterpieces of Asiatic art, are either memories or ruins. The
railways will end by bringing the countries they traverse down to the same level,
to a mutual resemblance which will certainly be equality and may be fraternity.
In truth, Kachgar is no longer the capital of Kachgaria; it is a station on the
Grand Transasiatic, the junction between the Russian and Chinese lines, and the
strip of iron which stretches for three thousand kilometres from the Caspian to
this city runs on for nearly four thousand more to the capital of the Celestial
Empire.

I return to the double town. The new one is Yangi-Chahr: the old one, three
and a half miles off, is Kachgar. I have seen both, and I will tell you what they
are like.

In the first place, both the old and the new towns are surrounded with a
villainous earthen wall that does not predispose you in their favor. Secondly, it is
in vain that you seek for any monument whatever, for the materials of
construction are identical for houses as for palaces. Nothing but earth, and not
even baked earth. It is not with mud dried in the sun that you can obtain regular


lines, clean profiles and finely worked sculptures. Your architecture must be in
stone or marble, and that is precisely what you do not get in Chinese Turkestan.

A small carriage quickly took the major and myself to Kachgar, which is
three miles round. The Kizil-Sou, that is to say the Red River, which is really
yellow, as a Chinese river ought to be, clasps it between its two arms, which are
united by two bridges. If you wish to see a few ruins of some interest, you must
go a short distance beyond the town, where there are the remains of fortifications
dating from five hundred or two thousand years ago, according to the
imagination of the archaeologist. What is certain is that Kachgar submitted to the
furious assault of Tamerlane, and we will agree that without the exploits of this
terrible cripple the history of Central Asia would be singularly monotonous.
Since his time there have been fierce sultans, it is true--among others that Ouali-
Khan-Toulla, who, in 1857, strangled Schlagintweit, one of the most learned and
most daring explorers of the Asiatic continent. Two tablets of bronze, presented
by the Geographical Societies of Paris and Petersburg, ornament his
commemorative monument.

Kachgar is an important centre of trade, which is almost entirely in Russian
hands. Khotan silks, cotton, felt, woolen carpets, cloth, are the principal articles
in the markets, and these are exported beyond the frontier between Tachkend and
Koulja, to the north of Oriental Turkestan.

Here, as the major told me, Sir Francis Trevellyan should have special cause
for manifesting his ill humor. In fact, an English embassy under Chapman and
Gordon in 1873 and 1874 had been sent from Kashmir to Kachgar by way of
Kothan and Yarkand. At this time the English had reason to hope that
commercial relations could be established to their advantage. But instead of
being in communication with the Indian railways, the Russian railways are in
communication with the Chinese, and the result of this junction has been that
English influence has had to give place to Russian.

The population of Kachgar is Turkoman, with a considerable mixture of
Chinese, who willingly fulfil the duties of domestics, artisans or porters. Less
fortunate than Chapman and Gordon, Major Noltitz and I were not able to see
the Kachgarian capital when the armies of the tumultuous emir filled its streets.
There were none of those Djiguit foot soldiers who were mounted, nor of those
Sarbaz who were not. Vanished had those magnificent bodies of Taifourchis,
armed and disciplined in the Chinese manner, those superb lancers, those
Kalmuck archers, bending bows five feet high, those "tigers" with their daubed
shields and their matchlocks. All have disappeared, the picturesque warriors of
Kachgaria and the emir with them.

At nine o'clock we are on our return to Yangi-Chahr. There, at the end of the


streets near the citadel, what do we see? The Caternas in ecstatic admiration
before a troop of musical dervishes.

Who says dervish says beggar, and who says beggar evokes the completest
type of filth and laziness. But with what an extraordinary combination of
gestures, with what attitudes in the management of the long-stringed guitar, with
what acrobatic swingings of the body do they accompany their singing of their
legends and poetry which could not be more profane. The instinct of the old
actor was awakened in Caterna. He could not keep still; it was too much for him.

And so these gestures, these attitudes, these swingings he imitated there with
the vigor of an old topman joined to that of a leading premier, and I saw him as
he was figuring in this quadrille of dancing dervishes.

"Eh! Monsieur Claudius!" he said, "it is not difficult to copy the exercises of
these gallant fellows! Make me a Turkestan operetta, let me act a dervish, and
you will see if I don't do it to the very life."

"I do not doubt it, my dear Caterna," I replied; "but before you do that, come
into the restaurant at the railway station and bid farewell to Turkestan cookery,
for we shall soon be reduced to Chinese."

The offer is accepted all the more willingly, for the reputation of the
Kachgarian cooks is well justified, as the major made us remark.

In fact, the Caternas, the major, young Pan Chao and I were astonished and
enchanted at the quantity of dishes that were served us, as well as at their quality.
Sweets alternated capriciously with roasts and grills. And as the Caternas could
never forget--any more than they could forget the famous peaches of Khodjend--
there are a few of these dishes which the English embassy wished to retain in
remembrance, for they have given the composition in the story of their journey:
pigs' feet dusted with sugar and browned in fat with a dash of pickles; kidneys
fried with sweet sauce and served with fritters.

Caterna asked for the first twice, and for the other three times.

"I take my precautions," said he. "Who knows what the dining-car kitchen
will give us on the Chinese railways? Let us beware of shark fins, which may
perhaps be rather horny, and of swallows' nests which may not be quite fresh!"

It is ten o'clock when a stroke of the gong announces that the police
formalities are about to begin. We leave the table after a parting glass of Choa-
Hing wine, and a few minutes afterward are in the waiting room.

All my numbers are present, with the exception, of course, of Kinko, who
would have done honor to our breakfast if it had been possible for him to take
part in it. There was Doctor Tio-King, his Cornaro under his arm; Fulk Ephrinell
and Miss Horatia Bluett, mingling their teeth and hair, figuratively, be it
understood; Sir Francis Trevellyan, motionless and silent, intractable and stiff,


smoking his cigar on the threshold; Faruskiar, accompanied by Ghangir;
Russian, Turkoman, Chinese travelers--in all from sixty to eighty persons. Every
one had in his turn to present himself at the table, which was occupied by two
Celestials in uniform; a functionary speaking Russian fluently, an interpreter for
German, French and English.

The Chinese was a man about fifty, with a bald head, a thick moustache, a
long pigtail, and spectacles on his nose. Wrapped in a flowery robe, fat as if he
belonged to the most distinguished people in the country, he had not a
prepossessing face. After all, it was only a verification of our papers, and as ours
were in order it did not much matter how repulsive he looked.

"What an air he has!" murmured Madame Caterna.

"The air of a Chinaman!" said her husband, "and frankly I do not want to
have one like it."

I am one of the first to present my passport, which bears the visas of the
consul at Tiflis and the Russian authorities at Uzun-Ada. The functionary looks
at it attentively. When you are dealing with a mandarin, you should always be on
the lookout. Nevertheless, the examination raises no difficulty, and the seal of
the green dragon declares me all in order.

The same result with regard to the actor and actress. Nevertheless it was
worth while looking at Caterna while his papers were being examined. He
assumed the attitude of a criminal endeavoring to mollify a magistrate, he made
the sheepiest of eyes, and smiled the most deprecating of smiles, and seemed to
implore a grace or rather a favor, and yet the most obdurate of the Chinamen had
not a word to say to him.

"Correct," said the interpreter.

"Thank you, my prince!" replied Caterna, with the accent of a Paris street
boy.

As to Ephrinell and Miss Bluett, they went through like a posted letter. If an
American commercial and an English ditto were not in order, who would be?
Uncle Sam and John Bull are one as far as that goes.

The other travelers, Russian and Turkoman, underwent examination without
any difficulty arising. Whether they were first-class or second-class, they had
fulfilled the conditions required by the Chinese administration, which levies a
rather heavy fee for each visa, payable in roubles, taels or sapeks.

Among the travelers I noticed an American clergyman bound to Pekin. This
was the Reverend Nathaniel Morse, of Boston, one of those honest Bible
distributors, a Yankee missionary, in the garb of a merchant, and very keen in
business matters. At a venture I make him No. 13 in my notebook.

The verification of the papers of young Pan Chao and Doctor Tio-King gave


rise to no difficulty, and on leaving they exchanged "ten thousand good
mornings" with the more amiable of the Chinese representatives.

When it came to the turn of Major Noltitz, a slight incident occurred. Sir
Francis Trevellyan, who came to the table at the same moment, did not seem
inclined to give way. However, nothing resulted but haughty and provoking
looks. The gentleman did not even take the trouble to open his mouth. It is
evidently written above that I am not to hear the sound of his voice! The Russian
and the Englishman each received the regulation visa, and the affair went no
further.

My lord Faruskiar, followed by Ghangir, then arrived before the man in
spectacles, who looked at him with a certain amount of attention. Major Noltitz
and I watched him. How would he submit to this examination? Perhaps we were
to be undeceived regarding him.

But what was our surprise and even our stupefaction at the dramatic outburst
which at once took place!

After throwing a glance at the papers presented to him by Ghangir, the
Chinese functionary rose and bowed respectfully to Faruskiar, saying:

"May the General Manager of the Grand Transasiatic deign to receive my ten
thousand respects!"

General Manager, that is what he is, this lord Faruskiar! All is explained.
During our crossing of Russian Turkestan he had maintained his incognito like a
great personage in a foreign country; but now on the Chinese railways he
resumed the rank which belonged to him.

And I--in a joke, it is true--had permitted myself to identify him with the
pirate Ki-Tsang. And Major Noltitz, who had spent his time suspecting him! At
last I have some one of note in our train--I have him, this somebody, I will make
his acquaintance, I will cultivate it like a rare plant, and if he will only speak
Russian I will interview him down to his boots!

Good! I am completely upset, and I could not help shrugging my shoulders,
when the major whispers to me:

"Perhaps one of the bandit chiefs with whom the Grand Transasiatic had to
make terms!"

"Come, major, be serious."

The visit was nearing its end when Baron Weissschnitzerd6érfer appeared.

He is preoccupied, he is troubled, he is anxious, he is confused, he is fidgety.
Why is he shaking, and bending, and diving into his pockets like a man who has
lost something valuable?

"Your papers!" demands the interpreter in German.

"My papers!" replies the baron, "I am looking for them. I have not got them;


they were in my letter case."

And he dived again into his trousers pockets, his waistcoat pockets, his coat
pockets, his great-coat pockets--there were twenty of them at the least--and he
found nothing.

"Be quick--be quick!" said the interpreter. "The train cannot wait!"

"IT object to its going without me!" exclaimed the baron. "These papers--how
have they gone astray? I must have let them drop out of my case. They should
have given them back to me--"

At this moment the gong awoke the echoes of the interior of the railway
station.

"Wait! wait! Donner vetter! Can't you wait a few moments for a man who is
going round the world in thirty-nine days--"

"The Grand Transasiatic does not wait," says the interpreter.

Without waiting for any more, Major Noltitz and I reach the platform, while
the baron continues to struggle in the presence of the impassible Chinese
functionaries.

I examine the train and see that its composition has been modified on
account of there being fewer travelers between Kachgar and Pekin. Instead of
twelve carriages, there are now only ten, placed in the following order: engine,
tender, front van, two first-class cars, dining car, two second-class cars, the van
with the defunct mandarin, rear van.

The Russian locomotives, which have brought us from Uzun-Ada, have been
replaced by a Chinese locomotive, burning not naphtha but coal, of which there
are large deposits in Turkestan, and stores at the chief stations along the line.

My first care is to look in at the front van. The custom-house officers are
about to visit it, and I tremble for poor Kinko.

It is evident that the fraud has not been discovered yet, for there would have
been a great stir at the news. Suppose the case is passed? Will its position be
shifted? Will it be put hind side before or upside down? Kinko will not then be
able to get out, and that would be a complication.

The Chinese officers have come out of the van and shut the door, so that I
cannot give a glance into it. The essential point is that Kinko has not been caught
in the act. As soon as possible I will enter the van, and as bankers say, "verify the
state of the safe."

Before getting into our car, Major Noltitz asks me to follow him to the rear
of the train.

The scene we witness is not devoid of interest; it is the giving over of the
corpse of the mandarin Yen Lou by the Persian guards to a detachment of
soldiers of the Green Standard, who form the Chinese gendarmerie. The defunct


passes into the care of twenty Celestials, who are to occupy the second-class car
in front of the mortuary van. They are armed with guns and revolvers, and
commanded by an officer.

"Well," said I to the major, "this mandarin must be some very exalted
personage if the Son of Heaven sends him a guard of honor--"

"Or of defence," replies the major.

Faruskiar and Ghangir assist at these proceedings, in which there is nothing
surprising. Surely the general manager of the line ought to keep an eye on the
illustrious defunct, entrusted to the care of the Grand Transasiatic?

The gong was struck for the last time; we hasten into our cars.

And the baron, what has become of him?

Here he comes out on to the platform like a whirlwind. He has found his
papers at the bottom of his nineteenth pocket. He has obtained the necessary
visa--and it was time.

"Passengers for Pekin, take your seats!" shouts Popof in a sonorous voice.

The train trembles, it starts, it has gone.


CHAPTER XVII.

We are off on a Chinese railway, single line, the train drawn by a Chinese
engine, driven by a Chinese driver. Let us hope we shall not be telescoped on the
road, for among the passengers is one of the chief functionaries of the company
in the person of Faruskiar.

After all, if an accident should happen it will break the monotony of the
journey, and furnish me with an episode. I am forced to admit that up to the
present my personages have not behaved as I expected. The drama does not run
well, the action languishes. We want something startling to bring all the actors
on--what Caterna would call "a good fourth act."

But then Ephrinell and Miss Bluett are all the time absorbed in their
commercial téte-a-téte. Pan Chao and the doctor amused me for a time, but they
are not equal to it now. The actor and the actress are of no use without
opportunity. Kinko, Kinko himself, on whom I had built such hopes, has passed
the frontier without difficulty, he will reach Pekin, he will marry Zinca Klork.
Decidedly there is a want of excitement. I cannot get anything out of the corpse
of Yen Lou! and the readers of the Twentieth Century who looked to me for
something sensational and thrilling.

Must I have recourse to the German baron? No! he is merely ridiculous,
stupidly ridiculous, and he has no interest for me.

I return to my idea: I want a hero, and up to the present no hero has appeared


on the scene.

Evidently the moment has come to enter into more intimate relations with
Faruskiar. Perhaps he will not now be so close in his incognito. We are under his
orders, so to say. He is the mayor of our rolling town, and a mayor owes
something to those he governs. Besides, in the event of Kinko's fraud being
discovered I may as well secure the protection of this high functionary.

Our train runs at only moderate speed since we left Kachgar. On the opposite
horizon we can see the high lands of the Pamir; to the southwest rises the Bolor,
the Kachgarian belt from which towers the summit of Tagharma lost among the
clouds.

I do not know how to spend my time. Major Noltitz has never visited the
territories crossed by the Grand Transasiatic, and I am deprived of the pleasure
of taking notes from his dictation. Dr. Tio-King does not lift his nose from his
Cornaro, and Pan Chao reminds me more of Paris and France than of Pekin and
China; besides, when he came to Europe he came by Suez, and he knows no
more of Oriental Turkestan than he does of Kamtschatka. All the same, we talk.
He is a pleasant companion, but a little less amiability and a little more
originality would suit me better.

I am reduced to strolling from one car to another, lounging on the platforms,
interrogating the horizon, which obstinately refuses to reply, listening on all
sides.

Hello! there are the actor and his wife apparently in animated conversation. I
approach. They sing in an undertone. I listen.

"I'm fond of my turkeys--eys--eys," says Madame Caterna.

"I'm fond of my wethers--ers--ers," says Monsieur Caterna, in any number of
baritones.

It is the everlasting duet between Pipo and Bettina; and they are rehearsing
for Shanghai. Happy Shanghai! They do not yet know the Mascotte!

Ephrinell and Miss Bluett are talking away with unusual animation, and I
catch the end of the dialogue.

"I am afraid," said she, "that hair will be rising in Pekin--"

"And I," said he, "that teeth will be down. Ah! If a good war would only
break out in which the Russians would give the Chinaman a smack on the jaw."

There now! Smack them on the jaw, in order that Strong, Bulbul & Co., of
New York, might have a chance of doing a trade!

Really I do not know what to do, and we have a week's journey before us. To
Jericho with the Grand Transasiatic and its monotonous security! The Great
Trunk from New York to San Francisco has more life in it! At least, the redskins
do sometimes attack the trains, and the chance of a scalping on the road cannot


but add to the charm of the voyage!

But what is that I hear being recited, or rather intoned at the end of our
compartment?

"There is no man, whoever he may be, who cannot prevent himself from
eating too much, and avoid the evils due to repletion. On those who are intrusted
with the direction of public affairs this is more incumbent than on others--"

It is Dr. Tio-King reading Comaro aloud, in order that he may remember his
principles better. Eh! after all, this principle is not to be despised. Shall I send it
by telegram to our cabinet ministers? They might, perhaps, dine with more
discretion after it.

During this afternoon I find by the guide-book that we shall cross the
Yamanyar over a wooden bridge. This stream descends from the mountains to
the west, which are at least twenty-five thousand feet high, and its rapidity is
increased by the melting of the snows. Sometimes the train runs through thick
jungles, amid which Popof assures me tigers are numerous. Numerous they may
be, but I have not seen one. And yet in default of redskins we might get some
excitement out of tiger-skins. What a heading for a newspaper, and what a stroke
of luck for a joumalist! TERRIBLE CATASTROPHE. A GRAND
TRANSASIATIC EXPRESS ATTACKED BY TIGERS. FIFTY VICTIMS. AN
INFANT DEVOURED BEFORE ITS MOTHER'S EYES--the whole thickly
leaded and appropriately displayed.

Well, no! The Turkoman felidae did not give me even that satisfaction! And I
treat them--as I treat any other harmless cats.

The two principal stations have been Yanghi-Hissar, where the train stops ten
minutes, and Kizil, where it stops a quarter of an hour. Several blast furnaces are
at work here, the soil being ferruginous, as is shown by the word "Kizil," which
means red.

The country is fertile and well cultivated, growing wheat, maize, rice, barley
and flax, in its eastern districts. Everywhere are great masses of trees, willows,
mulberries, poplars. As far as the eye can reach are fields under culture, irrigated
by numerous canals, also green fields in which are flocks of sheep; a country
half Normandy, half Provence, were it not for the mountains of the Pamir on the
horizon. But this portion of Kachgaria was terribly ravaged by war when its
people were struggling for independence. The land flowed with blood, and along
by the railway the ground is dotted with tumuli beneath which are buried the
victims of their patriotism. But I did not come to Central Asia to travel as if I
were in France! Novelty! Novelty! The unforeseen! The appalling!

It was without the shadow of an accident, and after a particularly fine run,
that we entered Yarkand station at four o'clock in the afternoon.


If Yarkand is not the administrative capital of eastern Turkestan, it is
certainly the most important commercial city of the province.


"Again two towns together," said I to Major Noltitz. "That I have from
Popof."

"But this time," said the major, "it was not the Russians who built the new
one."

"New or old," I added, "I am afraid is like the others we have seen, a wall of
earth, a few dozen gateways cut in the wall, no monuments or buildings of note,
and the eternal bazaars of the East."

I was not mistaken, and it did not take four hours to visit both Yarkands, the
newer of which is called Yanji-Shahr.

Fortunately, the Yarkand women are not forbidden to appear in the streets,
which are bordered by simple mud huts, as they were at the time of the
"dadkwahs," or governors of the province. They can give themselves the
pleasure of seeing and being seen, and this pleasure is shared in by the farangis--
as they call foreigners, no matter to what nation they may belong. They are very
pretty, these Asiatics, with their long tresses, their transversely striped bodices,
their skirts of bright colors, relieved by Chinese designs in Kothan silk, their
high-heeled embroidered boots, their turbans of coquettish pattern, beneath
which appear their black hair and their eyebrows united by a bar.

A few Chinese passengers alighted at Yarkand, and gave place to others
exactly like them--among others a score of coolies--and we started again at eight
o'clock in the evening.

During the night we ran the three hundred and fifty kilometres which
separate Yarkand from Kothan.

A visit I paid to the front van showed me that the box was still in the same
place. A certain snoring proved that Kinko was inside as usual, and sleeping
peacefully. I did not care to wake him, and I left him to dream of his adorable
Roumanian.

In the morning Popof told me that the train, which was now traveling about
as fast as an omnibus, had passed Kargalik, the junction for the Kilian and Tong
branches. The night had been cold, for we are still at an altitude of twelve
hundred metres. Leaving Guma station, the line runs due east and west,
following the thirty-seventh parallel, the same which traverses in Europe,
Seville, Syracuse and Athens.

We sighted only one stream of importance, the Kara-kash, on which
appeared a few drifting rafts, and files of horses and asses at the fords between
the pebbly banks. The railroad crosses it about a hundred kilometres from
Khotan, where we arrived at eight o'clock in the morning.

Two hours to stop, and as the town may give me a foretaste of the cities of
China, I resolve to take a run through it.


It seems to be a Turkoman town built by the Chinese, or perhaps a Chinese
town built by Turkomans. Monuments and inhabitants betray their double origin.
The mosques look like pagodas, the pagodas look like mosques.

And I was not astonished when the Caternas, who would not miss this
opportunity of setting foot in China, were rather disappointed.

"Monsieur Claudius," said the actor to me, "there is not a single scene here
that would suit the Prise de Pékin!"

"But we are not at Pekin, my dear Caterna."

"That is true, and it has to be remembered, if we are to be thankful for little."

"Thankful for very little,’ as the Italians say."

"Well, if they say that, they are no fools."

As we were about to board the car again, I saw Popof running toward me,
shouting:

"Monsieur Bombarnac!"

"What is the matter, Popof?"

"A telegraph messenger asked me if there was any one belonging to the
Twentieth Century in the train."

"A telegraph messenger?”

"Yes, on my replying in the affirmative, he gave me this telegram for you."

"Give it me! give it me!"

I seize the telegram, which has been waiting for me for some days. Is it a
reply to my wire sent from Merv, relative to the mandarin Yen Lou?

I open it. I read it. And it falls from my hand.

This is what it said:

"Claudius Bombarnac, "Correspondent, "Twentieth Century. "Khotan,
Chinese Turkestan.

"It is not the corpse of a mandarin that the train is taking to Pekin, but the
imperial treasure, value fifteen millions, sent from Persia to China, as announced
in the Paris newspapers eight days ago; endeavor to be better informed for the


future."
ok


CHAPTER XVIII.

"Millions--there are millions in that pretended mortuary van!"

In spite of myself, this imprudent phrase had escaped me in such a way that
the secret of the imperial treasure was instantly known to all, to the railway men
as well as to the passengers. And so, for greater security, the Persian
government, in agreement with the Chinese government, has allowed it to be


believed that we were carrying the corpse of a mandarin, when we were really
taking to Pekin a treasure worth fifteen million of francs.

Heaven pardon me, what a howler--pardonable assuredly--but what a howler
I had been guilty of! But why should I have doubted what Popof told me, and
why should Popof have suspected what the Persians had told him regarding this
Yen Lou? There was no reason for our doubting their veracity.

I am none the less deeply humiliated in my self-esteem as a journalist, and I
am much annoyed at the call to order which I have brought upon myself. I shall
take very good care not to breathe a word of my misadventure, even to the
major. Is it credible? In Paris the Twentieth Century is better informed of what
concerns the Grand Transasiatic than I am! They knew that an imperial treasure
is in the van, and I did not! Oh! the mistakes of special correspondents!

Now the secret is divulged, and we know that this treasure, composed of
gold and precious stones, formerly deposited in the hands of the Shah of Persia,
is being sent to its legitimate owner, the Son of Heaven.

That is why my lord Faruskiar, who was aware of it in consequence of his
position as general manager of the company, had joined the train at Douchak so
as to accompany the treasure to its destination. That is why he and Ghangir--and
the three other Mongols--had so carefully watched this precious van, and why
they had shown themselves so anxious when it had been left behind by the
breakage of the coupling, and why they were so eager for its recovery. Yes, all is
explained!

That is also why a detachment of Chinese soldiers has taken over the van at
Kachgar, in relief of the Persians! That is why Pan-Chao never heard of Yen
Lou, nor of any exalted personage of that name existing in the Celestial Empire!

We started to time, and, as may be supposed, our traveling companions could
talk of nothing else but the millions which were enough to enrich every one in
the train.

"This pretended mortuary van has always been suspicious to me," said Major
Noltitz. "And that was why I questioned Pan-Chao regarding the dead
mandarin."

"I remember," I said; "and I could not quite understand the motive of your
question. It is certain now that we have got a treasure in tow."

"And I add," said the major, "that the Chinese government has done wisely in
sending an escort of twenty well-armed men. From Kothan to Lan Teheou the
trains will have two thousand kilometres to traverse through the desert, and the
safety of the line is not as great as it might be across the Gobi."

"All the more so, major, as the redoubtable Ki-Tsang has been reported in the
northern provinces.”


"Quite so, and a haul of fifteen millions is worth having by a bandit chief."

"But how could the chief be informed of the treasure being sent?"

"That sort of people always know what it is their interest to know."

"Yes," thought I, "although they do not read the Twentieth Century."

Meanwhile different opinions were being exchanged on the gangways. Some
would rather travel with the millions than carry a corpse along with them, even
though it was that of a first-class mandarin. Others considered the carrying of the
treasure a danger to the passengers. And that was the opinion of Baron
Weissschnitzerdorfer in a furious attack on Popof.

"You ought to have told us about it, sir, you ought to have told us about it!
Those millions are known to be in the train, and they will tempt people to attack
us. And an attack, even if repulsed, will mean delay, and delay I will not submit
to! No, sir, I will not!"

"No one will attack us," replied Popof. "No one will dream of doing it!"

"And how do you know that? how do you know that?"

"Be calm, pray."

"IT will not be calm; and if there is a delay, I will hold the company
responsible!"

That is understood; a hundred thousand florins damages to Monsieur le
Baron Tour de Monde.

Let us pass to the other passengers.

Ephrinell looked at the matter, of course, from a very practical point of view.

"There can be no doubt that our risks have been greatly increased by this
treasure, and in case of accident on account of it, the Life Travelers' Society, in
which I am insured, will, I expect, refuse to pay, so that the Grand Transasiatic
Company will have all the responsibility."

"Of course," said Miss Bluett; "and if they had not found the missing van the
company would have been in a serious difficulty with China. Would it not,
Fulk?"

"Exactly, Horatia!"

Horatia and Fulk--nothing less.

The Anglo-American couple were right, the enormous loss would have had
to be borne by the Grand Transasiatic, for the company must have known they
were Carrying a treasure and not a corpse--and thereby they were responsible.

As to the Caternas, the millions rolling behind did not seem to trouble them.
The only reflection they inspired was, "Ah! Caroline, what a splendid theater we
might build with all that money!"

But the best thing was said by the Reverend Nathaniel Morse, who had
joined the train at Kachgar.


"It is never comfortable to be dragging a powder magazine after one!"

Nothing could be truer, and this van with its imperial treasure was a powder
magazine that might blow up our train.

The first railway was opened in China about 1877 and ran from Shanghai to
Fou-Tcheou. The Grand Transasiatic followed very closely the Russian road
proposed in 1874 by Tachkend, Kouldja, Kami, Lan Tcheou, Singan and
Shanghai. This railway did not run through the populous central provinces which
can be compared to vast and humming hives of bees--and extaordinarily prolific
bees. As before curving off to Lan Tcheou; it reaches the great cities by the
branches it gives out to the south and southeast. Among others, one of these
branches, that from Tai Youan to Nanking, should have put these two towns of
the Chan-Si and Chen-Toong provinces into communication. But at present the
branch is not ready for opening, owing to an important viaduct not having
finished building.

The completed portion gives me direct communication across Central Asia.
That is the main line of the Transasiatic. The engineers did not find it so difficult
of construction as General Annenkof did the Transcaspian. The deserts of Kara
Koum and Gobi are very much alike; the same dead level, the same absence of
elevations and depressions, the same suitability for the iron road. If the engineers
had had to attack the enormous chain of the Kuen Lun, Nan Chan, Amie, Gangar
Oola, which forms the frontier of Tibet, the obstacles would have been such that
it would have taken a century to surmount them. But on a flat, sandy plain the
railway could be rapidly pushed on up to Lan Tcheou, like a long Decauville of
three thousand kilometres.

It is only in the vicinity of this city that the art of the engineer has had a
serious struggle with nature in the costly and troublesome road through the
provinces of Kan-Sou, Chan-Si and Petchili.

As we go along I must mention a few of the principal stations at which the
train stops to take in coal and water. On the right-hand side the eye never tires of
the distant horizon of mountains which bounds the tableland of Tibet to the
north. On the left the view is over the interminable steppes of the Gobi. The
combination of these territories constitutes the Chinese Empire if not China
proper, and we shall only reach that when we are in the neighborhood of Lan
Tcheou.

It would seem, therefore, as though the second part of the journey would be
rather uninteresting, unless we are favored with a few startling incidents. But it
seems to me that we are certainly in the possession of the elements out of which
something journalistic can be made.

At eleven o'clock the train left Kothan station, and it was nearly two o'clock


in the afternoon when it reached Keria, having left behind the small stations of
Urang, Langar, Pola and Tschiria.

In 1889-90 this road was followed by Pevtsoff from Kothan to Lob-Nor at
the foot of the Kuen Lun, which divides Chinese Turkestan from Tibet. The
Russian traveler went by Keria, Nia, Tchertchen, as we are doing so easily, but
then his caravan had to contend with much danger and difficulty--which did not
prevent his reporting ten thousand kilometres of surveys, without reckoning
altitude and longitude observations of the geographical points. It is an honor for
the Russian government to have thus continued the work of Prjevalsky.

From Keria station you can see to the southwest the heights of Kara Korum
and the peak of Dapsang, to which different geographers assign a height of eight
thousand metres. At its foot extends the province of Kachmir. There the Indus
rises in a number of inconsiderable sources which feed one of the greatest rivers
of the Peninsula. Thence from the Pamir tableland extends the mighty range of
the Himalaya, where rise the highest summits on the face of the globe.

Since we left Kothan we have covered a hundred and fifty kilometres in four
hours. It is not a high rate of speed, but we cannot expect on this part of the
Transasiatic the same rate of traveling we experienced on the Transcaspian.
Either the Chinese engines are not so fast, or, thanks to their natural indolence,
the engine drivers imagine that from thirty to forty miles an hour is the
maximum that can be obtained on the railways of the Celestial Empire.

At five o'clock in the afternoon we were at another station, Nia, where
General Pevtsoff established a meterological observatory. Here we stopped only
twenty minutes. I had time to lay in a few provisions at the bar. For whom they
were intended you can imagine.

The passengers we picked up were only Chinese, men and women. There
were only a few for the first class, and these only went short journeys.

We had not started a quarter of an hour when Ephrinell, with the sferious
manner of a merchant intent on some business, came up to me on the gangway.

"Monsieur Bombarnac," he said, "I have to ask a favor of you."

Eh! I thought, this Yankee knows where to find me when he wants me.

"Only too happy, I can assure you," said I. "What is it about?"

"I want you to be a witness--"

"An affair of honor? And with whom, if you please?"

"Miss Horatia Bluett."

"You are going to fight Miss Bluett!" I exclaimed, with a laugh.

"Not yet. I am going to marry her."

"Marry her?"

"Yes! a treasure of a woman, well acquainted with business matters, holding


a splendid commission--"

"My compliments, Mr. Ephrinell! You can count on me--"

"And probably on M. Caterna?"

"He would like nothing better, and if there is a wedding breakfast he will
sing at your dessert--"

"As much as he pleases," replied the American. "And now for Miss Bluett's
witnesses."

"Quite so."

"Do you think Major Noltitz would consent?"

"A Russian is too gallant to refuse. I will ask him, if you like."

"Thank you in advance. As to the second witness, I am rather in a difficulty.
This Englishman, Sir Francis Trevellyan--"

"A shake of the head is all you will get from him."

"Baron Weissschnitzerdorfer?"

"Ask that of a man who is doing a tour of the globe, and who would never
get through a signature of a name of that length!"

"Then I can only think of Pan-Chao, unless we try Popof--"

"Either would do it with pleasure. But there is no hurry, Mr. Ephrinell, and
when you get to Pekin you will have no difficulty in finding a fourth witness."

"What! to Pekin? It is not at Pekin that I hope to marry Miss Bluett!"

"Where, then? At Sou Tcheou or Lan Tcheou, while we stop a few hours?"

"Wait a bit, Monsieur Bombarnac! Can a Yankee wait?"

"Then it is to be--"

"Here."

"In the train?"

"In the train."

"Then it is for me to say, Wait a bit!"

"Not twenty-four hours."

"But to be married you require--"

"An American minister, and we have the Reverend Nathaniel Morse."

"He consents?"

"As if he would not! He would marry the whole train if it asked him!"

"Bravo, Mr. Ephrinell! A wedding in a train will be delightful."

"We should never put off until to-morrow what we can do to-day."

"Yes, I know, time is money."

"No! Time is time, simply, and I do not care to lose a minute of it."

Ephrinell clasped my hand, and as I had promised, I went to take the
necessary steps regarding the witnesses necessary for the nuptial ceremonial.

It needs not be said that the commercials were of full age and free to dispose


of themselves, to enter into marriage before a clergyman, as is done in America,
and without any of the fastidious preliminaries required in France and other
formalistic countries. Is this an advantage or otherwise? The Americans think it
is for the best, and, as Cooper says, the best at home is the best everywhere.

I first asked Major Noltitz, who willingly agreed to be Miss Bluett's witness.

"These Yankees are astonishing," he said to me.

"Precisely because they are astonished at nothing, major."

I made a similar proposition to Pan-Chao.

"Delighted, Monsieur Bombarnac," he replied. "I will be the witness of this
adorable and adored Miss Bluett! If a wedding between an Englishwoman and
an American, with French, Russian and Chinese witnesses, does not offer every
guarantee of happiness, where are we likely to meet with it?"

And now for Caterna.

The actor would have consented for any number of weddings.

"What a notion for a vaudeville or an operetta!" he exclaimed. "We have the
Mariage au tambour, the Mariage aux olives, the Mariage aux lanternes--well,
this will be the Mariage en railway, or the Marriage by Steam! Good titles, all
those, Monsieur Claudius! Your Yankee can reckon on me! Witness old or
young, noble father or first lover, marquis or peasant, as you like, I am equal to
it--"

"Be natural, please," said I. "It will have a good effect, considering the
scenery."

"Is Madame Caterna to come to the wedding?"

"Why not--as bridesmaid!"

In all that concerns the traditional functions we must have no difficulties on
the Grand Transasiatic.

It is too late for the ceremony to take place to-day. Ephrinell understood that
certain conventionalities must be complied with. The celebration could take
place in the morning. The passengers could all be invited, and Faruskiar might
be prevailed on to honor the affair with his presence.

During dinner we talked of nothing else. After congratulating the happy
couple, who replied with true Anglo-Saxon grace, we all promised to sign the
marriage contract.

"And we will do honor to your signatures," said Ephrinell, in the tone of a
tradesman accepting a bill.

The night came, and we retired, to dream of the marriage festivities of the
morrow. I took my usual stroll into the car occupied by the Chinese soldiers, and
found the treasure of the Son of Heaven faithfully guarded. Half the detachment
were awake and half were asleep.


About one o'clock in the morning I visited Kinko, and handed him over my
purchases at Nia. The young Roumanian was in high spirits. He anticipated no
further obstacles, he would reach port safely, after all.

"I am getting quite fat in this box," he told me.

I told him about the Ephrinell-Bluett marriage, and how the union was to be
celebrated next morning with great pomp.

"Ah!" said he, with a sigh. "They are not obliged to wait until they reach
Pekin!"

"Quite so, Kinko; but it seems to me that a marriage under such conditions is
not likely to be lasting! But after all, that is the couple's lookout."

At three o'clock in the morning we stopped forty minutes at Tchertchen,
almost at the foot of the ramifications of the Kuen Lun. None of us had seen this
miserable, desolate country, treeless and verdureless, which the railway was now
crossing on its road to the northeast.

Day came; our train ran the four hundred kilometres between Tchertchen and
Tcharkalyk, while the sun caressed with its rays the immense plain, glittering in
its saline efflorescences.


CHAPTER XIX.

When I awoke I seemed to have had an unpleasant dream. A dream in no
way like those we interpret by the Clef d'Or. No! Nothing could be clearer. The
bandit chief Ki Tsang had prepared a scheme for the seizure of the Chinese
treasure; he had attacked the train in the plains of Gobi; the car is assaulted,
pillaged, ransacked; the gold and precious stones, to the value of fifteen millions,
are torn from the grasp of the Celestials, who yield after a courageous defence.
As to the passengers, another two minutes of sleep would have settled their fate--
and mine.

But all that disappeared with the vapors of the night. Dreams are not fixed
photographs; they fade in the sun, and end by effacing themselves.

In taking my stroll through the train as a good townsman takes his stroll
through the town, I am joined by Major Noltitz. After shaking hands, he showed
me a Mongol in the second-class car, and said to me, "That is not one of those
we picked up at Douchak when we picked up Faruskiar and Ghangir."

"That is so," said I; "I never saw that face in the train before."

Popof, to whom I applied for information, told me that the Mongol had got in
at Tchertchen. "When he arrived," he said, "the manager spoke to him for a
minute, from which I concluded that he also was one of the staff of the Grand
‘Transasiatic."


I had not noticed Faruskiar during my walk. Had he alighted at one of the
small stations between Tchertchen and Tcharkalyk, where we ought to have been
about one o'clock in the afternoon?

No, he and Ghangir were on the gangway in front of our car. They seemed to
be in animated conversation, and only stopped to take a good look toward the
northeastern horizon. Had the Mongol brought some news which had made them
throw off their usual reserve and gravity? And I abandoned myself to my
imagination, foreseeing adventures, attacks of bandits, and so on, according to
my dream.

I was recalled to reality by the Reverend Nathaniel Morse, who said to me,
"It is fixed for to-day, at nine o'clock; do not forget."

That meant the marriage of Fulk Ephrinell and Horatia Bluett. Really, I was
not thinking of it. It is time for me to go and dress for the occasion. All I can do
will be to change my shirt. It is enough that one of the husband's witnesses
should be presentable; the other, Caterna, will be sure to be magnificent!

In fact, the actor had gone into the luggage van--how I trembled for Kinko!--
and there, with Popof's assistance, had got out of one of his boxes a somewhat
free-and-easy costume, but one certain of success at a wedding: A primrose coat
with metal buttons, and a buttonhole, a sham diamond pin in the cravat, poppy-
colored breeches, copper buckles, flowered waistcoat, clouded stockings, thread
gloves, black pumps, and white beaver hat. What a number of bridegrooms and
uncles of bridegrooms our friend had been in this traditional attire! He looked
superb, with his beaming face, his close-shaven chin, and blue cheeks, and his
laughing eyes and rosy lips.

Madame Caterna was quite as glorious in her array. She had easily
discovered a bridesmaid's costume in her wardrobe, bodice with intercrossing
stripes, short petticoat in green woolen, mauve stockings, straw hat with artificial
flowers, a suspicion of black on the eyelids and of rouge on the cheeks. There
you have the provincial stage beauty, and if she and her husband like to play a
village piece after the breakfast, I can promise them bravos enough.

It was at nine o'clock that this marriage was to take place, announced by the
bell of the tender, which was to sound full clang as if it were a chapel bell. With
a little imagination, we could believe we were in a village. But whither did this
bell invite the witnesses and guests? Into the dining car, which had been
conveniently arranged for the ceremony, as I had taken good care.

It was no longer a dining car; it was a hall car, if the expression is admissible.
The big table had been taken away, and replaced by a small table which served
as a desk. A few flowers bought at Tchertchen had been arranged in the corners
of the car, which was large enough to hold nearly all who wished to be present--


and those who could not get inside could look on from the gangways.

That all the passengers might know what was going on, we had put up a
notice at the doors of the first and second-class cars, couched in the following
terms:

"Mr. Fulk Ephrinell, of the firm of Messrs. Strong, Bulbul & Co., of New
York City, has the honor to invite you to his wedding with Miss Horatia Bluett,
of the firm of Messrs. Holmes-Holme, London, which will take place in the
dining car on this the 22d of May, at nine o'clock precisely. The Reverend
Nathaniel Morse, of Boston, U.S.A., will officiate.

"Miss Horatia Bluett, of the firm of Messrs. Holmes-Holme, of London, has
the honor to invite you to her wedding with Mr. Fulk Ephrinell, of the firm of
Messrs. Strong, Bulbul & Co., of New York City, etc., etc."

If I do not make half a dozen pars out of all this 1 am no newspaper man!

Meanwhile I learn from Popof the precise spot where the ceremony will take
place.

Popof points it out on the map. It is a hundred and fifty kilometres from
Tcharkalyk station, in the middle of the desert, amid the plains which are
traversed by a little stream which flows into the Lob Nor. For twenty leagues
there is no station, and the ceremony is not likely to be interrupted by any
stoppage.

It need hardly be said that at half-past eight I and Caterna were ready for the
call.

Major Noltitz and Pan-Chao had got themselves up in all due form for the
solemnity. The major looked as serious as a surgeon who was going to cut off a
leg. The Chinaman looked as gay as a Parisian at a village bridal.

Doctor Tio-King and Cornaro, one carrying the other, were to be at this little
festivity. The noble Venetian was a bachelor, if I am not mistaken, but I do not
think he gives any opinion on marriage, at least I have no recollection of its
being in the chapter headed "Safe and easy means of promptly remedying the
different accidents that threaten life."

"And," added Pan-Chao, who has just quoted this Cornarian phrase, "I
suppose marriage ought to be included among those accidents!"

A quarter to nine. No one has yet seen the happy couple. Miss Bluett is in
one of the toilet cabinets in the first van, where she is probably preparing herself.
Fulk Ephrinell is perhaps struggling with his cravat and giving a last polish to his
portable jewelry. I am not anxious. We shall see them as soon as the bell rings.

I have but one regret, and that is that Faruskiar and Ghangir should be too
busy to join us. Why do they continue to look out over the immense desert?
Before their eyes there stretches not the cultivated steppe of the Lob Nor region,


but the Gobi, which is barren, desolate and gloomy, according to the reports of
Grjimailo, Blanc and Martin. It may be asked why these people are keeping such
an obstinate lookout.

"If my presentiments do not deceive me," said Major Noltitz, "there is some
reason for it."

What does he mean? But the bell of the tender, the tender bell, begins its
joyous appeal. Nine o'clock; it is time to go into the dining car.

Caterna comes near me, and I hear him singing:

"Tt is the turret bell, Which suddenly is sounding."

While Madame Caterna replies to the trio of the Dame Blanche by the refrain
of the Dragons de Villars:

"And it sounds, sounds, sounds, It sounds and resounds--"

The passengers move in a procession, the four witnesses first, then the guests
from the end of the village--I mean of the train; Chinese, Turkomans, Tartars,
men and women, all curious to assist at the ceremony. The four Mongols remain
on the last gangway near the treasure which the Chinese soldiers do not leave for
an instant.

We reach the dining car.

The clergyman is seated at the little table, on which is the certificate of
marriage he has prepared according to the customary form. He looks as though
he was accustomed to this sort of thing, which is as much commercial as
matrimonial.

The bride and bridegroom have not appeared.

"Ah!" said I to the actor, "perhaps they have changed their minds."

"If they have," said Caterna, laughing, "the reverend gentleman can marry
me and my wife over again. We are in wedding garments, and it is a pity to have
had all this fuss for nothing, isn't it, Caroline?"

"Yes, Adolphe--"

But this pleasing second edition of the wedding of the Caternas did not come
off. Here is Mr. Fulk Ephrinell, dressed this morning just as he was dressed
yesterday--and--detail to note--with a pencil behind the lobe of his left ear, for he
has just been making out an account for his New York house.

Here is Miss Horatia Bluett, as thin, as dry, as plain as ever, her dust cloak
over her traveling gown, and in place of jewelry a noisy bunch of keys, which
hangs from her belt.

The company politely rise as the bride and bridegroom enter. They "mark
time," as Caterna says. Then they advance toward the clergyman, who is
standing with his hand resting on a Bible, open probably at the place where
Isaac, the son of Abraham, espouses Rebecca, the daughter of Rachel.


We might fancy we were in a chapel if we only had a harmonium.

And the music is here! If it is not a harmonium, it is the next thing to it. An
accordion makes itself heard in Caterna's hands. As an ancient mariner, he
knows how to manipulate this instrument of torture, and here he is swinging out
the andante from Norma with the most accordionesque expression.

It seems to give great pleasure to the natives of Central Asia. Never have
their ears been charmed by the antiquated melody that the pneumatic apparatus
was rendering so expressively.

But everything must end in this world, even the andante from Norma. and
the Reverend Nathaniel Morse began to favor the young couple with the speech
which had clone duty many times before under similar circumstances. "The two
souls that blend together--Flesh of my flesh--Increase and multiply--"

In my opinion he had much better have got to work like a notary: "Before us,
there has been drawn up a deed of arrangement regarding Messrs. Ephrinell,
Bluett & Co.--"

My thought remained unfinished. There are shouts from the engine. The
brakes are suddenly applied with a scream and a grind. Successive shocks
accompany the stoppage of the train. Then, with a violent bump, the cars pull up
in a cloud of sand.

What an interruption to the nuptial ceremony!

Everything is upset in the dining car, men, furniture, bride, bridegroom and
witnesses. Not one kept his equilibrium. It is an indescribable pell-mell, with
cries of terror and prolonged groans. But I hasten to point out that there was
nothing serious, for the stoppage was not all at once.


"Quick!" said the major. "Out of the train!"
ok


CHAPTER XX.

In a moment the passengers, more or less bruised and alarmed, were out on
the track. Nothing but complaints and questions uttered in three or four different
languages, amid general bewilderment.

Faruskiar, Ghangir and the four Mongols were the first to jump off the cars.
They are out on the line, kandijar in one hand, revolver in the other. No doubt an
attack has been organized to pillage the train.

The rails have been taken up for about a hundred yards, and the engine, after
bumping over the sleepers, has come to a standstill in a sandhill.

"What! The railroad not finished--and they sold me a through ticket from
Tiflis to Pekin? And I came by this Transasiatic to save nine days in my trip


round the world!"

In these phrases, in German, hurled at Popof, I recognized the voice of the
irascible baron. But this time he should have addressed his reproaches not to the
engineers of the company, but to others.

We spoke to Popof, while Major Noltitz continued to watch Faruskiar and
the Mongols.

"The baron is mistaken," said Popof, "the railway is completed, and if a
hundred yards of rails have been lifted here, it has been with some criminal
intention."

"To stop the train!" I exclaim.

"And steal the treasure they are sending to Pekin!" says Caterna.

"There is no doubt about that," says Popof. "Be ready to repulse an attack."

"Is it Ki-Tsang and his gang that we have to do with?" I asked.

Ki-Tsang! The name spread among the passengers and caused inexpressible
terror.

The major said to me in a low voice: "Why Ki-Tsang? Why not my lord
Faruskiar?"

"He--the manager of the Transasiatic?"

"If it is true that the company had to take several of these robber chiefs into
its confidence to assure the safety of the trains--"

"T will never believe that, major."

"As you please, Monsieur Bombarnac. But assuredly Faruskiar knew that
this pretended mortuary van contained millions."

"Come, major, this is no time for joking."

No, it was the time for defending, and defending one's self courageously.

The Chinese officer has placed his men around the treasure van. They are
twenty in number, and the rest of the passengers, not counting the women,
amount to thirty. Popof distributes the weapons which are carried in case of
attack. Major Noltitz, Caterna, Pan-Chao, Ephrinell, driver and_ stoker,
passengers, Asiatic and European, all resolve to fight for the common safety.

On the right of the line, about a hundred yards away, stretches a deep,
gloomy thicket, a sort of jungle, in which doubtless are hidden the robbers,
awaiting the signal to pounce upon us.

Suddenly there is a burst of shouting, the thicket has given passage to the
gang in ambush--some sixty Mongols, nomads of the Gobi. If these rascals beat
us, the train will be pillaged, the treasure of the Son of Heaven will be stolen,
and, what concerns us more intimately, the passengers will be massacred without
mercy.

And Faruskiar, whom Major Noltitz so unjustly suspected? I look at him. His


face is no longer the same; his fine features have become pale, his height has
increased, there is lightning in his eyes.

Well! If I was mistaken about the mandarin Yen Lou, at least I had not
mistaken the general manager of the Transasiatic or the famous bandit of
Yunnan.

However, as soon as the Mongols appeared, Popof hurried Madame Caterna,
Miss Horatia Bluett, and the other women into the cars. We took every means for
putting them in safety.

My only weapon was a six-shot revolver, and I knew how to use it.

Ah! I wanted incidents and accidents, and impressions of the journey! Well,
the chronicler will not fail to chronicle, on condition that he emerges safe and
sound from the fray, for the honor of reporting in general and the glory of the
Twentieth Century in particular.

But is it not possible to spread trouble among the assailants, by beginning
with blowing out Ki-Tsang's brains, if Ki-Tsang is the author of this ambuscade?
That would bring matters to a crisis.

The bandits fire a volley, and begin brandishing their arms and shouting.
Faruskiar, pistol in one hand, kandijar in the other, has rushed onto them, his
eyes gleaming, his lips covered with a slight foam. Ghangir is at his side,
followed by four Mongols whom he is exciting by word and gesture.

Major Noltitz and I throw ourselves into the midst of our assailants. Caterna
is in front of us, his mouth open, his white teeth ready to bite, his eyes blinking,
his revolver flourishing about. The actor has given place to the old sailor who
has reappeared for the occasion.

"These beggars want to board us!" said he. "Forward, forward, for the honor
of the flag! To port, there, fire! To starboard, there, fire! All together, fire!"

And it was with no property daggers he was armed, nor dummy pistols
loaded with Edouard Philippe's inoffensive powder. No! A revolver in each
hand, he was bounding along, firing, as he said, right and left and everywhere.

Pan-Chao also exposed himself bravely, a smile on his lips, gallantly leading
on the other Chinese passengers. Popof and the railwaymen did their duty
bravely. Sir Francis Trevellyan, of Trevellyan Hall, took matters very coolly, but
Ephrinell abandoned himself to true Yankee fury, being no less irritated at the
interruption to his marriage as to the danger run by his forty-two packages of
artificial teeth.

And in short, the band of robbers met with a much more serious resistance
than they expected.

And Baron Weissschnitzerd6rfer? Well, he is one of the most furious of us
all. He sweats blood and water, his fury carries him away at the risk of his being


massacred. Many times we have to rescue him. These rails lifted, this train
stopped, this attack in the open Gobi desert, the delays that it will all occasion,
the mailboat lost at Tientsin, the voyage round the world spoiled, his plan come
to grief before he had half accomplished it! What a shock to his German self-
esteem!

Faruskiar, my hero--I cannot call him anything else--displays extraordinary
intrepidity, bearing himself the boldest in the struggle, and when he had
exhausted his revolver, using his kandijar like a man who had often faced death
and never feared it.

Already there were a few wounded on both sides, perhaps a few dead among
the passengers who lay on the line. I have had my shoulder grazed by a bullet, a
simple scratch I have hardly noticed. The Reverend Nathaniel Morse does not
think that his sacred character compels him to cross his arms, and, from the way
he works, one would not imagine that it was the first time he has handled
firearms. Caterna has his hat shot through, and it will be remembered that it is
his village bridegroom's hat, the gray beaver, with the long fur. He utters a
gigantic maritime oath, something about thunder and portholes, and then, taking
a most deliberate aim, quietly shoots stone dead the ruffian who has taken such a
liberty with his best headgear.

For ten minutes or so the battle continues with most alarming alternations.
The number of wounded on both sides increases, and the issue is still doubtful.
Faruskiar and Ghangir and the Mongols have been driven back toward the
precious van, which the Chinese guard have not left for an instant. But two or
three of them have been mortally wounded, and their officer has just been killed
by a bullet in the head. And my hero does all that the most ardent courage can do
for the defence of the treasure of the Son of Heaven.

I am getting uneasy at the prolongation of the combat. It will continue
evidently as long as the chief of the band--a tall man with a black beard--urges
on his accomplices to the attack on the train. Up till now he has escaped unhurt,
and, in spite of all we can do, he is gaining ground. Shall we be obliged to take
refuge in the vans, as behind the walls of a fortress, to entrench ourselves, to
fight until the last has succumbed? And that will not be long, if we cannot stop
the retrograde movement which is beginning on our side.

To the reports of the guns there are now added the cries of the women, who
in their terror are running about the gangways, although Miss Bluett and
Madame Caterna are trying to keep them inside the cars. A few bullets have
gone through the panels, and I am wondering if any of them have hit Kinko.

Major Noltitz comes near me and says: "This is not going well."

"No, it is not going well," I reply, "and I am afraid the ammunition will give


out. We must settle their commander-in-chief. Come, major--"

But what we are about to do was done by another at that very instant.

This other was Faruskiar. Bursting through the ranks of the assailants, he
cleared them off the line, in spite of the blows they aimed at him. He is in front
of the bandit chief, he raises his arm, he stabs him full in the chest.

Instantly the thieves beat a retreat, without even carrying off their dead and
wounded. Some run across the plain, some disappear in the thickets. Why pursue
them, now that the battle has ended in our favor? And I must say that without the
admirable valor of Faruskiar, I do not expect any of us would have lived to tell
the story.

But the chief of the bandits is not dead, although the blood flows abundantly
from his chest.

He has fallen with one knee on the ground, one hand up, with the other he is
supporting himself.

Faruskiar stands over him, towering above him.

Suddenly he rises in a last effort, his arm threatens his adversary, he looks at
him.

A last thrust of the kandijar is driven into his heart.

Faruskiar returns, and in Russian, with perfect calmness, remarks:

"Ki-Tsang is dead! So perish all who bear weapons against the Son of
Heaven!"


CHAPTER XXI.

And so it was Ki-Tsang who had just attacked the Grand Transasiatic on the
plains of Gobi. The pirate of Vunnan had learned that a van containing gold and
precious stones of enormous value had formed part of this train! And was there
anything astonishing in that, considering that the newspapers, even those of
Paris, had published the fact many days before? So Ki-Tsang had had time to
prepare his attempt, and had lifted a portion of the rails, and would probably
have succeeded in carrying off the treasure if Faruskiar had not brought him to
his feet. That is why our hero had been so uneasy all the morning; if he had been
looking out over the desert so persistently, it was because he had been warned of
Ki-Tsang's plans by the last Mongol who had joined the train at Tchertchen!
Under any circumstances we had now nothing to fear from Ki-Tsang. The
manager of the company had done justice on the bandit--speedy justice, I admit.
But we are in the midst of the deserts of Mongolia, where there are no juries as
yet, which is a good thing for the Mongols.

"Well," said I to the major, "I hope you have abandoned your suspicions with


regard to my lord Faruskiar?"

"To a certain extent, Monsieur Bombarnac!" Only to a certain extent?
Evidently Major Noltitz is difficult to please.

But let us hasten on and count our victims. On our side there are three dead,
including the Chinese officer, and more than twelve wounded, four of them
seriously, the rest slightly, so that they can continue their journey to Pekin. Popof
escaped without a scratch, Caterna with a slight graze which his wife insists on
bathing.

The major has the wounded brought into the cars and does the best for them
under the circumstances. Doctor Tio-King offers his services, but they seem to
prefer the Russian army surgeon, and that I understand. As to those who have
fallen it is best for us to take them on to the next station and there render them
the last services.

The thieves had abandoned their dead. We covered them over with a little
sand, and that is all we need say.

The place where we had been stopped was halfway between Tcharkalyk and
Tchertchen, the only two stations from which we could procure help.
Unfortunately they were no longer in telegraphic communication, Ki-Tsang
having knocked down the posts at the same time as he lifted the rails.

Hence a discussion as to what was the best thing to be done, which was not
of long duration.

As the engine had run off the rails, the very first thing to do was evidently to
get it onto them again; then as there was a gap in the line, the simplest thing to
do was to run back to Tchertchen, and wait there until the company's workmen
had repaired the damage, which they could easily do in a couple of days.

We set to work without losing a moment. The passengers were only too glad
to help Popof and the officials who had at their disposal a few tools, including
jacks, levers and hammers, and in three hours the engine and tender were again
on the line.

The most difficult business is over. With the engine behind we can proceed at
slow speed to Tchertchen. But what lost time! What delays! And what
recriminations from our German baron, what donnervetters and teufels and other
German expletives!

I have omitted to say that immediately after the dispersal of the bandits we
had in a body thanked Faruskiar. The hero received our thanks with all the
dignity of an Oriental.

"I only did my duty as general manager of the company," he replied, with a
truly noble modesty.

And then at his orders the Mongols had set to work, and I noticed that they


displayed indefatigable ardor, for which they earned our sincere felicitations.

Meanwhile Faruskiar and Ghangir were often talking together in a whisper,
and from these interviews arose a proposition which none of us expected.

"Guard," said Faruskiar, addressing Popof, "it is my opinion that we had
much better run on to Tcharkalyk than go back; it would suit the passengers
much better."

"Certainly, sir, it would be preferable," said Popof; "but the line is broken
between here and Tcharkalyk, and we cannot get through."

"Not at present, but we could get the cars through if we could temporarily
repair the line."

That was a proposal worth consideration, and we assembled to consider it,
Major Noltitz, Pan-Chao, Fulk Ephrinell, Caterna, the clergyman, Baron
Weissschnitzerdo6rfer, and a dozen others--all who understood Russian.

Faruskiar spoke as follows:

"I have been looking at the portion of the line damaged by the band of Ki-
Tsang. Most of the sleepers are still in place. As to the rails, the scoundrels have
simply thrown them onto the sand, and by replacing them end to end it would be
easy to get the train over to the uninjured track. It would not take a day to do
this, and five hours afterward we should be at Tcharkalyk."

Excellent notion, at once approved of by Popof, the driver, the passengers,
and particularly by the baron. The plan was possible, and if there were a few
rails useless, we could bring to the front those we had already run over, and in
this way get over the difficulty.

Evidently this Faruskiar is a man, he is our true chief, he is the personage I
was in want of, and I will sound his name over the entire universe in all the
trumpets of my chronicle!

And yet Major Noltitz is mistaken enough to see in him only a rival to this
Ki-Tsang, whose crimes have just received their final punishment from his hand!

We set to work to replace the sleepers that had been shifted aside from where
they had left their mark, and we continued our task without intermission.

Having no fear of being noticed amid the confusion which followed the
attack, I went into the luggage van to assure myself that Kinko was safe and
sound, to tell him what had passed, to caution him on no account to come put of
his box. He promised me, and I was at ease regarding him.

It was nearly three o'clock when we began work. The rails had been shifted
for about a hundred yards. As Faruskiar remarked, it was not necessary for us to
fix them permanently. That would be the task of the workmen the company
would send from Tcharkalyk when we reached that station, which is one of the
most important on the line.


As the rails were heavy we divided ourselves into detachments. First-class
and second-class, all worked together with good will. The baron displayed
tremendous ardor. Ephrinell, who thought no more of his marriage than if he had
never thought about it, devoted strict attention to business. Pan-Chao was second
to nobody, and even Doctor Tio-King strove to make himself useful--in the
fashion of the celebrated Auguste, the fly on the chariot wheel.

"It is hot, this Gobi sun!" said Caterna.

Alone sat Sir Francis Trevellyan of Trevellyanshire, calm and impassive in
his car, utterly regardless of our efforts.

At seven o'clock thirty yards of the line had been repaired. The night was
closing in. It was decided to wait until the morning. In half a day we could finish
the work, and in the afternoon we could be off again.

We were in great want of food and sleep. After so rude a task, how rude the
appetite! We met in the dining car without distinction of classes. There was no
scarcity of provisions, and a large breach was made in the reserves. Never mind!
We can fill up again at Tcharkalyk.

Caterna is particularly cheery, talkative, facetious, communicative,
overflowing. At dessert he and his wife sang the air--appropriate to the occasion-
-from the Voyage en Chine, which we caught up with more power than
precision:

"China is a charming land Which surely ought to please you."

Oh! Labiche, could you ever have imagined that this adorable composition
would one day charm passengers in distress on the Grand Transasiatic? And then
our actor--a little fresh, I admit--had an idea. And such an idea! Why not resume
the marriage ceremony interrupted by the attack on the train?

"What marriage?” asked Ephrinell.

"Yours, sir, yours," replied Caterna. "Have you forgotten it? That is rather too
good!"

The fact is that Fulk Ephrinell, on the one part, and Horatia Bluett, on the
other part, seemed to have forgotten that had it not been for the attack of Ki-
Tsang and his band they would now have been united in the gentle bonds of
matrimony.

But we were all too tired. The Reverend Nathaniel Morse was unequal to the
task; he would not have strength enough to bless the pair, and the pair would not
have strength enough to support his blessing. The ceremony could be resumed
on the day after to-morrow. Between Tcharkalyk and Lan Tcheou there was a run
of nine hundred kilometres, and that was quite long enough for this Anglo-
American couple to be linked together in.

And so we all went to our couches or benches for a little refreshing sleep.


But at the same time the requirements of prudence were not neglected.

Although it appeared improbable, now that their chief had succumbed, the
bandits might still make a nocturnal attack. There were always these cursed
millions of the Son of Heaven to excite their covetousness, and if we are not on
our guard--

But we feel safe. Faruskiar in person arranges for the surveillance of the
train. Since the death of the officer he has taken command of the Chinese
detachment. He and Ghangir are on guard over the imperial treasure, and
according to Caterna, who is never in want of a quotation from some comic
opera:

"This night the maids of honor will be guarded well."

And, in fact, the imperial treasure was much better guarded than the beautiful
Athenais de Solange between the first and second acts of the Mousquetaires de
la Reine.

At daybreak next moming we are at work. The weather is superb. The day
will be warm. Out in the Asian desert on the 24th of May the temperature is such
that you can cook eggs if you only cover them with a little sand.

Zeal was not wanting, and the passengers worked as hard as they had done
the night before. The line was gradually completed. One by one the sleepers
were replaced, the rails were laid end to end, and about four o'clock in the
afternoon the gap was bridged.

At once the engine began to advance slowly, the cars following until they
were over the temporary track and safe again. Now the road is clear to
Tcharkalyk; what do I say? to Pekin.

We resume our places. Popof gives the signal for departure as Caterna trolls
out the chorus of victory of the admiral's sailors in Haydee.

A thousand cheers reply to him. At ten o'clock in the evening the train enters
Tcharkalyk station.

We are exactly thirty hours behind time. But is not thirty hours enough to
make Baron Weissschnitzerdorfer lose the mail from Tient-Tsin to Yokohama?


CHAPTER XXII.

I, who wanted an incident, have had one to perfection. I am thankful enough
not to have been one of the victims. I have emerged from the fray safe and
sound. All my numbers are intact, barring two or three insignificant scratches.
Only No. 4 has been traversed by a bullet clean through--his hat.

At present I have nothing in view beyond the Bluett-Ephrinell marriage and
the termination of the Kinko affair. I do not suppose that Faruskiar can afford us


any further surprises. I can reckon on the casual, of course, for the journey has
another five days to run. Taking into account the delay occasioned by the Ki-
Tsang affair that will make thirteen days from the start from Uzun Ada.

Thirteen days! Heavens! And there are the thirteen numbers in my notebook!
Supposing I were superstitious?

We remained three hours at Tcharkalyk. Most of the passengers did not leave
their beds. We were occupied with declarations relative to the attack on the train,
to the dead which the Chinese authorities were to bury, to the wounded who
were to be left at Tcharkalyk, where they would be properly looked after. Pan-
Chao told me it was a populous town, and I regret I was unable to visit it.

The company sent off immediately a gang of workmen to repair the line and
set up the telegraph posts; and in a day everything would be clear again.

I need scarcely say that Faruskiar, with all the authority of the company's
general manager, took part in the different formalities that were needed at
Tcharkalyk. I do not know how to praise him sufficiently. Besides, he was repaid
for his good offices by the deference shown him by the staff at the railway
station.

At three in the morning we arrived at Kara Bouran, where the train stopped
but a few minutes. Here the railway crosses the route of Gabriel Bonvalot and
Prince Henri of Orleans across Tibet in 1889-90, a much more complete journey
than ours, a circular trip from Paris to Paris, by Berlin, Petersburg, Moscow,
Nijni, Perm, Tobolsk, Omsk, Semipalatinsk, Kouldja, Tcharkalyk, Batong,
Yunnan, Hanoi, Saigon, Singapore, Ceylon, Aden, Suez, Marseilles, the tour of
Asia, and the tour of Europe.

The train halts at Lob Nor at four o'clock and departs at six. This lake, the
banks of which were visited by General Povtzoff in 1889, when he returned from
his expedition to Tibet, is an extensive marsh with a few sandy islands,
surrounded by two or three feet of water. The country through which the Tarim
slowly flows had already been visited by Fathers Hue and Gabet, the explorers
Prjevalski and Carey up to the Davana pass, situated a hundred and fifty
kilometres to the south. But from that pass Gabriel Bonvalot and Prince Henri of
Orleans, camping sometimes at fifteen thousand feet of altitude, had ventured
across virgin territories to the foot of the superb Himalayan chain.

Our itinerary lay eastwards toward Kara Nor, skirting the base of the Nan
Chan mountains, behind which lies the region of Tsaidam. The railway dare not
venture among the mountainous countries of the Kou-Kou-Nor, and we were on
our way to the great city of Lan Tcheou along, the base of the hills.

Gloomy though the country might be, there was no reason for the passengers
to be so. This glorious sun, with its rays gilding the sands of the Gobi as far as


we could see, announced a perfect holiday. From Lob Nor to Kara Nor there are
three hundred and fifty kilometres to run, and between the lakes we will resume
the interrupted marriage of Fulk Ephrinell and Horatia Bluett, if nothing occurs
to again delay their happiness.

The dining car has been again arranged for the ceremony, the witnesses are
ready to resume their parts, and the happy pair cannot well be otherwise than of
the same mind.

The Reverend Nathaniel Morse, in announcing that the marriage will take
place at nine o'clock, presents the compliments of Mr. Ephrinell and Miss Bluett.

Major Noltitz and I, Caterna and Pan-Chao are under arms at the time stated.

Caterna did not think it his duty to resume his costume, nor did his wife.
They were dressed merely for the grand dinner party which took place at eight
o'clock in the evening--the dinner given by Ephrinell to his witnesses and to the
chief first-class passengers. Our actor, puffing out his left cheek, informed me
that he had a surprise for us at dessert. What? I thought it wise not to ask.

A little before nine o'clock the bell of the tender begins to ring. Be assured it
does not announce an accident. Its joyous tinkling calls us to the dining car, and
we march in procession toward the place of sacrifice.

Ephrinell and Miss Bluett are already seated at the little table in front of the
worthy clergyman, and we take our places around them.

On the platforms are grouped the spectators, anxious to lose nothing of the
nuptial ceremony.

My lord Faruskiar and Ghangir, who had been the object of a personal
invitation, had just arrived. The assembly respectfully rises to receive them.
They will sign the deed of marriage. It is a great honor, and if it were my
marriage I should be proud to see the illustrious name of Faruskiar figure among
the signatures to the deed.

The ceremony begins, and this time the Reverend Nathaniel Morse was able
to finish his speech, so regrettably interrupted on the former occasion.

The young people rise, mud the clergyman asks them if they are mutually
agreed as to matriage.

Before replying, Miss Bluett turns to Ephrinell, and says:

"It is understood that Holmes-Holme will have twenty-five per cent. of the
profits of our partnership."

"Fifteen," said Ephrinell, "only fifteen."

"That is not fair, for I agree to thirty per cent, from Strong, Bulbul & Co."

"Well, let us say twenty per cent., Miss Bluett."

"Be it so, Mr. Ephrinell."

"But that is a good deal for you!" whispered Caterna in my ear.


The marriage for a moment was in check for five per cent.!

But all is arranged. The interests of the two houses have been safeguarded.
The Reverend Nathaniel Morse repeats the question.

A dry "yes" from Horatia Bluett, a short "yes" from Fulk Ephrinell, and the
two are declared to be united in the bonds of matrimony.

The deed is then signed, first by them, then by the witnesses, then by
Faruskiar, and the other signatures follow. At length the clergyman adds his
name and flourish, and that closes the series of formalities according to rule.

"There they are, riveted for life," said the actor to me, with a little lift of his
shoulder.

"For life--like two bullfinches," said the actress, who had not forgotten that
these birds are noted for the fidelity of their armours.

"In China," said Pan-Chao, "it is not the bullfinch but the mandarin duck that
symbolizes fidelity in marriage."

"Ducks or bullfinches, it is all one," said Caterna philosophically.

The ceremony is over. We compliment the newly married pair. We return to
our occupation, Ephrinell to his accounts, Mrs. Ephrinell to her work. Nothing is
changed in the train. There are only two more married people.

Major Noltitz, Pan-Chao and I go out and smoke on one of the platforms,
leaving to their preparations the Caternas, who seem to be having a sort of
rehearsal in their corner. Probably it is the surprise for the evening.

There is not much variety in the landscape. All along is this monotonous
desert of Gobi with the heights of the Humboldt mountains on the right reaching
on to the ranges of Nan Chan. The stations are few and far between, and consist
merely of an agglomeration of huts, with the signal cabin standing up among
them like a monument. Here the tender fills up with water and coal. Beyond the
Kara Nor, where a few towns appear, the approach to China Proper, populous
and laborious, becomes more evident.

This part of the desert of Gobi has little resemblance to the regions of
Eastern Turkestan we crossed on leaving Kachgar. These regions are as new to
Pan-Chao and Doctor Tio-King as to us Europeans.

I should say that Faruskiar no longer disdains to mingle in our conversation.
He is a charming man, well informed and witty, with whom I shall become better
acquainted when we reach Pekin. He has already invited me to visit him at his
yamen, and I will then have an opportunity of putting him to the question--that
is, to the interview. He has traveled a good deal, and seems to have an especially
good opinion of French journalists. He will not refuse to subscribe to the
Twentieth Century. I am sure--Paris, 48 francs, Departments, 56, Foreign, 76.

While the train is running at full speed we talk of one thing and another. With


regard to Kachgaria, which had been mentioned, Faruskiar gave us a few very
interesting details regarding the province, which had been so greatly troubled by
insurrectionary movements. It was at this epoch that the capital, holding out
against Chinese covetousness, had not yet submitted to Russian domination.
Many times numbers of Celestials had been massacred in the revolts of the
Turkestan chiefs, and the garrison had taken refuge in the fortress of Yanghi-
Hissar.

Among these insurgent chiefs there was one, a certain Ouali-Khan-Toulla,
whom I have mentioned with regard to the murder of Schlagintweit, and who for
a time had become master of Kachgaria. He was a man of great intelligence, but
of uncommon ferocity. And Faruskiar told us an anecdote giving us an idea of
these pitiless Orientals.

"There was at Kachgar," he said, "an armorer of repute, who, wishing to
secure the favors of Ouali-Khan-Toulla, made a costly sword. When he had
finished his work he sent his son, a boy of ten, to present the sword, hoping to
receive some recompense from the royal hand. He received it. The Khan
admired the sword, and asked if the blade was of the first quality. "Yes,’ said the
boy. "Then approach!’ said the Khan, and at one blow he smote off the head,
which he sent back to the father with the price of the blade he had thus proved to
be of excellent quality."

This story he told really well. Had Caterna heard it, he would have asked for
a Turkestan opera on the subject.

The day passed without incident. The train kept on at its moderate speed of
forty kilometres an hour, an average that would have been raised to eighty had
they listened to Baron Weissschnitzerdorfer. The truth is that the Chinese driver
had no notion of making up the time lost between Tchertchen and Tcharkalyk.

At seven in the evening we reach Kara Nor, to stay there fifty minutes. This
lake, which is not as extensive as Lob Nor, absorbs the waters of the Soule Ho,
coming down from the Nan Chan mountains. Our eyes are charmed with the
masses of verdure that clothe its southern bank, alive with the flight of numerous
birds. At eight o'clock, when we left the station, the sun had set behind the
sandhills, and a sort of mirage produced by the warming of the lower zones of
the atmosphere prolonged the twilight above the horizon.

The dining car has resumed its restaurant appearance, and here is the
wedding banquet, instead of the usual fare. Twenty guests have been invited to
this railway love feast, and, first of them, my lord Faruskiar. But for some reason
or other he has declined Ephrinell's invitation.

I am sorry for it, for I hoped that good luck would place me near him.

It occurred to me then that this illustrious name was worth sending to the


office of the Twentieth Century, this name and also a few lines relative to the
attack on the train and the details of the defense. Never was information better
worth sending by telegram, however much it might cost. This time there is no
risk of my bringing a lecture down on myself. There is no mistake possible, as in
the case of that pretended mandarin, Yen-Lou, which I shall never forget--but
then, it was in the country of the false Smerdis and that must be my excuse.

It is agreed that as soon as we arrive at Sou-Tcheou, the telegraph being
repaired at the same time as the line, I will send off a despatch, which will reveal
to the admiration of Europe the brilliant name of Faruskiar.

We are seated at the table. Ephrinell has done the thing as well as
circumstances permit. In view of the feast, provisions were taken in at
Tcharkalyk. It is not Russian cookery, but Chinese, and by a Chinese chef to
which we do honor. Luckily we are not condemned to eat it with chopsticks, for
forks are not prohibited at the Grand Transasiatic table.

I am placed to the left of Mrs. Ephrinell, Major Noltitz to the right of her
husband. The other guests are seated as they please. The German baron, who is
not the man to refuse a good dinner, is one of the guests. Sir Francis Trevellyan
did not even make a sign in answer to the invitation that was tendered him.

To begin with, we had chicken soup and plovers' eggs, then swallows’ nests
cut in threads, stewed spawn of crab, sparrow gizzards, roast pig's feet and
sauce, mutton marrow, fried sea slug, shark's fin--very gelatinous; finally
bamboo shoots in syrup, and water lily roots in sugar, all the most out-of-the-
way dishes, watered by Chao Hing wine, served warm in metal tea urns.

The feast is very jolly and--what shall I say?--very confidential, except that
the husband takes no notice of the wife, and reciprocally.

What an indefatigable humorist is our actor? What a continuous stream of
wheezes, unintelligible for the most part, of antediluvian puns, of pure nonsense
at which he laughs so heartily that it is difficult not to laugh with him. He wanted
to learn a few words of Chinese, and Pan-Chao having told him that "tching-
tching" means thanks, he has been tching-tchinging at every opportunity, with
burlesque intonation.

Then we have French songs, Russian songs, Chinese songs--among others
the "Shiang-Touo-Tching," the Chanson de la Reverie, in which our young
Celestial repeats that the flowers of the peach tree are of finest fragrance at the
third moon, and those of the red pomegranate at the fifth.

The dinner lasts till ten o'clock. At this moment the actor and actress, who
had retired during dessert, made their entry, one in a coachman's overcoat, the
other in a nurse's jacket, and they gave us the Sonnettes with an energy, a go, a
dash--well, it would only be fair to them if Claretie, on the recommendation of


Meilhac and Halevy, offers to put them on the pension list of the Comédie
Frangaise.

At midnight the festival is over. We all retire to our sleeping places. We do
not even hear them shouting the names of the stations before we come to Kan-
Tcheou, and it is between four and five o'clock in the morning that a halt of forty
minutes retains us at the station of that town.

The country is changing as the railway runs south of the fortieth degree, so
as to skirt the eastern base of the Nan Shan mountains. The desert gradually
disappears, villages are not so few, the density of the population increases.
Instead of sandy flats, we get verdant plains, and even rice fields, for the
neighboring mountains spread their abundant streams over these high regions of
the Celestial Empire. We do not complain of this change after the dreariness of
the Kara-Koum and the solitude of Gobi. Since we left the Caspian, deserts have
succeeded deserts, except when crossing the Pamir. From here to Pekin
picturesque sites, mountain horizons, and deep valleys will not be wanting along
the Grand Transasiatic.

We shall enter China, the real China, that of folding screens and porcelain, in
the territory of the vast province of Kin-Sou. In three days we shall be at the end
of our journey, and it is not I, a mere special correspondent, vowed to perpetual
movement, who will complain of its length. Good for Kinko, shut up in his box,
and for pretty Zinca Klork, devoured by anxiety in her house in the Avenue Cha-
Coua!

We halt two hours at Sou-Tcheou. The first thing I do is to run to the
telegraph office. The complaisant Pan-Chao offers to be my interpreter. The
clerk tells us that the posts are all up again, and that messages can be sent
through to Europe.

At once I favor the Twentieth Century with the following telegram:

"Sou-Tcheou, 25th May, 2:25 P.M.

"Train attacked between Tchertchen and Tcharkalyk by the gang of the
celebrated Ki-Tsang; travelers repulsed the attack and saved the Chinese
treasure; dead and wounded on both sides; chief killed by the heroic Mongol
grandee Faruskiar, general manager of the company, whose name should be the
object of universal admiration."

If this telegram does not gratify the editor of my newspaper, well--

Two hours to visit Sou-Tcheou, that is not much.

In Turkestan we have seen two towns side by side, an ancient one and a
modern one. Here, in China, as Pan-Chao points out, we have two and even three
or four, as at Pekin, enclosed one within the other.

Here Tai-Tchen is the outer town, and Le-Tchen the inner one. It strikes us at


first glance that both look desolate. Everywhere are traces of fire, here and there
pagodas or houses half destroyed, a mass of ruins, not the work of time, but the
work of war. This shows that Sou-Tcheou, taken by the Mussulmans and retaken
by the Chinese, has undergone the horrors of those barbarous contests which end
in the destruction of buildings and the massacre of their inhabitants of every age
and sex.

It is true that population rapidly increases in the Celestial Empire; more
rapidly than monuments are raised from their ruins. And so Sou-Tcheou has
become populous again within its double wall as in the suburbs around. Trade is
flourishing, and as we walked through the principal streets we noticed the well-
stocked shops, to say nothing of the perambulating pedlars.

Here, for the first time, the Caternas saw pass along between the inhabitants,
who stood at attention more from fear than respect, a mandarin on horseback,
preceded by a servant carrying a fringed parasol, the mark of his master's
dignity.

But there is one curiosity for which Sou-Tcheou is worth a visit. It is there
that the Great Wall of China ends.

After descending to the southeast toward Lan-Tcheou, the wall runs to the
northeast, covering the provinces of Kian-Sou, Chan-si, and Petchili to the north
of Pekin. Here it is little more than an embankment with a tower here and there,
mostly in ruins. I should have failed in my duty as a chronicler if I had not
noticed this gigantic work at its beginning, for it far surpasses the works of our
modern fortifications.

"Is it of any real use, this wall of China?" asked Major Noltitz.

"To the Chinese, I do not know," said I; "but certainly it is to our political
orators for purposes of comparison, when discussing treaties of commerce.
Without it, what would become of the eloquence of our legislators?"


CHAPTER XXIII.

I have not seen Kinko for two days, and the last was only to exchange a few
words with him to relieve his anxiety.

To-night I will try and visit him. I have taken care to lay in a few provisions
at Sou-Tcheou.

We started at three o'clock. We have got a more powerful engine on. Across
this undulating country the gradients are occasionally rather steep. Seven
hundred kilometres separate us from the important city of Lan-Tcheou, where we
ought to arrive to-morrow morning, running thirty miles an hour.

I remarked to Pan-Chao that this average was not a high one.


"What would you have?" he replied, crunching the watermelon seeds. "You
will not change, and nothing will change the temperament of the Celestials. As
they are conservatives in all things, so will they be conservative in this matter of
speed, no matter how the engine may be improved. And, besides, Monsieur
Bombarnac, that there are railways at all in the Middle Kingdom is a wonder to
me."

"I agree with you, but where you have a railway you might as well get all the
advantage out of it that you can."

"Bah!" said Pan-Chao carelessly.

"Speed," said I, "is a gain of time--and to gain time--"

"Time does not exist in China, Monsieur Bombarnac, and it cannot exist for a
population of four hundred millions. There would not be enough for everybody.
And so we do not count by days and hours, but always by moons and watches."

"Which is more poetical than practical," I remark.

"Practical, Mr. Reporter? You Westemers are never without that word in your
mouth. To be practical is to be the slave of time, work, money, business, the
world, everybody else, and one's self included. I confess that during my stay in
Europe--you can ask Doctor Tio-King--I have not been very practical, and now I
return to Asia I shall be less so. I shall let myself live, that is all, as the cloud
floats in the breeze, the straw on the stream, as the thought is borne away by the
imagination."

"T see," said I, "we must take China as it is."

"And as it will probably always be, Monsieur Bombarnac. Ah! if you knew
how easy the life is--an adorable dolce far niente between folding screens in the
quietude of the yamens. The cares of business trouble us little; the cares of
politics trouble us less. Think! Since Fou Hi, the first emperor in 2950, a
contemporary of Noah, we are in the twenty-third dynasty. Now it is Manchoo;
what it is to be next what matters? Either we have a government or we have not;
and which of its sons Heaven has chosen for the happiness of four hundred
million subjects we hardly know, and we hardly care to know."

It is evident that the young Celestial is a thousand and ten times wrong, to
use the numerative formula; but it is not for me to tell him so.

At dinner Mr. and Mrs. Ephrinell, sitting side by side, hardly exchanged a
word. Their intimacy seems to have decreased since they were married. Perhaps
they are absorbed in the calculation of their reciprocal interests, which are not
yet perfectly amalgamated. Ah! they do not count by moons and watches, these
Anglo-Saxons! They are practical, too practical!

We have had a bad night. The sky of purple sulphury tint became stormy
toward evening, the atmosphere became stifling, the electrical tension excessive.


It meant a "highly successful" storm, to quote Caterna, who assured me he had
never seen a better one except perhaps in the second act of Freyschiitz. In truth
the train ran through a zone, so to speak, of vivid lightning and rolling thunder,
which the echoes of the mountains prolonged indefinitely. I think there must
have been several lightning strokes, but the rails acted as conductors, and
preserved the cars from injury. It was a fine spectacle, a little alarming, these
fires in the sky that the heavy rain could not put out--these continuous discharges
from the clouds, in which were mingled the strident whistlings of our locomotive
as we passed through the stations of Yanlu, Youn Tcheng, Houlan-Sien and Da-
Tsching.

By favor of this troubled night I was able to communicate with Kinko, to
take him some provisions and to have a few minutes' conversation with him.

"Is it the day after to-morrow," he asked, "that we arrive at Pekin?"

"Yes, the day after to-morrow, if the train is not delayed."

"Oh, I am not afraid of delays! But when my box is in the railway station at
Pekin, I have still to get to the Avenue Cha-Coua--"

"What does it matter, will not the fair Zinca Klork come and call for it?"

"No. I advised her not to do so."

"And why?"

"Women are so impressionable! She would want to see the van in-which I
had come, she would claim the box with such excitement that suspicions would
be aroused. In short, she would run the risk of betraying me."

"You are right, Kinko."

"Besides, we shall reach the station in the afternoon, very late in the
afternoon perhaps, and the unloading of the packages will not take place until
next morning--"

"Probably."

"Well, Monsieur Bombarnac, if I am not taking too great a liberty, may I ask
a favor of you?"

"What is it?"

"That you will be present at the departure of the case, so as to avoid any
mistake."

"T will be there, Kinko, I will be there. Glass fragile, I will see that they don't
handle it too roughly. And if you like I will accompany the case to Avenue Cha-
Coua--"

"I hardly like to ask you to do that--"

"You are wrong, Kinko. You should not stand on ceremony with a friend, and
I am yours, Kinko. Besides, it will be a pleasure to me to make the acquaintance
of Mademoiselle Zinca Klork. I will be there when they deliver the box, the


precious box. I will help her to get the nails out of it--"

"The nails out of it, Monsieur Bombarnac? My panel? Ah, I will jump
through my panel!"

A terrible clap of thunder interrupted our conversation. I thought the train
had been thrown off the line by the commotion of the air. I left the young
Roumanian and regained my place within the car.

In the morning--26th of May, 7 A.M.--we arrived at Lan-Tcheou. Three
hours to stop, three hours only.

"Come, Major Noltitz, come, Pan-Chao, come, Caterna, we have not a
minute to spare."

But as we are leaving the station we are stopped by the appearance of a tall,
fat, gray, solemn personage. It is the governor of the town in a double robe of
white and yellow silk, fan in hand, buckled belt, and a mantilla--a black mantilla
which would have looked much better on the shoulders of a manola. He is
accompanied by a certain number of globular mandarins, and the Celestials
salute him by holding out their two fists, which they move up and down as they
nod their heads.

"Ah! What is this gentleman going to do? Is it some Chinese formality? A
visit to the passengers and their baggage? And Kinko, what about him?"

Nothing alarming, after all. It is only about the treasure of the Son of
Heaven. The governor and his suite have stopped before the precious van, bolted
and sealed, and are looking at it with that respectful admiration which is
experienced even in China before a box containing many millions.

I ask Popof what is meant by the governor's presence, has it anything to do
with us?

"Not at all," says Popof; "the order has come from Pekin to telegraph the
arrival of the treasure. The governor has done so, and he is awaiting a reply as to
whether he is to send it on to Pekin or keep it provisionally at Lan-Tcheou."

"That will not delay us?"

"T don't think so."

"Then come on," said I to my companions. But if the imperial treasure was a
matter of indifference to us, it did not seem to be so to Faruskiar. But whether
this van started or did not start, whether it was attached to our train or left
behind, what could it matter to him? Nevertheless, he and Ghangir seemed to be
much put about regarding it, although they tried to hide their anxiety, while the
Mongols, talking together in a low tone, gave the governor anything but friendly
glances.

Meanwhile the governor had just heard of the attack on the train and of the
part that our hero had taken in defence of the treasure, with what courage he had


fought, and how he had delivered the country from the terrible Ki-Tsang. And
then in laudatory terms, which Pan-Chao translated to us, he thanked Faruskiar,
complimented him, and gave him to understand that the Son of Heaven would
reward him for his services.

The manager of the Grand Transasiatic listened with that tranquil air that
distinguished him, not without impatience, as, I could clearly see. Perhaps he felt
himself superior to praises as well as recompenses, no matter from how great a
height they might come. In that I recognized all the Mongol pride.

But we need not wait. The treasure van may remain here or go on to Pekin,
but it makes no difference to us! Our business is to visit Lan-Tcheou.

What we did briefly I will more briefly tell.

There is an outer town and an inner one. No ruins this time. A very lively
city, population swarming like ants and very active, familiarized by the railway
with the presence of strangers whom they do not follow about with indiscreet
curiosity as they used to do. Huge quarters occupy the right of the Hoang Ho,
two kilometres wide. This Hoang Ho is the yellow river, the famous yellow
river, which, after a course of four thousand four hundred kilometres, pours its
muddy waters into the Gulf of Petchili.

"Is not its mouth near Tien Tsin, where the baron thinks of catching the mail
for Yokohama?" asks the major.

"That is so," I reply.

"He will miss it," says the actor.

"Unless he trots, our globe-trotter."

"A donkey's trot does not last long," says Caterna, "and he will not catch the
boat."

"He will catch it if the train is no later," said the major. "We shall be at Tien
Tsin on the 23d at six o'clock in the morning, and the steamer leaves at eleven."

"Whether he misses the boat or not, my friends, do not let us miss our walk."

A bridge of boats crosses the river, and the stream is so swift that the footway
rises and falls like the waves of the sea. Madame Caterna, who had ventured on
it, began to turn pale.

"Caroline, Caroline," said her husband, "you will be seasick! Pull yourself
together; pull yourself together!"

She "pulled herself together," and we went up towards a pagoda which rises
over the town.

Like all the monuments of this kind, the pagoda resembles a pile of dessert
dishes placed one on the other, but the dishes are of graceful form, and if they
are in Chinese porcelain it is not astonishing.

We get an outside view of a cannon foundry, a rifle factory, the workmen


being natives. Through a fine garden we reach the governor's house, with a
capricious assemblage of bridges, kiosks, fountains and doors like vases. There
are more pavilions and upturned roofs than there are trees and shady walks. Then
there are paths paved with bricks, among them the remains of the base of the
Great Wall.

It is ten minutes to ten when we return to the station, absolutely tired out; for
the walk has been a rough one, and almost suffocating, for the heat is very great.

My first care is to look after the van with the millions. It is there as usual
behind the train under the Chinese guard.

The message expected by the governor has arrived; the order to forward on
the van to Pekin, where the treasure is to be handed over to the finance minister.

Where is Faruskiar? I do not see him. Has he given us the slip?

No! There he is on one of the platforms, and the Mongols are back in the car.

Ephrinell has been off to do a round of calls--with his samples, no doubt--
and Mrs. Ephrinell has also been out on business, for a deal in hair probably.
Here they come, and without seeming to notice one another they take their seats.

The other passengers are only Celestials. Some are going to Pekin; some
have taken their tickets for intermediate stations like Si-Ngan, Ho Nan. Lou-
Ngan, Tai-Youan. There are a hundred passengers in the train. All my numbers
are on board. There is not one missing. Thirteen, always thirteen!

We were still on the platform, just after the signal of departure had been
given, when Caterna asked his wife what was the most curious thing she had
seen at Lan-Tcheou.

"The most curious thing, Adolphe? Those big cages, hung on to the walls
and trees, which held such curious birds--"

"Very curious, Madame Caterna," said Pan-Chao. "Birds that talk--"

"What--parrots?"”

"No; criminals' heads."

"Horrible!" said the actress, with a most expressive grimace.

"What would you have, Caroline?" said Caterna. "It is the custom of the
country."


CHAPTER XXIV.

On leaving Lan-Tcheou, the railway crosses a well-cultivated country,
watered by numerous streams, and hilly enough to necessitate frequent curves.
There is a good deal of engineering work; mostly bridges, viaducts on wooden
trestles of somewhat doubtful solidity, and the traveler is not particularly
comfortable when he finds them bending under the weight of the train. It is true


we are in the Celestial Empire, and a few thousand victims of a railway accident
is hardly anything among a population of four hundred millions.

"Besides," said Pan-Chao, "the Son of Heaven never travels by railway."

So much the better.

At six o'clock in the evening we are at King-Tcheou, after skirting for some
time the capricious meanderings of the Great Wall. Of this immense artificial
frontier built between Mongolia and China, there remain only the blocks of
granite and red quartzite which served as its base, its terrace of bricks with the
parapets of unequal heights, a few old cannons eaten into with rust and hidden
under a thick veil of lichens, and then the square towers with their ruined
battlements. The interminable wall rises, falls, bends, bends back again, and is
lost to sight on the undulations of the ground.

At six o'clock we halt for half an hour at King-Tcheou, of which I only saw a
few pagodas, and about ten o'clock there is a halt of three-quarters of an hour at
Si-Ngan, of which I did not even see the outline.

All night was spent in running the three hundred kilometres which separate
this town from Ho Nan, where we had an hour to stop.

I fancy the Londoners might easily imagine that this town of Ho Nan was
London, and perhaps Mrs. Ephrinell did so. Not because there was a Strand with
its extraordinary traffic, nor a Thames with its prodigious movement of barges
and steamboats. No! But because we were in a fog so thick that it was
impossible to see either houses or pagodas.

The fog lasted all day, and this hindered the progress of the train. These
Chinese engine-drivers are really very skilful and attentive and intelligent.

We were not fortunate in our last day's journey before reaching Tien Tsin!
What a loss of copy! What paragraphs were melted away in these unfathomable
vapors! I saw nothing of the gorges and ravines, through which runs the Grand
Transasiatic; nothing of the valley of Lou-Ngan, where we stopped at eleven
o'clock; nothing of the two hundred and thirty kilometres which we
accomplished amid the wreaths of a sort of yellow steam, worthy of a yellow
country, until we stopped about ten o'clock at night at Tai-Youan.

Ah! the disagreeable day.

Luckily the fog rose early in the evening. Now it is night--and a very dark
night, too.

I go to the refreshment bar and buy a few cakes and a bottle of wine. My
intention is to pay a last visit to Kinko. We will drink to his health, to his
approaching marriage with the fair Roumanian. He has traveled by fraud, I
know, and if the Grand Transasiatic only knew! But the Grand Transasiatic will
not know.


During the stoppage Faruskiar and Ghangir are walking on the platform and
looking at the train. But it is not the van at the rear that is attracting their
attention, but the van in front, and they seem to be much interested in it.

Are they suspicious of Kinko? No! the hypothesis is unlikely. The driver and
stoker seem to be the object of their very particular attention. They are two brave
Chinamen who have just come on duty, and perhaps Faruskiar is not sorry to see
men in whom he can trust, with this imperial treasure and a hundred passengers
behind them!

The hour for departure strikes, and at midnight the engine begins to move,
emitting two or three loud whistles.

As I have said, the night is very dark, without moon, without stars. Long
clouds are creeping across the lower zones of the atmosphere. It will be easy for
me to enter the van without being noticed. And I have not been too liberal in my
visits to Kinko during these twelve days on the road.

At this moment Popof says to me:

"Are you not going to sleep to-night, Monsieur Bombarnac?"

"IT am in no hurry," I reply; "after this foggy day, spent inside the car, I am
glad of a breath of fresh air. Where does the train stop next?"

"At Fuen-Choo, when it has passed the junction with the Nanking line."

"Good night, Popof."

"Good night, Monsieur Bombarnac."

I am alone.

The idea occurs to me to walk to the rear of the train, and I stop for an instant
on the gangway in front of the treasure van.

The passengers, with the exception of the Chinese guard, are all sleeping
their last sleep--their last, be it understood, on the Grand Transasiatic.

Returning to the front of the train, I approach Popof's box, and find him
sound asleep.

I then open the door of the van, shut it behind me, and signal my presence to
Kinko.

The panel is lowered, the little lamp is lighted. In exchange for the cakes and
wine I receive the brave fellow's thanks, and we drink to the health of Zinca
Klork, whose acquaintance I am to make on the morrow.

It is ten minutes to one. In twelve minutes, so Popof says, we shall pass the
junction with the Nanking branch. This branch is only completed for five or six
kilometres, and leads to the viaduct over the Tjon valley. This viaduct is a great
work--I have the details from Pan-Chao--and the engineers have as yet only got
in the piers, which rise for a hundred feet above the ground.

As I know we are to halt at Fuen-Choo, I shake hands with Kinko, and rise to


take my leave.

At this moment I seem to hear some one on the platform in the rear of the
van.

"Look out, Kinko!" I say in a whisper.

The lamp is instantly extinguished, and we remain quite still.

I am not mistaken. Some one is opening the door of the van.

"Your panel," I whisper.

The panel is raised, the car is shut, and I am alone in the dark.

Evidently it must be Popof who has come in. What will he think to find me
here? The first time I came to visit the young Roumanian I hid among the
packages. Well, I will hide a second time. If I get behind Ephrinell's boxes it is
not likely that Popof will see me, even by the light of his lantern.

I do so; and I watch.

It is not Popof, for he would have brought his lantern.

I try to recognize the people who have just entered. It is difficult. They have
glided between the packages, and after opening the further door, they have gone
out and shut it behind them.

They are some of the passengers, evidently; but why here--at this hour?

I must know. I have a presentiment that something is in the wind

Perhaps by listening?

I approach the front door of the van, and in spite of the rumbling of the train
I hear them distinctly enough--

Thousand and ten thousand devils! I am not mistaken! It is the voice of my
lord Faruskiar. He is talking with Ghangir in Russian. It is indeed Faruskiar. The
four Mongols have accompanied him. But what are they doing there? For what
motive are they on the platform which is just behind the tender? And what are
they saying?

What they are saying is this.

Of these questions and answers exchanged between my lord Faruskiar and
his companions, I do not lose a word.

"When shall we be at the junction?"

"In a few minutes.”

"Are you sure that Kardek is at the points?"

"Yes; that has been arranged."

What had been arranged? And who is this Kardek they are talking about?

The conversation continues.

"We must wait until we get the signal," says Faruskiar.

"Is that a green light?" asks Ghangir.

"Yes--it will show that the switch is over."


I do not know if I am in my right senses. The switch over? What switch?

A half minute elapses. Ought I not to tell Popof? Yes--I ought.

I was turning to go out of the van, when an exclamation kept me back.

"The signal--there is the signal!" says Ghangir.

"And now the train is on the Nanking branch!" replies Faruskiar.

The Nanking branch? But then we are lost. At five kilometres from here is
the Tjon viaduct in course of construction, and the train is being precipitated
towards an abyss.

Evidently Major Noltitz was not mistaken regarding my lord Faruskiar. I
understand the scheme of the scoundrels. The manager of the Grand Transasiatic
is a scoundrel of the deepest dye. He has entered the service of the company to
await his opportunity for some extensive haul. The opportunity has come with
the millions of the Son of Heaven I Yes! The whole abominable scheme is clear
enough to me. Faruskiar has defended the imperial treasure against Ki-Tsang to
keep it from the chief of the bandits who stopped the train, whose attack would
have interfered with his criminal projects! That is why he had fought so bravely.
That is why he had risked his life and behaved like a hero. And thou, poor beast
of a Claudius, how thou hast been sold! Another howler! Think of that, my
friend!

But somehow we ought to prevent this rascal from accomplishing his work.
We ought to save the train which is running full speed towards the unfinished
viaduct, we ought to save the passengers from a frightful catastrophe. As to the
treasure Faruskiar and his accomplices are after, I care no more than for
yesterday's news! But the passengers--and myself--that is another affair
altogether.

I will go back to Popof. Impossible. I seem to be nailed to the floor of the
van. My head swims--

Is it true we are running towards the abyss? No! I am mad. Faruskiar and his
accomplices would be hurled over as well. They would share our fate. They
would perish with us!

But there are shouts in front of the train. The screams of people being killed.
There is no doubt now. The driver and the stoker are being strangled. I feel the
speed of the train begin to slacken.

I understand. One of the ruffians knows how to work the train, and he is
slowing it to enable them to jump off and avoid the catastrophe.

I begin to master my torpor. Staggering like a drunken man, I crawl to
Kinko's case. There, in a few words, I tell him what has passed, and I exclaim:

"We are lost!"

"No--perhaps" he replies.


Before I can move, Kinko is out of his box. He rushes towards the front
door; he climbs on to the tender.

"Come along! Come along!" he shouts.

I do not know how I have done it, but here I am at his side, on the foot-plate,
my feet in the blood of the driver and stoker, who have been thrown off on to the
line.

Faruskiar and his accomplices are no longer here.

But before they went one of them has taken off the brakes, jammed down the
regulator to full speed, thrown fresh coals into the fire-box, and the train is
running with frightful velocity.

In a few minutes we shall reach the Tjon viaduct.

Kinko, energetic and resolute, is as cool as a cucumber. But in vain he tries
to move the regulator, to shut off the steam, to put on the brake. These valves
and levers, what shall we do with them?

"T must tell Popof!" I shout.

"And what can he do? No; there is only one way--"

"And what is that?"

"Rouse up the fire," says Kinko, calmly; "shut down the safety valves, and
blow up the engine."

And was that the only way--a desperate way--of stopping the train before it
reached the viaduct?

Kinko scattered the coal on to the fire bars. He turned on the greatest
possible draught, the air roared across the furnace, the pressure goes up, up,
amid the heaving of the motion, the bellowings of the boiler, the beating of the
pistons. We are going a hundred kilometres an hour.

"Get back!" shouts Kinko above the roar. "Get back into the van."

"And you, Kinko?"

"Get back, I tell you."

I see him hang on to the valves, and put his whole weight on the levers.

"Go!" he shouts.

I am off over the tender. I am through the van. I awake Popof, shouting with
all my strength:

"Get back! Get back!"

A few passengers suddenly waking from sleep begin to run from the front
car.

Suddenly there is an explosion and a shock. The train at first jumps back.
Then it continues to move for about half a kilometre.

It stops.

Popof, the major, Caterna, most of the passengers are out on the line in an


instant.

A network of scaffolding appears confusedly in the darkness, above the piers
which were to carry the viaduct across the Tjon valley.

Two hundred yards further the train would have been lost in the abyss.


CHAPTER XXV.

And I, who wanted "incident," who feared the weariness of a monotonous
voyage of six thousand kilometres, in the course of which I should not meet with
an impression or emotion worth clothing in type!

I have made another muddle of it, I admit! My lord Faruskiar, of whom I had
made a hero--by telegraph--for the readers of the Twentieth. Century. Decidedly
my good intentions ought certainly to qualify me as one of the best paviers of a
road to a certain place you have doubtless heard of.

We are, as I have said, two hundred yards from the valley of the Tjon, so
deep and wide as to require a viaduct from three hundred and fifty to four
hundred feet long. The floor of the valley is scattered over with rocks, and a
hundred feet down. If the train had been hurled to the bottom of that chasm, not
one of us would have escaped alive. This memorable catastrophe--most
interesting from a reporter's point of view--would have claimed a hundred
victims. But thanks to the coolness, energy and devotion of the young
Roumanian, we have escaped this terrible disaster.

All? No! Kinko has paid with his life for the safety of his fellow passengers.

Amid the confusion my first care was to visit the luggage van, which had
remained uninjured. Evidently if Kinko had survived the explosion he would
have got back into his box and waited till I put myself in communication with
him.

Alas! The coffer is empty--empty as that of a company which has suspended
payment. Kinko has been the victim of his sacrifice.

And so there has been a hero among our traveling companions, and he was
not this Faruskiar, this abominable bandit hidden beneath the skin of a manager,
whose name I have so stupidly published over the four corners of the globe! It
was this Roumanian, this humble, this little, this poor fellow, whose sweetheart
will wait for him in vain, and whom she will never again see! Well, I will do him
justice! I will tell what he has done. As to his secret, I shall be sorry if I keep it.
If he defrauded the Grand Transasiatic, it is thanks to that fraud that a whole
train has been saved. We were lost, we should have perished in the most horrible
of deaths if Kinko had not been there!

I went back on to the line, my heart heavy, my eyes full of tears.


Assuredly Faruskiar's scheme--in the execution of which he had executed his
rival Ki-Tsang--had been cleverly contrived in utilizing this branch line leading
to the unfinished viaduct. Nothing was easier than to switch off the train if an
accomplice was at the points. And as soon as the signal was given that we were
on the branch, all he had to do was to gain the foot-plate, kill the driver and
stoker, slow the train and get off, leaving the steam on full to work up to full
speed.

And now there could be no doubt that the scoundrels worthy of the most
refined tortures that Chinese practice could devise were hastening down into the
Tjon valley. There, amid the wreck of the train, they expected to find the fifteen
millions of gold and precious stones, and this treasure they could carry off
without fear of surprise when the night enabled them to consummate this fearful
crime. Well! They have been robbed, these robbers, and I hope that they will pay
for their crime with their lives, at the least. I alone know what has passed, but I
will tell the story, for poor Kinko is no more.

Yes! My mind is made up. I will speak as soon as I have seen Zinca Klork.
The poor girl must be told with consideration. The death of her betrothed must
not come upon her like a thunderclap. Yes! To-morrow, as soon as we are at
Pekin.

After all, if I do not say anything about Kinko, I may at least denounce
Faruskiar and Ghangir and the four Mongols. I can say that I saw them go
through the van, that I followed them, that I found they were talking on the
gangway, that I heard the screams of the driver and stoker as they were strangled
on the foot-plate, and that I then returned to the cars shouting: "Back! Back!" or
whatever it was.

Besides, as will be seen immediately, there was somebody else whose just
suspicions had been changed into certainty, who only awaited his opportunity to
denounce Faruskiar.

We are now Standing at the head of the train, Major Noltitz, the German
baron, Caterna, Ephrinell, Pan-Chao, Popof, about twenty travelers in all. The
Chinese guard, faithful to their trust, are still near the treasure which not one of
them has abandoned. The rear guard has brought along the tail lamps, and by
their powerful light we can see in what a state the engine is.

If the train, which was then running at enormous velocity, had not stopped
suddenly--and thus brought about its destruction--it was because the boiler had
exploded at the top and on the side. The wheels being undamaged, the engine
had run far enough to come gradually to a standstill of itself, and thus the
passengers had been saved a violent shock.

Of the boiler and its accessories only a few shapeless fragments remained.


The funnel had gone, the dome, the steam chest; there was nothing but torn
plates, broken, twisted tubes, split cylinders, and loose connecting rods--gaping
wounds in the corpse of steel.

And not only had the engine been destroyed, but the tender had been
rendered useless. Its tank had been cracked, and its load of coals scattered over
the line. The luggage-van, curious to relate, had miraculously escaped without
injury.

And looking at the terrible effects of the explosion, I could see that the
Roumanian had had no chance of escape, and had probably been blown to
fragments.

Going a hundred yards down the line I could find no trace of him--which was
not to be wondered at.

At first we looked on at the disaster in silence; but eventually conversation
began.

"It is only too evident," said one of the passengers, "that our driver and
stoker have perished in the explosion."

"Poor fellows!" said Popof. "But I wonder how the train could have got on
the Nanking branch without being noticed?"

"The night was very dark," said Ephrinell, "and the driver could not see the
points."

"That is the only explanation possible," said Popof, "for he would have tried
to stop the train, and, on the contrary, we were traveling at tremendous speed."

"But," said Pan-Chao, "how does it happen the Nanking branch was open
when the Tjon viaduct is not finished? Had the switch been interfered with?"

"Undoubtedly," said Popof, "and probably out of carelessness."

"No," said Ephrinell, deliberately. "There has been a crime--a crime intended
to bring about the destruction of the train and passengers--"

"And with what object?" asked Popof.

"The object of stealing the imperial treasure," said Ephrinell. "Do you forget
that those millions would be a temptation to scoundrels? Was it not for the
purpose of robbing the train that we were attacked between Tchertchen and
Tcharkalyk?"

The American could not have been nearer the truth.

"And so," said Popof, "after Ki-Tsang's attempt, you think that other bandits-


W


Up to now Major Noltitz had taken no part in the discussion. Now he
interrupted Popof, and in a voice heard by all he asked:

"Where is Faruskiar?"

They all looked about and tried to discover what had become of the manager


of the Transasiatic.

"And where is his friend Ghangir?" asked the major.

There was no reply.

"And where are the four Mongols who were in the rear van?" asked Major
Noltitz.

And none of them presented themselves.

They called my lord Faruskiar a second time.

Faruskiar made no response.

Popof entered the car where this personage was generally to be found.

It was empty.

Empty? No. Sir Francis Trevellyan was calmly seated in his place, utterly
indifferent to all that happened. Was it any business of his? Not at all. Was he not
entitled to consider that the Russo-Chinese railways were the very apex of
absurdity and disorder? A switch opened, nobody knew by whom! A train on the
wrong line! Could anything be more ridiculous than this Russian
mismanagement?

"Well, then!" said Major Noltitz, "the rascal who sent us on to the Nanking
line, who would have hurled us into the Tjon valley, to walk off with the
imperial treasure, is Faruskiar."

"Faruskiar!" the passengers exclaimed. And most of them refused to believe
it.

"What!" said Popof. "The manager of the company who so courageously
drove off the bandits and killed their chief Ki-Tsang with his own hand?"

Then I entered on the scene.

"The major is not mistaken. It was Faruskiar who laid this fine trap for us."

And amid the general stupefaction I told them what I knew, and what good
fortune had enabled me to ascertain. I told them how I had overheard the plan of
Faruskiar and his Mongols, when it was too late to stop it, but I was silent
regarding the intervention of Kinko. The moment had not come, and I would do
him justice in due time.

To my words there succeeded a chorus of maledictions and menaces.

What! This seigneur Faruskiar, this superb Mongol, this functionary we had
seen at work! No! It was impossible.

But they had to give in to the evidence. I had seen; I had heard; I affirmed
that Faruskiar was the author of this catastrophe in which all our train might
have perished, was the most consummate bandit who had ever disgraced Central
Asia!

"You see, Monsieur Bombarnac," said Major Noltitz, "that I was not
mistaken in my first suspicion."


"It is only too true," I replied, without any false modesty, "that I was taken in
by the grand manners of the abominable rascal."

"Monsieur Claudius," said Caterna, "put that into a romance, and see if
anybody believes it likely."

Caterna was right; but unlikely as it may seem, it was. And, besides, I alone
knew Kinko's secret. It certainly did seem as though it was miraculous for the
locomotive to explode just on the verge of the abyss.

Now that all danger had disappeared we must take immediate measures for
running back the cars on to the Pekin line.

"The best thing to do is for one of us to volunteer--"

"T will do that," said Caterna.

"What is he to do?" I asked.

"Go to the nearest station, that of Fuen Choo, and telegraph to Tai- Youan for
them to send on a relief engine."

"How far is it to Fuen Choo?" asked Ephrinell.

"About six kilometres to Nanking junction, and about five kilometres beyond
that."

"Eleven kilometres," said the major; "that is a matter of an hour and a half
for good walkers. Before three o'clock the engine from Tai-Youan ought to be
here. I am ready to start."

"So am I," said Popof! "I think several of us ought to go. Who knows if we
may not meet Faruskiar and his Mongols on the road?"

"You are right, Popof," said Major Noltitz, "and we should be armed."

This was only prudent, for the bandits who ought to be on their way to the
Tjon viaduct could not be very far off. Of course, as soon as they found that their
attempt had failed, they would hasten to get away. How would they dare--six
strong--to attack a hundred passengers, including the Chinese guard?

Twelve of us, including Pan-Chao, Caterna, and myself, volunteered to
accompany Major Noltitz. But by common accord we advised Popof not to
abandon the train, assuring him that we would do all that was necessary at Fuen
Choo.

Then, armed with daggers and revolvers--it was one o'clock in the morning--
we went along the line to the junction, walking as fast as the very dark night
permitted.

In less than two hours we arrived at Fuen Choo station without adventure.
Evidently Faruskiar had cleared off. The Chinese police would have to deal with
the bandit and his accomplices. Would they catch him? I hoped so, but I doubted.

At the station Pan-Chao explained matters to the stationmaster, who
telegraphed for an engine to be sent from Tai-Youan to the Nanking line.


At three o'clock, just at daybreak, we returned to wait for the engine at the
junction. Three-quarters of an hour afterwards its whistle announced its
approach, and it stopped at the bifurcation of the lines. We climbed up on to the
tender, and half an hour later had rejoined the train.

The dawn had come on sufficiently for us to be able to see over a
considerable distance. Without saying anything to anybody, I went in search of
the body of my poor Kinko. And I could not find it among the wreck.

As the engine could not reach the front of the train, owing to their being only
a single line, and no turning-table, it was decided to couple it on in the rear and
run backwards to the junction. In this way the box, alas! without the Roumanian
in it, was in the last carriage.

We started, and in half an hour we were on the main line again.

Fortunately it was not necessary for us to return to Tai-Youan, and we thus
saved a delay of an hour and a half. At the junction the engine was detached and
run for a few yards towards Pekin, then the vans and cars, one by one, were
pushed on to the main line, and then the engine backed and the train proceeded,
made up as before the accident. By five o'clock we were on our way across
Petchili as if nothing had happened.

I have nothing to say regarding this latter half of the journey, during which
the Chinese driver--to do him justice--in no way endeavored to make up for lost
time. But if a few hours more or less were of no importance to us, it was
otherwise with Baron Weissschnitzerdorfer, who wanted to catch the Yokohama
boat at Tien Tsin.

When we arrived there at noon the steamer had been gone for three-quarters
of an hour; and when the German globe-trotter, the rival of Bly and Bisland,
rushed on to the platform, it was to learn that the said steamer was then going
out of the mouths of the Pei-Ho into the open sea.

Unfortunate traveler! We were not astonished when, as Gaterna said, the
baron "let go both broadsides" of Teutonic maledictions. And really he had cause
to curse in his native tongue.

We remained but a quarter of an hour at Tien Tsin. My readers must pardon
me for not having visited this city of five hundred thousand inhabitants, the
Chinese town with its temples, the European quarter in which the trade is
concentrated, the Pei-Ho quays where hundreds of junks load and unload. It was
all Faruskiar's fault, and were it only for having wrecked my reportorial
endeavors he ought to be hanged by the most fantastic executioner in China.

Nothing happened for the rest of our run. I was very sorry at the thought that
I was not bringing Kinko along with me, and that his box was empty. And he had
asked me to accompany him to Mademoiselle Zinca Klork! How could I tell this


unfortunate girl that her sweetheart would never reach Pekin station?

Everything ends in this world below, even a voyage of six thousand
kilometres on the Grand Transasiatic; and after a run of thirteen days, hour after
hour, our train stopped at the gates of the capital of the Celestial Empire.


CHAPTER XXVI.

"Pekin!" shouted Popof. "All change here."

And Caterna replied with truly Parisian unction:

"IT believe you, my boy!"

And we all changed.

It was four o'clock in the afternoon. For people fatigued with three hundred
and twelve hours of traveling, it was no time for running about the town--what
do I say?--the four towns inclosed one within the other. Besides, I had plenty of
time. I was going to stop some weeks in this capital.

The important thing was to find a hotel in which one could live passably.
From information received I was led to believe that the hotel of Ten Thousand
Dreams, near the railway station, might be sufficiently in accord with Western
notions.

As to Mademoiselle Klork, I will postpone my visit till to-morrow. I will call
on her before the box arrives, and even then I shall be too soon, for I shall take
her the news of Kinko's death.

Major Noltitz will remain in the same hotel as I do. I have not to bid him
farewell, nor have I to part with the Caternas, who are going to stay a fortnight
before starting for Shanghai. As to Pan-Chao and Dr. Tio-King, a carriage is
waiting to take them to the yamen in which the young Chinaman's family live.
But we shall see each other again. Friends do not separate at a simple good-by,
and the grip of the hand I gave him as he left the car will not be the last.

Mr. and Mrs. Ephrinell lose no time in leaving the station on business, which
obliges them to find a hotel in the commercial quarter of the Chinese town. But
they do not leave without receiving my compliments. Major Noltitz and I go up
to this amiable couple, and the conventional politenesses are reciprocally
exchanged.

"At last," said I to Ephrinell, "the forty-two packages of Strong, Bulbul &
Co. have come into port. But it is a wonder the explosion of our engine did not
smash your artificial teeth."

"Just so," said the American, "my teeth had a narrow escape. What
adventures they have had since we left Tiflis? Decidedly this journey has been
less monotonous than I expected."


"And," added the major, "you were married on the way--unless I am
mistaken!"

"Wait a bit!" replied the Yankee in a peculiar tone. "Excuse me; we are in a
hurry."

"We will not keep you, Mr. Ephrinell," I replied, "and to Mrs. Ephrinell and
yourself allow us to say au revoir!"

"Au revoir!" replied the Americanized lady, rather more dryly at her arrival
than at her departure.

Then, turning, she said:

"I have no time to wait, Mr. Ephrinell."

"Nor have I, Mrs. Ephrinell," replied the Yankee.

Mr.! Mrs.! And not so long ago they were calling each other Fulk and
Horatia.

And then, without taking each other's arm, they walked out of the station. I
believe he turned to the right and she to the left; but that is their affair.

There remains my No. 8, Sir Francis Trevellyan, the silent personage, who
has not said a word all through the piece--I mean all through the journey. I
wanted to hear his voice, if it was only for one second.

Eh! If I am not mistaken, here is the opportunity at last.

There is the phlegmatic gentleman contemptuously looking up and down the
cars. He has just taken a cigar from his yellow morocco case, but when he looks
at his match-box he finds it empty.

My cigar--a particularly good one--is alight, and I am smoking it with the
blessed satisfaction of one who enjoys it, and regretting that there is not a man in
all China who has its equal.

Sir Francis Trevellyan has seen the light burning at the end of my cigar, and
he comes towards me.

I think he is going to ask me for a light. He stretches out his hand, and I
present him with my cigar.

He takes it between his thumb and forefinger, knocks off the white ash, lights
up, and then, if I had not heard him ask for a light, I at least expected him to say,
"Thank you, sir!"

Not at all! Sir Francis Trevellyan takes a few puffs at his own cigar, and then
nonchalantly throws mine on to the platform. And then without even a bow, he
walks leisurely off out of the railway station.

Did you say nothing? No, I remained astounded. He gave me neither a word
nor a gesture. I was completely dumfounded at this ultra-Britannic rudeness,
while Major Noltitz could not restrain a loud outburst of laughter.

Ah! If I should see this gentleman again. But never did I see again Sir


Francis Trevellyan of Trevellyan Hall, Trevellyanshire.

Half an hour afterwards we are installed at the Hotel of Ten Thousand
Dreams. There we are served with a dinner in Chinese style. The repast being
over--towards the second watch--we lay ourselves on beds that are too narrow in
rooms with little comfort, and sleep not the sleep of the just, but the sleep of the
exhausted--and that is just as good.

I did not wake before ten o'clock, and I might have slept all the morning if
the thought had not occurred to me that I had a duty to fulfil. And what a duty!
To call in the Avenue Cha Coua before the delivery of the unhappy case to
Mademoiselle Zinca Klork.

I arise. Ah! If Kinko had not succumbed, I should have returned to the
railway station--I should have assisted, as I had promised, in the unloading of the
precious package. I would have watched it on to the cart, and I would have
accompanied it to the Avenue Cha Coua, I would even have helped in carrying
him up to Mademoiselle Zinca Klork! And what a double explosion of joy there
would have been when Kinko jumped through the panel to fall into the arms of
the fair Roumanian!

But no! When the box arrives it will be empty--empty as a heart from which
all the blood has escaped.

I leave the Hotel of Ten Thousand Dreams about eleven o'clock, I call one of
those Chinese carriages, which look like palanquins on wheels, I give the
address of Mademoiselle Klork, and I am on the way.

You know, that among the eighteen provinces of China Petchili occupies the
most northerly position. Formed of nine departments, it has for its capital Pekin,
otherwise known as Chim-Kin-Fo, an appellation which means a "town of the
first order, obedient to Heaven."

I do not know if this town is really obedient to Heaven, but it is obedient to
the laws of rectilineal geometry. There are four towns, square or rectangular, one
within the other. The Chinese town, which contains the Tartar town, which
contains the yellow town, or Houng Tching, which contains the Red Town, or
Tsen-Kai-Tching, that is to say, "the forbidden town." And within this
symmetrical circuit of six leagues there are more than two millions of those
inhabitants, Tartars or Chinese, who are called the Germans of the East, without
mentioning several thousands of Mongols and Tibetans. That there is much
bustle in the streets, I can see by the obstacles my vehicle encounters at every
step, itinerating peddlers, carts heavily laden, mandarins and their noisy
following. I say nothing of those abominable wandering dogs, half jackals, half
wolves, hairless and mangy, with deceitful eyes, threatening jaws, and having no
other food than the filthy rubbish which foreigners detest. Fortunately I am not


on foot, and I have no business in the Red Town, admittance to which is denied,
nor in the yellow town nor even in the Tartar town.

The Chinese town forms, a rectangular parallelogram, divided north and
south by the Grand Avenue leading from the Houn Ting gate to the Tien gate,
and crossed east and west by the Avenue Cha-Coua, which runs from the gate of
that name to the Cpuan-Tsa gate. With this indication nothing could be easier
than to find the dwelling of Mademoiselle Zinca Klork, but nothing more
difficult to reach, considering the block in the roads in this outer ring.

A little before twelve I arrived at my destination. My vehicle had stopped
before a house of modest appearance, occupied by artisans as lodgings, and as
the signboard said more particularly by strangers.

It was on the first floor, the window of which opened on to the avenue, that
the young Roumanian lived, and where, having learned her trade as a milliner in
Paris, she was engaged in it at Pekin.

I go up to the first floor. I read the name of Madame Zinca Klork on a door. I
knock. The door is opened.

I am in the presence of a young lady who is perfectly charming, as Kinko
said. She is a blonde of from twenty-two to twenty-three years old, with the
black eyes of the Roumanian type, an agreeable figure, a pleasant, smiling face.
In fact, has she not been informed that the Grand Transasiatic train has been in
the station ever since last evening, in spite of the circumstances of the journey,
and is she not awaiting her betrothed from one moment to another?

And I, with a word, am about to extinguish this joy. I am to wither that smile.

Mademoiselle Klork is evidently much surprised at seeing a stranger in her
doorway. As she has lived several years in France, she does not hesitate to
recognize me as a Frenchman, and asks to what she is indebted for my visit.

I must take care of my words, for I may kill her, poor child.

"Mademoiselle Zinca--" I say.

"You know my name?" she exclaims.

"Yes, mademoiselle. I arrived yesterday by the Grand Transasiatic."

The girl turned pale; her eyes became troubled. It was evident that she feared
something. Had Kinko been found in his box? Had the fraud been discovered?
Was he arrested? Was he in prison?

I hastened to add:

"Mademoiselle Zinca--certain circumstances have brought to my knowledge-
-the journey of a young Roumanian--"

"Kinko--my poor Kinko--they have found him?" she asks in a trembling
voice.

"No--no--" say I, hesitating. "No one knows--except myself. I often visited


him in the luggage-van at night; we were companions, friends. I took him a few
provisions--"

"Oh! thank you, sir!" says the lady, taking me by the hands. "With a
Frenchman Kinko was sure of not being betrayed, and even of receiving help!
Thank you, thank you!"

I am more than ever afraid of the mission on which I have come.

"And no one suspected the presence of my dear Kinko?" she asks.

"No one."

"What would you have had us do, sir? We are not rich. Kinko was without
money over there at Tiflis, and I had not enough to send him his fare. But he is
here at last. He will get work, for he is a good workman, and as soon as we can
we will pay the company--"

"Yes; I know, I know."

"And then we are going to get married, monsieur. He loves me so much, and
I love him. We met one another in Paris. He was so kind to me. Then when he
went back to Tiflis I asked him to come to me in that box. Is the poor fellow ill?"

"No, Mademoiselle Zinca, no."

"Ah! I shall be happy to pay the carriage of my dear Kinko."

"Yes--pay the carriage--"

"Tt will not be long now?"

"No; this afternoon probably."

I do not know what to say.

"Monsieur," says mademoiselle, "we are going to get married as soon as the
formalities are complied with; and if it is not abusing your confidence, will you
do us the honor and pleasure of being present?"

"At your matriage--certainly. I promised my friend Kinko I would."

Poor girl! I cannot leave her like this. I must tell her everything.

"Mademoiselle Zinca--Kinko--"

"He asked you to come and tell me he had arrived?"

"Yes--but--you understand--he is very tired after so long a journey--"

"Tired?"

"Oh! do not be alarmed--"

"Is he ill?"

"Yes--rather--rather ill--"

"Then I will go--I must see him--I pray you, sir, come with me to the station-


"No; that would be an imprudence--remain here--remain--"
Zinca Klork looked at me fixedly.
"The truth, monsieur, the truth! Hide nothing from me--Kinko--"


"Yes--I have sad news--to give you." She is fainting. Her lips tremble. She
can hardly speak.

"He has been discovered!" she says. "His fraud is known--they have arrested
him--"

"Would to heaven it was no worse. We have had accidents on the road. The
train was nearly annihilated--a frightful catastrophe--"

"He is dead! Kinko is dead!"

The unhappy Zinca falls on to a chair--and to employ the imaginative
phraseology of the Chinese--her tears roll down like rain on an autumn night.
Never have I seen anything so lamentable. But it will not do to leave her in this
state, poor girl! She is becoming unconscious. I do not know where I am. I take
her hands. I repeat:

"Mademoiselle Zinca! Mademoiselle Zinca!"

Suddenly there is a great noise in front of the house. Shouts are heard. There
is a tremendous to do, and amid the tumult I hear a voice.

Good Heavens! I cannot be mistaken. That is Kinko's voice!

I recognize it. Am I in my right senses?

Zinca jumps up, springs to the window, opens it, and we look out.

There is a cart at the door. There is the case, with all its inscriptions: This
side up, this side down, fragile, glass, beware of damp, etc., etc. It is there--half
smashed. There has been a collision. The cart has been run into by a carriage, as
the case was being got down. The case has slipped on to the ground. It has been
knocked in. And Kinko has jumped out like a jack-in-the-box--but alive, very
much alive!

I can hardly believe my eyes! What, my young Roumanian did not perish in
the explosion? No! As I shall soon hear from his own mouth, he was thrown on
to the line when the boiler went up, remained there inert for a time, found
himself uninjured--miraculously--kept away till he could slip into the van
unperceived. I had just left the van after looking for him in vain, and supposing
that he had been the first victim of the catastrophe.

Then--oh! the irony of fate!--after accomplishing a journey of six thousand
kilometres on the Grand Transasiatic, shut up in a box among the baggage, after
escaping so many dangers, attack by bandits, explosion of engine, he was here,
by the mere colliding of a cart and a carriage in a Pekin Street, deprived of all
the good of his journey--fraudulent it may be--but really if--I know of no epithet
worthy of this climax.

The carter gave a yell at the sight of a human being who had just appeared.
In an instant the crowd had gathered, the fraud was discovered, the police had
run up. And what could this young Roumanian do who did not know a word of


Chinese, but explain matters in the sign language? And if he could not be
understood, what explanation could he give?

Zinca and I ran down to him.

"My Zinca--my dear Zinca!" he exclaims, pressing the girl to his heart.

"My Kinko--my dear Kinko!" she replies, while her tears mingle with his.

"Monsieur Bombarnac!" says the poor fellow, appealing for my intervention.

"Kinko," I reply, "take it coolly, and depend on me. You are alive, and we
thought you were dead."

"But I am not much better off!" he murmurs.

Mistake! Anything is better than being dead--even when one is menaced by
prison, be it a Chinese prison. And that is what happens, in spite of the girl's
supplications and my entreaties. And Kinko is dragged off by the police, amid
the laughter and howls of the crowd.

But I will not abandon him! No, if I move heaven and earth, I will not
abandon him.


CHAPTER XXVII.

If ever the expression, "sinking in sight of port," could be used in its precise
meaning, it evidently can in this case. And I must beg you to excuse me. But
although a ship may sink by the side of the jetty, we must not conclude that she
is lost. That Kinko's liberty is in danger, providing the intervention of myself and
fellow passengers is of no avail, agreed. But he is alive, and that is the essential
point.

But we must not waste an hour, for if the police is not perfect in China, it is
at least prompt and expeditious. Soon caught, soon hanged--and it will not do for
them to hang Kinko, even metaphorically.

I offer my arm to Mademoiselle Zinca, and I lead her to my carriage, and we
return rapidly towards the Hotel of the Ten Thousand Dreams.

There I find Major Noltitz and the Caternas, and by a lucky chance young
Pan-Chao, without Dr. Tio-King. Pan-Chao would like nothing better than to be
our interpreter before the Chinese authorities.

And then, before the weeping Zinca, I told my companions all about Kinko,
how he had traveled, how I had made his acquaintance on the journey. I told
them that if he had defrauded the Transasiatic Company it was thanks to this
fraud that he was able to get on to the train at Uzun Ada. And if he had not been
in the train we should all have been engulfed in the abyss of the Tjon valley.

And I enlarged on the facts which I alone knew. I had surprised Faruskiar at
the very moment he was about to accomplish his crime, but it was Kinko who, at


the peril of his life, with coolness and courage superhuman, had thrown on the
coals, hung on to the lever of the safety valves, and stopped the train by blowing
up the engine.

What an explosion there was of exclamatory ohs and ahs when I had finished
my recital, and in a burst of gratitude, somewhat of the theatrical sort, our actor
shouted:

"Hurrah for Kinko! He ought to have a medal!"

Until the Son of Heaven accorded this hero a green dragon of some sort,
Madame Caterna took Zinca's hand, drew her to her heart and embraced her--
embraced her without being able to restrain her tears. Just think of a love story
interrupted at the last chapter!

But we must hasten, and as Caterna says, "all on the scene for the fifth"--the
fifth act, in which dramas generally clear themselves up.

"We must not let this brave fellow suffer!" said Major Noltitz; "we must see
the Grand Transasiatic people, and when they learn the facts they will be the first
to stop the prosecution."

"Doubtless," I said, "for it cannot be denied that Kinko saved the train and its
passengers."

"To say nothing of the imperial treasure," added Caterna, "the millions of his
majesty!"

"Nothing could be truer," said Pan-Chao. "Unfortunately Kinko has fallen
into the hands of the police, and they have taken him to prison, and it is not easy
to get out of a Chinese prison."

"Let us be off," I replied, "and see the company."

"See here," said Madame Caterna, "is there any need of a subscription to
defray the cost of the affair?"

"The proposal does you honor, Caroline," said the actor, putting his hand in
his pocket.

"Gentlemen," said pretty Zinca Klork, her eyes bathed in tears, "do save him
before he is sentenced--"

"Yes, my darling,” said Madame Caterna, "yes, my heart, we will save your
sweetheart for you, and if a benefit performance--"

"Bravo, Caroline, bravo!" exclaimed Caterna, applauding with the vigor of
the sub-chief of the claque.

We left the young Roumanian to the caresses, as exaggerated as they were
sincere, of the worthy actress. Madame Caterna would not leave her, declaring
that she looked upon her as her daughter, that she would protect her like a
mother. Then Pan-Chao, Major Noltitz, Caterna, and I went off to the company's
offices at the station.


The manager was in his office, and we were admitted.

He was a Chinese in every acceptation of the word, and capable of every
administrative Chinesery--a functionary who functioned in a way that would
have moved his colleagues in old Europe to envy.

Pan-Chao told the story, and, as he understood Russian, the major and I took
part in the discussion.

Yes! There was a discussion. This unmistakable Chinaman did not hesitate to
contend that Kinko's case was a most serious one. A fraud undertaken on such
conditions, a fraud extending over six thousand kilometres, a fraud of a thousand
francs on the Grand Transasiatic Company and its agents.

We replied to this Chinesing Chinee that it was all very true, but that the
damage had been inconsiderable, that if the defrauder had not been in the train
he could not have saved it at the risk of his life, and at the same time he could
not have saved the lives of the passengers.

Well, would you believe it? This living China figure gave us to understand
that from a certain point of view it would have been better to regret the deaths of
a hundred victims--

Yes! We knew that! Perish the colonies and all the passengers rather than a
principle!

In short, we got nothing. Justice must take its course against the fraudulent
Kinko.

We retired while Caterna poured out all the locutions in his marine and
theatrical vocabulary.

What was to be done?

"Gentlemen," said Pan-Chao, "I know how things are managed in Pekin and
the Celestial Empire. Two hours will not elapse from the time Kinko is arrested
to the time he is brought before the judge charged with this sort of crime. He will
not only be sent to prison, but the bastinado--"

"The bastinado--like that idiot Zizel in Si j'etais Roi?" asked the actor.

"Precisely," replied Pan-Chao.

"We must stop that abomination," said Major Noltitz.

"We can try at the least," said Pan-Chao. "I propose we go before the court
when I will try and defend the sweetheart of this charming Roumanian, and may
I lose my face if I do not get him off."

That was the best, the only thing to do. We left the station, invaded a vehicle,
and arrived in twenty minutes before a shabby-looking shanty, where the court
was held.

There was a crowd. The affair had got abroad. It was known that a swindler
had come in a box in a Grand Transasiatic van free, gratis, and for nothing from


Tiflis to Pekin. Every one wished to see him; every one wanted to recognize the
features of this genius--it was not yet known that he was a hero.

There he is, our brave companion, between two rascally looking policemen,
yellow as quinces. These fellows are ready to walk him off to prison at the
judge's order, and to give him a few dozen strokes on the soles of his feet if he is
condemned to that punishment.

Kinko is thoroughly disheartened, which astonishes me on the part of one I
know to be so energetic. But as soon as he sees us his face betrays a ray of hope.

At this moment the carter, brought forward by the police, relates the affair to
a good sort of fellow in spectacles, who shakes his head in anything but a
hopeful way for the prisoner, who, even if he were as innocent as a new-born
child, could not defend himself, inasmuch as he did not know Chinese.

Then it is that Pan-Chao presents himself. The judge recognized him and
smiled. In fact, our companion was the son of a rich merchant in Pekin, a tea
merchant in the Toung-Tien and Soung-Fong-Cao trade. And these nods of the
judge's head became more sympathetically significant.

Our young advocate was really pathetic and amusing. He interested the
judge, he excited the audience with the story of the journey, he told them all
about it, and finally he offered to pay the company what was due to them.

Unfortunately the judge could not consent. There had been material
damages, moral damages, etc., etc.

Thereupon Pan-Chao became animated, and although we understood nothing
he said, we guessed that he was speaking of the courage of Kinko, of the
sacrifice he had made for the safety of the travelers, and finally, as a supreme
argument, he pleaded that his client had saved the imperial treasure.

Useless eloquence? Arguments were of no avail with this pitiless magistrate,
who had not acquitted ten prisoners in is life. He spared the delinquent the
bastinado; but he gave him six months in prison, and condemned him in
damages against the Grand Transasiatic Company. And then at a sign from this
condemning machine poor Kinko was taken away.

Let not my readers pity Kinko's fate. I may as well say at once that
everything was arranged satisfactorily.

Next morning Kinko made a triumphal entry into the house in the Avenue
Cha-Coua, where we were assembled, while Madame Caterna was showering
her maternal consolations on the unhappy Zinca Klork.

The newspapers had got wind of the affair. The Chi Bao of Pekin and the
Chinese Times of Tien-Tsin had demanded mercy for the young Roumanian.
These cries for mercy had reached the feet of the Son of Heaven--the very spot
where the imperial ears are placed. Besides, Pan-Chao had sent to his majesty a


petition relating the incidents of the journey, and insisting on the point that had it
not been for Kinko's devotion, the gold and precious stones would be in the
hands of Faruskiar and his bandits. And, by Buddha! that was worth something
else than six months in prison.

Yes! It was worth 15,000 taels, that is to say, more than 100,000 francs, and
in a fit of generosity the Son of Heaven remitted these to Kinko with the remittal
of his sentence.

I decline to depict the joy, the happiness, the intoxication which this news
brought by Kinko in person, gave to all his friends, and particularly to the fair
Zinca Klork. These things are expressible in no language--not even in Chinese,
which lends itself so generously to the metaphorical.

And now my readers must permit me to finish with my traveling companions
whose numbers have figured in my notebook.

Nos. 1 and 2, Fulk Ephrinell and Miss Horatia Bluett: not being able to agree
regarding the various items stipulated in their matrimonial contract, they were
divorced three days after their arrival in Pekin. Things were as though the
marriage had never been celebrated on the Grand Transasiatic, and Miss Horatia
Bluett remained Miss Horatia Bluett. May she gather cargoes of heads of hair
from Chinese polls; and may he furnish with artificial teeth every jaw in the
Celestial Empire!

No. 3, Major Noltitz: he is busy at the hospital he has come to establish at
Pekin on behalf of the Russian government, and when the hour for separation
strikes, I feel that I shall leave a true friend behind me in these distant lands.

Nos. 4 and 5, the Caternas: after a stay of three weeks in the capital of the
Celestial Empire, the charming actor and actress set out for Shanghai, where
they are now the great attraction at the French Residency.

No. 6, Baron Weissschnitzerd6rfer, whose incommensurable name I write for
the last time: well, not only did the globe-trotter miss the steamer at Tien-Tsin,
but a month later he missed it at Yokohama; six weeks after that he was
shipwrecked on the coast of British Columbia, and then, after being thrown off
the line between San Francisco and New York, he managed to complete his
round of the world in a hundred and eighty-seven days instead of thirty-nine.

Nos. 9 and 10, Pan-Chao and Dr. Tio-King: what can I say except that Pan-
Chao is always the Parisian you know, and that if he comes to France we shall
meet at dinner at Durand's or Marguery's. As to the doctor, he has got down to
eating only the yolk of an egg a day, like his master, Cornaro, and he hopes to
live to a hundred and two as did the noble Venetian.

No. 8, Sir Francis Trevellyan, and No. 12, Seigneur Faruskiar: I have never
heard of the one who owes me an apology and a cigar, nor have I heard that the


other has been hanged. Doubtless, the illustrious bandit, having sent in his
resignation of the general managership of the Grand Transasiatic, continues his
lucrative career in the depths of the Mongol provinces.

Now for Kinko, my No. 11: I need hardly say that my No. 11 was married to
Zinca Klork with great ceremony. We were all at the wedding, and if the Son of
Heaven had richly endowed the young Roumanian, his wife received a
magnificent present in the name of the passengers of the train he had saved.

That is the faithful story of this journey. I have done my best to do my duty
as special correspondent all down the line, and perhaps my editors may be
satisfied, notwithstanding the slip or two you have heard about.

As to me, after spending three weeks in Pekin, I returned to France by sea.

And now I have to make a confession, which is very painful to my self-
esteem. The morning after I arrived in the Chinese capital I received a telegram
thus worded, in reply to the one I had sent from Lan-Tcheou:

Claudius Bombarnac, Pekin, China.

Twentieth Century requests its correspondent, Claudius Bombarnac, to
present its compliments and respects to the heroic Seigneur Faruskiar.

But I always say that this telegram never reached him, so that he has been
spared the unpleasantness of having to reply to it.

THE END.


The Blockade Runners


by Jules Verne


Chapter I


THE DOLPHIN


The Clyde was the first river whose waters were lashed into foam by a
steamboat. It was in 1812 when the steamer called the Comet ran between
Glasgow and Greenock, at the speed of six miles an hour. Since that time more
than a million of steamers or packet-boats have plied this Scotch river, and the
inhabitants of Glasgow must be as familiar as any people with the wonders of
steam navigation.

However, on the 3rd of December, 1862, an immense crowd, composed of
shipowners, merchants, manufacturers, workmen, sailors, women, and children,
thronged the muddy streets of Glasgow, all going in the direction of Kelvin
Dock, the large shipbuilding premises belonging to Messrs. Tod & MacGregor.
This last name especially proves that the descendants of the famous Highlanders
have become manufacturers, and that they have made workmen of all the vassals
of the old clan chieftains.

Kelvin Dock is situated a few minutes’ walk from the town, on the right bank
of the Clyde. Soon the immense timber-yards were thronged with spectators; not
a part of the quay, not a wall of the wharf, not a factory roof showed an
unoccupied place; the river itself was covered with craft of all descriptions, and
the heights of Govan, on the left bank, swarmed with spectators.

There was, however, nothing extraordinary in the event about to take place; it
was nothing but the launching of a ship, and this was an everyday affair with the
people of Glasgow. Had the Dolphin, then — for that was the name of the ship
built by Messrs. Tod & MacGregor — some special peculiarity? To tell the truth,
it had none.

It was a large ship, about 1,500 tons, in which everything combined to obtain
superior speed. Her engines, of 500 horse-power, were from the workshops of
Lancefield Forge; they worked two screws, one on either side the stern-post,
completely independent of each other. As for the depth of water the Dolphin
would draw, it must be very inconsiderable; connoisseurs were not deceived, and
they concluded rightly that this ship was destined for shallow straits. But all
these particulars could not in any way justify the eagerness of the people: taken
altogether, the Dolphin was nothing more or less than an ordinary ship. Would
her launching present some mechanical difficulty to be overcome? Not any more
than usual. The Clyde had received many a ship of heavier tonnage, and the


launching of the Dolphin would take place in the usual manner.

In fact, when the water was calm, the moment the ebb-tide set in, the
workmen began to operate. Their mallets kept perfect time falling on the wedges
meant to raise the ship’s keel: soon a shudder ran through the whole of her
massive structure; although she had only been slightly raised, one could see that
she shook, and then gradually began to glide down the well greased wedges, and
in a few moments she plunged into the Clyde. Her stern struck the muddy bed of
the river, then she raised herself on the top of a gigantic wave, and, carried
forward by her start, would have been dashed against the quay of the Govan
timber-yards, if her anchors had not restrained her.

The launch had been perfectly successful, the Dolphin swayed quietly on the
waters of the Clyde, all the spectators clapped their hands when she took
possession of her natural element, and loud hurrahs arose from either bank.

But wherefore these cries and this applause? Undoubtedly the most eager of
the spectators would have been at a loss to explain the reason of his enthusiasm.
What was the cause, then, of the lively interest excited by this ship? Simply the
mystery which shrouded her destination; it was not known to what kind of
commerce she was to be appropriated, and in questioning different groups the
diversity of opinion on this important subject was indeed astonishing.

However, the best informed, at least those who pretended to be so, agreed in
saying that the steamer was going to take part in the terrible war which was then
ravaging the United States of America, but more than this they did not know, and
whether the Dolphin was a privateer, a transport ship, or an addition to the
Federal marine was what no one could tell.

"Hurrah!" cried one, affirming that the Dolphin had been built for the
Southern States.

"Hip! hip! hip!" cried another, swearing that never had a faster boat crossed
to the American coasts.

Thus its destination was unknown, and in order to obtain any reliable
information one must be an intimate friend, or, at any rate, an acquaintance of
Vincent Playfair & Co., of Glasgow.

A rich, powerful, intelligent house of business was that of Vincent Playfair &
Co., in a social sense, an old and honourable family, descended from those
tobacco lords who built the finest quarters of the town. These clever merchants,
by an act of the Union, had founded the first Glasgow warehouse for dealing in
tobacco from Virginia and Maryland. Immense fortunes were realised; mills and
foundries sprang up in all parts, and in a few years the prosperity of the city
attained its height.

The house of Playfair remained faithful to the enterprising spirit of its


ancestors, it entered into the most daring schemes, and maintained the honour of
English commerce. The principal, Vincent Playfair, a man of fifty, with a
temperament essentially practical and decided, although somewhat daring, was a
genuine shipowner. Nothing affected him beyond commercial questions, not
even the political side of the transactions, otherwise he was a perfectly loyal and
honest man.

However, he could not lay claim to the idea of building and fitting up the
Dolphin; she belonged to his nephew, James Playfair, a fine young man of thirty,
the boldest skipper of the British merchant marine.

It was one day at the Tontine coffee-room under the arcades of the town hall,
that James Playfair, after having impatiently scanned the American journal,
disclosed to his uncle an adventurous scheme.

"Uncle Vincent," said he, coming to the point at once, "there are two millions
of pounds to be gained in less than a month."

"And what to risk?" asked Uncle Vincent.

"A ship and a cargo.”

"Nothing else?"

"Nothing, except the crew and the captain, and that does not reckon for
much."

"Let us see," said Uncle Vincent.

"It is all seen," replied James Playfair. "You have read the Tribune, the New
York Herald, The Times, the Richmond Inquirer, the American Review?"

"Scores of times, nephew."

"You believe, like me, that the war of the United States will last a long time
still?"

"A very long time."

"You know how much this struggle will affect the interests of England, and
especially those of Glasgow?"

"And more especially still the house of Playfair & Co.,'
Vincent.

"Theirs especially," added the young Captain.

"I worry myself about it every day, James, and I cannot think without terror
of the commercial disasters which this war may produce; not but that the house
of Playfair is firmly established, nephew; at the same time it has correspondents
which may fail. Ah! those Americans, slave-holders or Abolitionists, I have no
faith in them!"

If Vincent Playfair was wrong in thus speaking with respect to the great
principles of humanity, always and everywhere superior to personal interests, he
was, nevertheless, right from a commercial point of view. The most important


'


replied Uncle


material was failing at Glasgow, the cotton famine became every day more
threatening, thousands of workmen were reduced to living upon public charity.
Glasgow possessed 25,000 looms, by which 625,000 yards of cotton were spun
daily; that is to say, fifty millions of pounds yearly. From these numbers it may
be guessed what disturbances were caused in the commercial part of the town
when the raw material failed altogether. Failures were hourly taking place, the
manufactories were closed, and the workmen were dying of starvation.

It was the sight of this great misery which had put the idea of his bold
enterprise into James Playfair’s head.

"I will go for cotton, and will get it, cost what it may."

But, as he also was a merchant as well as his uncle Vincent, he resolved to
carry out his plan by way of exchange, and to make his proposition under the
guise of a commercial enterprise.

"Uncle Vincent," said he, "this is my idea."

"Well, James?"

"It is simply this: we will have a ship built of superior sailing qualities and
great bulk."

"That is quite possible."

"We will load her with ammunition of war, provisions, and clothes."

"Just so."

"I will take the command of this steamer, I will defy all the ships of the
Federal marine for speed, and I will run the blockade of one of the southern
ports."

"You must make a good bargain for your cargo with the Confederates, who
will be in need of it," said his uncle.

"And I shall return laden with cotton."

"Which they will give you for nothing.”

"As you say, Uncle. Will it answer?"

"Tt will; but shall you be able to get there?"

"T shall, if I have a good ship."

"One can be made on purpose. But the crew?"

"Oh, I will find them. I do not want many men; enough to work with, that is
all. It is not a question of fighting with the Federals, but distancing them."

"They shall be distanced," said Uncle Vincent, in a peremptory tone; "but
now, tell me, James, to what port of the American coast do you think of going?"

"Up to now, Uncle, ships have run the blockade of New Orleans,
Wilmington, and Savannah, but I think of going straight to Charleston; no
English boat has yet been able to penetrate into the harbour, except the Bermuda.
I will do like her, and, if my ship draws but very little water, I shall be able to go


where the Federalists will not be able to follow."

"The fact is," said Uncle Vincent, "Charleston is overwhelmed with cotton;
they are even burning it to get rid of it."

"Yes," replied James; "besides, the town is almost invested; Beauregard is
running short of provisions, and he will pay me a golden price for my cargo!"

"Well, nephew, and when will you start?"

"In six months; I must have the long winter nights to aid me."

"Tt shall be as you wish, nephew."

"Tt is settled, then, Uncle?"

"Settled!"

"Shall it be kept quiet?"

"Yes; better so."

And this is how it was that five months later the steamer Dolphin was
launched from the Kelvin Dock timber-yards, and no one knew her real
destination.


Chapter II


GETTING UNDER SAIL


The Dolphin was rapidly equipped, her rigging was ready, and there was
nothing to do but fit her up. She carried three schooner-masts, an almost useless
luxury; in fact, the Dolphin did not rely on the wind to escape the Federalists,
but rather on her powerful engines.

Towards the end of December a trial of the steamer was made in the gulf of
the Clyde. Which was the more satisfied, builder or captain, it is impossible to
say. The new steamer shot along wonderfully, and the patent log showed a speed
of seventeen miles an hour, a speed which as yet no English, French, or
American boat had ever obtained. The Dolphin would certainly have gained by
several lengths in a sailing match with the fastest opponent.

The loading was begun on the 25th of December, the steamer having ranged
along the steamboat-quay a little below Glasgow Bridge, the last which stretches
across the Clyde before its mouth. Here the wharfs were heaped with a heavy
cargo of clothes, ammunition, and provisions which were rapidly carried to the
hold of the Dolphin. The nature of this cargo betrayed the mysterious destination
of the ship, and the house of Playfair could no longer keep it secret; besides, the
Dolphin must not be long before she started. No American cruiser had been
signalled in English waters; and, then, when the question of getting the crew
came, how was it possible to keep silent any longer? They could not embark
them, even, without informing the men whither they were bound, for, after all, it
was a matter of life and death, and when one risks one’s life, at least it is
satisfactory to know how and wherefore.

However, this prospect hindered no one; the pay was good, and everyone had
a share in the speculation, so that a great number of the finest sailors soon
presented themselves. James Playfair was only embarrassed which to choose, but
he chose well, and in twenty-four hours his muster-roll bore the names of thirty
sailors who would have done honour to her Majesty's yacht.

The departure was settled for the 3rd of January; on the 31st of December the
Dolphin was ready, her hold full of ammunition and provisions, and nothing was
keeping her now.

The skipper went on board on the 2nd of January, and was giving a last look
round his ship with a captain’s eye, when a man presented himself at the fore
part of the Dolphin, and asked to speak with the Captain. One of the sailors led


him on to the poop.

He was a strong, hearty-looking fellow, with broad shoulders and ruddy face,
the simple expression of which ill-concealed a depth of wit and mirth. He did not
seem to be accustomed to a seafaring life, and looked about him with the air of a
man little used to being on board a ship; however, he assumed the manner of a
Jack-tar, looking up at the rigging of the Dolphin, and waddling in true sailor
fashion.

When he had reached the Captain, he looked fixedly at him, and said,
"Captain James Playfair?"

"The same," replied the skipper. "What do you want with me?"

"To join your ship."

"There is no room; the crew is already complete."

"Oh, one man, more or less, will not be in the way; quite the contrary."

"You think so?" said James Playfair, giving a sidelong glance at his
questioner.

"I am sure of it," replied the sailor.

"But who are you?" asked the Captain.

"A rough sailor, with two strong arms, which, I can tell you, are not to be
despised on board a ship, and which I now have the honour of putting at your
service."

"But there are other ships besides the Dolphin, and other captains besides
James Playfair. Why do you come here?"

"Because it is on board the Dolphin that I wish to serve, and under the orders
of Captain James Playfair."

"I do not want you."

"There is always need of a strong man, and if to prove my strength you will
try me with three or four of the strongest fellows of your crew, I am ready."

"That will do," replied James Playfair. "And what is your name?"

"Crockston, at your service."

The Captain made a few steps backwards in order to get a better view of the
giant who presented himself in this odd fashion. The height, the build, and the
look of the sailor did not deny his pretensions to strength.

"Where have you sailed?" asked Playfair of him.

"A little everywhere."

"And do you know where the Dolphin is bound for?"

"Yes; and that is what tempts me."

"Ah, well! I have no mind to let a fellow of your stamp escape me. Go and
find the first mate, and get him to enrol you."

Having said this, the Captain expected to see the man turn on his heels and


run to the bows, but he was mistaken. Crockston did not stir.

"Well! did you hear me?" asked the Captain.

"Yes, but it is not all," replied the sailor. "I have something else to ask you."

"Ah! You are wasting my time," replied James, sharply; "I have not a
moment to lose in talking."

"I shall not keep you long," replied Crockston; "two words more and that is
all; I was going to tell you that I have a nephew."

"He has a fine uncle, then," interrupted James Playfair.

"Hah! Hah!" laughed Crockston.

"Have you finished?" asked the Captain, very impatiently.

"Well, this is what I have to say, when one takes the uncle, the nephew
comes into the bargain."

"Ah! indeed!"

"Yes, that is the custom, the one does not go without the other."

"And what is this nephew of yours?"

"A lad of fifteen whom I am going to train to the sea; he is willing to learn,
and will make a fine sailor some day."

"How now, Master Crockston," cried James Playfair; "do you think the
Dolphin is a training-school for cabin-boys?"

"Don’t let us speak ill of cabin-boys: there was one of them who became
Admiral Nelson, and another Admiral Franklin."

"Upon my honour, friend," replied James Playfair, "you have a way of
speaking which I like; bring your nephew, but if I don’t find the uncle the hearty
fellow he pretends to be, he will have some business with me. Go, and be back
in an hour."

Crockston did not want to be told twice; be bowed awkwardly to the Captain
of the Dolphin, and went on to the quay. An hour afterwards he came on board
with his nephew, a boy of fourteen or fifteen, rather delicate and weakly looking,
with a timid and astonished air, which showed that he did not possess his uncle’s
self-possession and vigorous corporeal qualities. Crockston was even obliged to
encourage him by such words as these:

"Come," said he, "don’t be frightened, they are not going to eat us, besides,
there is yet time to return.”

"No, no," replied the young man, "and may God protect us!"

The same day the sailor Crockston and his nephew were inscribed in the
muster-roll of the Dolphin.

The next morning, at five o’clock, the fires of the steamer were well fed, the
deck trembled under the vibrations of the boiler, and the steam rushed hissing
through the escape-pipes. The hour of departure had arrived.


A considerable crowd, in spite of the early hour, flocked on the quays and on
Glasgow Bridge; they had come to salute the bold steamer for the last time.
Vincent Playfair was there to say good-bye to Captain James, but he conducted
himself on this occasion like a Roman of the good old times. His was a heroic
countenance, and the two loud kisses with which he gratified his nephew were
the indication of a strong mind.

"Go, James," said he to the young Captain, "go quickly, and come back
quicker still; above all, don’t abuse your position. Sell at a good price, make a
good bargain, and you will have your uncle’s esteem."

On this recommendation, borrowed from the manual of the perfect merchant,
the uncle and nephew separated, and all the visitors left the boat.

At this moment Crockston and John Stiggs stood together on the forecastle,
while the former remarked to his nephew, "This is well, this is well; before two
o’clock we shall be at sea, and I have a good opinion of a voyage which begins
like this."

For reply the novice pressed Crockston’s hand.

James Playfair then gave the orders for departure.

"Have we pressure on?" he asked of his mate.

"Yes, Captain," replied Mr. Mathew.

"Well, then, weigh anchor."

This was immediately done, and the screws began to move. The Dolphin
trembled, passed between the ships in the port, and soon disappeared from the
sight of the people, who shouted their last hurrahs.

The descent of the Clyde was easily accomplished, one might almost say that
this river had been made by the hand of man, and even by the hand of a master.
For sixty years, thanks to the dredges and constant dragging, it has gained fifteen
feet in depth, and its breadth has been tripled between the quays and the town.
Soon the forests of masts and chimneys were lost in the smoke and fog; the noise
of the foundry hammers and the hatchets of the timber-yards grew fainter in the
distance. After the village of Partick had been passed the factories gave way to
country houses and villas. The Dolphin, slackening her speed, sailed between the
dykes which carry the river above the shores, and often through a very narrow
channel, which, however, is only a small inconvenience for a navigable river, for,
after all, depth is of more importance than width. The steamer, guided by one of
those excellent pilots from the Irish sea, passed without hesitation between
floating buoys, stone columns, and biggings, surmounted with lighthouses,
which mark the entrance to the channel. Beyond the town of Renfrew, at the foot
of Kilpatrick hills, the Clyde grew wider. Then came Bouling Bay, at the end of
which opens the mouth of the canal which joints Edinburgh to Glasgow. Lastly,


at the height of four hundred feet from the ground, was seen the outline of
Dumbarton Castle, almost indiscernible through the mists, and soon the harbour-
boats of Glasgow were rocked on the waves which the Dolphin caused. Some
miles farther on Greenock, the birthplace of James Watt, was passed: the
Dolphin now found herself at the mouth of the Clyde, and at the entrance of the
gulf by which it empties its waters into the Northern Ocean. Here the first
undulations of the sea were felt, and the steamer ranged along the picturesque
coast of the Isle of Arran. At last the promontory of Cantyre, which runs out into
the channel, was doubled; the Isle of Rattelin was hailed, the pilot returned by a
shore-boat to his cutter, which was cruising in the open sea; the Dolphin,
returning to her Captain’s authority, took a less frequented route round the north
of Ireland, and soon, having lost sight of the last European land, found herself in
the open ocean.


Chapter ITI


THINGS ARE NOT WHAT THEY SEEM


The Dolphin had a good crew, not fighting men, or boarding sailors, but
good working men, and that was all she wanted. These brave, determined
fellows were all, more or less, merchants; they sought a fortune rather than
glory; they had no flag to display, no colours to defend with cannon; in fact, all
the artillery on board consisted of two small swivel signal-guns.

The Dolphin shot bravely across the water, and fulfilled the utmost
expectations of both builder and captain. Soon she passed the limit of British
seas; there was not a ship in sight; the great ocean route was free; besides, no
ship of the Federal marine would have a right to attack her beneath the English
flag. Followed she might be, and prevented from forcing the blockade, and
precisely for this reason had James Playfair sacrificed everything to the speed of
his ship, in order not to be pursued.

Howbeit a careful watch was kept on board, and, in spite of the extreme cold,
a man was always in the rigging ready to signal the smallest sail that appeared
on the horizon. When evening came, Captain James gave the most precise orders
to Mr. Mathew.

"Don’t leave the man on watch too long in the rigging; the cold may seize
him, and in that case it is impossible to keep a good lookout; change your men
often."

"T understand, Captain," replied Mr. Mathew.

"Try Crockston for that work; the fellow pretends to have excellent sight; it
must be put to trial; put him on the morning watch, he will have the morning
mists to see through. If anything particular happens call me."

This said, James Playfair went to his cabin. Mr. Mathew called Crockston,
and told him the Captain’s orders.

"To-morrow, at six o’clock," said he, "you are to relieve watch of the main
masthead."

For reply, Crockston gave a decided grunt, but Mr. Mathew had hardly
turned his back when the sailor muttered some incomprehensible words, and
then cried:

"What on earth did he say about the mainmast?"

At this moment his nephew, John Stiggs, joined him on the forecastle.

"Well, my good Crockston," said he.


"It’s all right, all right," said the seaman, with a forced smile; "there is only
one thing, this wretched boat shakes herself like a dog coming out of the water,
and it makes my head confused."

"Dear Crockston, and it is for my sake."

"For you and him," replied Crockston, "but not a word about that, John. Trust
in God, and He will not forsake you."

So saying, John Stiggs and Crockston went to the sailor’s berth, but the sailor
did not lie down before he had seen the young novice comfortably settled in the
narrow cabin which he had got for him.

The next day, at six o’clock in the morming, Crockston got up to go to his
place; he went on deck, where the first officer ordered him to go up into the
rigging, and keep good watch.


At these words the sailor seemed undecided what to do; then, making up his
mind, he went towards the bows of the Dolphin.

"Well, where are you off to now?" cried Mr. Mathew.

"Where you sent me," answered Crockston.

"I told you to go to the mainmast."

"And I am going there," replied the sailor, in an ununconcerned tone,
continuing his way to the poop.

"Are you a fool?" cried Mr. Mathew, impatiently; "you are looking for the
bars of the main on the foremast. You are like a cockney, who doesn’t know how
to twist a cat-o’-nine-tails, or make a splice. On board what ship can you have
been, man? The mainmast, stupid, the mainmast!"

The sailors who had run up to hear what was going on burst out laughing
when they saw Crockston’s disconcerted look, as he went back to the forecastle.

"So," said he, looking up the mast, the top of which was quite invisible
through the morning mists; "so, am I to climb up here?"

"Yes," replied Mr. Mathew, "and hurry yourself! By St. Patrick, a Federal
ship would have time to get her bowsprit fast in our rigging before that lazy
fellow could get to his post. Will you go up?"

Without a word, Crockston got on the bulwarks with some difficulty; then he
began to climb the rigging with most visible awkwardness, like a man who did
not know how to make use of his hands or feet. When he had reached the
topgallant, instead of springing lightly on to it, he remained motionless, clinging
to the ropes, as if he had been seized with giddiness. Mr. Mathew, irritated by his
stupidity, ordered him to come down immediately.

"That fellow there," said he to the boatswain, "has never been a sailor in his
life. Johnston, just go and see what he has in his bundle."

The boatswain made haste to the sailor’s berth.

In the meantime Crockston was with difficulty coming down again, but, his
foot having slipped, he slid down the rope he had hold of, and fell heavily on the
deck.

"Clumsy blockhead! land-lubber!" cried Mr. Mathew, by way of consolation.
"What did you come to do on board the Dolphin! Ah! you entered as an able
seaman, and you cannot even distinguish the main from the foremast! I shall
have a little talk with you."

Crockston made no attempt to speak; he bent his back like a man resigned to
anything he might have to bear; just then the boatswain returned.

"This," said he to the first officer, "is all that I have found; a suspicious
portfolio with letters."

"Give them here," said Mr. Mathew. "Letters with Federal stamps! Mr.


Halliburtt, of Boston! An Abolitionist! a Federalist! Wretch! you are nothing but
a traitor, and have sneaked on board to betray us! Never mind, you will be paid
for your trouble with the cat-o’-nine-tails! Boatswain, call the Captain, and you
others just keep an eye on that rogue there."

Crockston received these compliments with a hideous grimace, but he did
not open his lips. They had fastened him to the capstan, and he could move
neither hand nor foot.

A few minutes later James Playfair came out of his cabin and went to the
forecastle, where Mr. Mathew immediately acquainted him with the details of
the case.

"What have you to say?" asked James Playfair, scarcely able to restrain his
anger.

"Nothing," replied Crockston.

"And what did you come on board my ship for?"

"Nothing."

"And what do you expect from me now?"

"Nothing."

"Who are you? An American, as letters seem to prove?" Crockston did not
answer.

"Boatswain," said James Playfair, "fifty lashes with the cat-o’-nine-tails to
loosen his tongue. Will that be enough, Crockston?"

"Tt will remain to be seen," replied John Stiggs’ uncle without moving a
muscle.

"Now then, come along, men," said the boatswain.

At this order, two strong sailors stripped Crockston of his woollen jersey;
they had already seized the formidable weapon, and laid it across the prisoner’s
shoulders, when the novice, John Stiggs, pale and agitated, hurried on deck.

"Captain!" exclaimed he.

"Ah! the nephew!" remarked James Playfair.

"Captain," repeated the novice, with a violent effort to steady his voice, "I
will tell you what Crockston does not want to say. I will hide it no longer; yes,
he is American, and so am IJ; we are both enemies of the slave-holders, but not
traitors come on board to betray the Dolphin into the hands of the Federalists."

"What did you come to do, then?" asked the Captain, in a severe tone,
examining the novice attentively. The latter hesitated a few seconds before
replying, then he said, "Captain, I should like to speak to you in private."

Whilst John Stiggs made this request, James Playfair did not cease to look
carefully at him; the sweet young face of the novice, his peculiarly gentle voice,
the delicacy and whiteness of his hands, hardly disguised by paint, the large


eyes, the animation of which could not bide their tenderness — all this together
gave rise to a certain suspicion in the Captain’s mind. When John Stiggs had
made his request, Playfair glanced fixedly at Crockston, who shrugged his
shoulders; then he fastened a questioning look on the novice, which the latter
could not withstand, and said simply to him, "Come."

John Stiggs followed the Captain on to the poop, and then James Playfair,
opening the door of his cabin, said to the novice, whose cheeks were pale with
emotion, "Be so kind as to walk in, miss."

John, thus addressed, blushed violently, and two tears rolled involuntarily
down his cheeks.

"Don’t be alarmed, miss," said James Playfair, in a gentle voice, "but be so
good as to tell me how I come to have the honour of having you on board?"

The young girl hesitated a moment, then, reassured by the Captain’s look,
she made up her mind to speak.

"Sir," said she, "I wanted to join my father at Charleston; the town is
besieged by land and blockaded by sea. I knew not how to get there, when I
heard that the Dolphin meant to force the blockade. I came on board your ship,
and I beg you to forgive me if I acted without your consent, which you would
have refused me."

"Certainly," said James Playfair.

"I did well, then, not to ask you," resumed the young girl, with a firmer
voice.

The Captain crossed his arms, walked round his cabin, and then came back.

"What is your name?" said he.

"Jenny Halliburtt."

"Your father, if I remember rightly the address on the letters, is he not from
Boston?"

"Yes, sir."

"And a Northerner is thus in a southern town in the thickest of the war?"

"My father is a prisoner; he was at Charleston when the first shot of the Civil
War was fired, and the troops of the Union driven from Fort Sumter by the
Confederates. My father’s opinions exposed him to the hatred of the slavist part,
and by the order of General Beauregard he was imprisoned. I was then in
England, living with a relation who has just died, and left alone, with no help but
that of Crockston, our faithful servant, I wished to go to my father and share his
prison with him."

"What was Mr. Halliburtt, then?" asked James Playfair.

"A loyal and brave journalist," replied Jenny proudly, one of the noblest
editors of the Tribune, and the one who was the boldest in defending the cause of


the negroes."

"An Abolitionist," cried the Captain angrily; "one of those men who, under
the vain pretence of abolishing slavery, have deluged their country with blood
and ruin."

"Sir!" replied Jenny Halliburtt, growing pale, "you are insulting my father;
you must not forget that I stand alone to defend him."

The young Captain blushed scarlet; anger mingled with shame struggled in
his breast; perhaps he would have answered the young girl, but he succeeded in
restraining himself, and, opening the door of the cabin, he called "Boatswain!"

The boatswain came to him directly.

"This cabin will henceforward belong to Miss Jenny Halliburtt. Have a cot
made ready for me at the end of the poop; that’s all I want."

The boatswain looked with a stupefied stare at the young novice addressed in
a feminine name, but on a sign from James Playfair he went out.

"And now, miss, you are at home," said the young Captain of the Dolphin.
Then he retired.


Chapter IV


CROCKSTON’S TRICK


It was not long before the whole crew knew Miss Halliburtt’s story, which
Crockston was no longer hindered from telling. By the Captain’s orders he was
released from the capstan, and the cat-o’-nine-tails returned to its Place.

"A pretty animal," said Crockston, "especially when it shows its velvety
paws."

As soon as he was free, he went down to the sailors’ berths, found a small
portmanteau, and carried it to Miss Jenny; the young girl was now able to
resume her feminine attire, but she remained in her cabin, and did not again
appear on deck.

As for Crockston, it was well and duly agreed that, as he was no more a
sailor than a horse-guard, he should be exempt from all duty on board.

In the meanwhile the Dolphin, with her twin screws cutting the waves, sped
rapidly across the Atlantic, and there was nothing now to do but keep a strict
look-out. The day following the discovery of Miss Jenny’s identity, James
Playfair paced the deck at the poop with a rapid step; he had made no attempt to
see the young girl and resume the conversation of the day before.

Whilst he was walking to and fro, Crockston passed him several times,
looking at him askant with a satisfied grin. He evidently wanted to speak to the
Captain, and at last his persistent manner attracted the attention of the latter, who
said to him, somewhat impatiently:

"How now, what do you want? You are turning round me like a swimmer
round a buoy: when are you going to leave off?"

"Excuse me, Captain,” answered Crockston, winking, "I wanted to speak to
"Speak, then."

"Oh, it is nothing very much. I only wanted to tell you frankly that you are a
good fellow at bottom."

"Why at bottom?"

"At bottom and surface also."

"I don’t want your compliments."

"IT am not complimenting you. I shall wait to do that when you have gone to
the end.”

"To what end?"


you


"To the end of your task."

"Ah! T have a task to fulfil?"

"Decidedly, you have taken the young girl and myself on board; good! You
have given up your cabin to Miss Halliburtt; good! You released me from the
cat-o’-nine-tails; nothing could be better. You are going to take us straight to
Charleston; that’s delightful, but it is not all."

"How not all?" cried James Playfair, amazed at Crockston’s boldness.

"No, certainly not," replied the latter, with a knowing look, "the father is
prisoner there."

"Well, what about that?"

"Well, the father must be rescued."

"Rescue Miss Halliburtt’s father?"

"Most certainly, and it is worth risking something for such a noble man and
courageous citizen as he."

"Master Crockston," said James Playfair, frowning, "I am not in the humour
for your jokes, so have a care what you say."

"You misunderstand me, Captain," said the American. "I am not joking in the
least, but speaking quite seriously. What I have proposed may at first seem very
absurd to you; when you have thought it over, you will see that you cannot do
otherwise."

"What, do you mean that I must deliver Mr. Halliburtt?"

"Just so. You can demand his release of General Beauregard, who will not
refuse you."

"But if he does refuse me?"

"In that case," replied Crockston, in a deliberate tone, "we must use stronger
measures, and carry off the prisoner by force."

"So," cried James Playfair, who was beginning to get angry, "so, not content
with passing through the Federal fleets and forcing the blockade of Charleston, I
must run out to sea again from under the cannon of the forts, and this to deliver a
gentleman I know nothing of, one of those Abolitionists whom I detest, one of
those journalists who shed ink instead of their blood!"

"Oh, it is but a cannon-shot more or less!" added Crockston.

"Master Crockston," said James Playfair, "mind what I say: if ever you
mention this affair again to me, I will send you to the hold for the rest of the
passage, to teach you manners.”

Thus saying, the Captain dismissed the American, who went off murmuring,
"Ah, well, I am not altogether displeased with this conversation: at any rate, the
affair is broached; it will do, it will do!"

James Playfair had hardly meant it when he said an Abolitionist whom I


detest; he did not in the least side with the Federals, but he did not wish to admit
that the question of slavery was the predominant reason for the civil war of the
United States, in spite of President Lincoln’s formal declaration. Did he, then,
think that the Southern States, eight out of thirty-six, were right in separating
when they had been voluntarily united? Not so; he detested the Northerners, and
that was all; he detested them as brothers separated from the common family —
true Englishmen — who had thought it right to do what he, James Playfair,
disapproved of with regard to the United States: these were the political opinions
of the Captain of the Dolphin. But, more than this, the American war interfered
with him personally, and he had a grudge against those who had caused this war;
one can understand, then, how he would receive a proposition to deliver an
Abolitionist, thus bringing down on him the Confederates, with whom he
pretended to do business.

However, Crockston’s insinuation did not fail to disturb him; he cast the
thought from him, but it returned unceasingly to his mind, and when Miss Jenny
came on deck the next day for a few minutes, he dared not look her in the face.

And really it was a great pity, for this young girl, with the fair hair and sweet,
intelligent face, deserved to be looked at by a young man of thirty. But James felt
embarrassed in her presence; he felt that this charming creature who had been
educated in the school of misfortune possessed a strong and generous soul; he
understood that his silence towards her inferred a refusal to acquiesce in her
dearest wishes; besides, Miss Jenny never looked out for James Playfair, neither
did she avoid him. Thus for the first few days they spoke little or not at all to
each other. Miss Halliburtt scarcely ever left her cabin, and it is certain she
would never have addressed herself to the Captain of the Dolphin if it had not
been for Crockston’s strategy, which brought both parties together.

The worthy American was a faithful servant of the Halliburtt family; he had
been brought up in his master’s house, and his devotion knew no bounds. His
good sense equalled his courage and energy, and, as has been seen, he had a way
of looking things straight in the face. He was very seldom discouraged, and
could generally find a way out of the most intricate dangers with a wonderful
skill.

This honest fellow had taken it into his head to deliver Mr. Halliburtt, to
employ the Captain’s ship, and the Captain himself for this purpose, and to
return with him to England. Such was his intention, so long as the young girl had
no other object than to rejoin her father and share his captivity. It was this
Crockston tried to make the Captain understand, as we have seen, but the enemy
had not yet surrendered; on the contrary.

"Now," said he, "it is absolutely necessary that Miss Jenny and the Captain


come to an understanding; if they are going to be sulky like this all the passage
we shall get nothing done. They must speak, discuss; let them dispute even, so
long as they talk, and I’ll be hanged if during their conversation James Playfair
does not propose himself what he refused me to-day."

But when Crockston saw that the young girl and the young man avoided
each other, he began to be perplexed.

"We must look sharp," said he to himself, and the morning of the fourth day
he entered Miss Halliburtt’s cabin, rubbing his hands with an air of perfect
satisfaction.

"Good news!" cried he, "good news! You will never guess what the Captain
has proposed to me. A very noble young man he is. Now try."

"Ah!" replied Jenny, whose heart beat violently, "has he proposed to — "

"To deliver Mr. Halliburtt, to carry him off from the Confederates, and bring
him to England."

"Is it true?" cried Jenny.

"It is as I say, miss. What a good-hearted man this James Playfair is! These
English are either all good or all bad. Ah! he may reckon on my gratitude, and I
am ready to cut myself in pieces if it would please him."

Jenny’s joy was profound on hearing Crockston’s words. Deliver her father!
She had never dared to think of such a plan, and the Captain of the Dolphin was
going to risk his ship and crew!

"That’s what he is," added Crockston; "and this, Miss Jenny, is well worth an
acknowledgment from you."

"More than an acknowledgment," cried the young girl; "a lasting friendship!"

And immediately she left the cabin to find James Playfair, and express to him
the sentiments which flowed from her heart.

"Getting on by degrees," muttered the American.

James Playfair was pacing to and fro on the poop, and, as may be thought, he
was very much surprised, not to say amazed, to see the young girl come up to
him, her eyes moist with grateful tears, and, holding out her hand to him, saying:

"Thank you, sir, thank you for your kindness, which I should never have
dared to expect from a stranger."

"Miss," replied the Captain, as if he understood nothing of what she was
talking, and could not understand, "I do not know — "

"Nevertheless, sir, you are going to brave many dangers, perhaps
compromise your interests for me, and you have done so much already in
offering me on board an hospitality to which I have no right whatever — "

"Pardon me, Miss Jenny," interrupted James Playfair, "but I protest again I
do not understand your words. I have acted towards you as any well-bred man


would towards a lady, and my conduct deserves neither so many thanks nor so
much gratitude."

"Mr. Playfair," said Jenny, "it is useless to pretend any longer; Crockston has
told me all!"

"Ah!" said the Captain, "Crockston has told you all; then I understand less
than ever the reason for your leaving your cabin, and saying these words which

Whilst speaking the Captain felt very much embarrassed; he remembered the
rough way in which he had received the American’s overtures, but Jenny,
fortunately for him, did not give him time for further explanation; she
interrupted him, holding out her hand and saying:

"Mr. James, I had no other object in coming on board your ship except to go
to Charleston, and there, however cruel the slave-holders may be, they will not
refuse to let a poor girl share her father’s prison; that was all. I had never thought
of a return as possible; but, since you are so generous as to wish for my father’s
deliverance, since you will attempt everything to save him, be assured you have
my deepest gratitude."

James did not know what to do or what part to assume; he bit his lip; he
dared not take the hand offered him; he saw perfectly that Crockston had
compromised him, so that escape was impossible. At the same time he had no
thoughts of delivering Mr. Halliburtt, and getting complicated in a disagreeable
business: but how dash to the ground the hope which had arisen in this poor
girl’s heart? How refuse the hand which she held out to him with a feeling of
such profound friendship? How change to tears of grief the tears of gratitude
which filled her eyes?

So the young man tried to reply evasively, in a manner which would ensure
his liberty of action for the future.

"Miss Jenny," said he, "rest assured I will do everything in my power for — "

And he took the little hand in both of his, but with the gentle pressure he felt
his heart melt and his head grow confused: words to express his thoughts failed
him. He stammered out some incoherent words:

"Miss — Miss Jenny — for you — "

Crockston, who was watching him, rubbed his hands, grinning and repeating
to himself:

"Tt will come! it will come! it has come!"

How James Playfair would have managed to extricate himself from his
embarrassing position no one knows, but fortunately for him, if not for the
Dolphin, the man on watch was heard crying:

"Ahoy, officer of the watch!"


"What now?" asked Mr. Mathew.

"A sail to windward!"

James Playfair, leaving the young girl, immediately sprang to the shrouds of
the mainmast.


Chapter V


THE SHOT FROM THE IROQUOIS, AND MISS JENNY’S
ARGUMENTS


Until now the navigation of the Dolphin had been very fortunate. Not one
ship had been signalled before the sail hailed by the man on watch.

The Dolphin was then in 32° 51’ lat., and 57° 43’ W. longitude. For forty-
eight hours a fog, which now began to rise, had covered the ocean. If this mist
favoured the Dolphin by hiding her course, it also prevented any observations at
a distance being made, and, without being aware of it, she might be sailing side
by side, so to speak, with the ships she wished most to avoid.

Now this is just what had happened, and when the ship was signalled she
was only three miles to windward.

When James Playfair had reached the cross-trees, he saw distinctly, through
an opening in the mist, a large Federal corvette in full pursuit of the Dolphin.

After having carefully examined her, the Captain came down on deck again,
and called to the first officer.

"Mr. Mathew," said he, "what do you think of this ship?"

"T think, Captain, that it is a Federal cruiser, which suspects our intentions."

"There is no possible doubt of her nationality," said James Playfair. "Look!"

At this moment the starry flag of the North United States appeared on the
gaff-yards of the corvette, and the latter asserted her colours with a cannon-shot.

"An invitation to show ours," said Mr. Mathew. "Well, let us show them;
there is nothing to be ashamed of."

"What’s the good?" replied James Playfair. "Our flag will hardly protect us,
and it will not hinder those people from paying us a visit. No; let us go ahead."

"And go quickly," replied Mr. Mathew, "for, if my eyes do not deceive me, I
have already seen that corvette lying off Liverpool, where she went to watch the
ships in building: my name is not Mathew, if that is not the Iroquois on her
taffrail."

"And is she fast?"

"One of the fastest vessels of the Federal marine."

"What guns does she carry?"

"Eight."

"Pooh!"

"Oh, don’t shrug your shoulders, Captain," said Mr. Mathew, in a serious


tone; "two out of those eight guns are rifled, one is a sixty-pounder on the
forecastle, and the other a hundred-pounder on deck."

"Upon my soul!" exclaimed James Playfair, "they are Parrott’s, and will
carry three miles."

"Yes, and farther than that, Captain."

"Ah, well! Mr. Mathew, let their guns be sixty or only four-pounders, and let
them carry three miles or five hundred yards, it is all the same if we can go fast
enough to avoid their shot. We will show this Iroquois how a ship can go when
she is built on purpose to go. Have the fires drawn forward, Mr. Mathew."

The first officer gave the Captain’s orders to the engineer, and soon volumes
of black smoke curled from the steamer’s chimneys.

This proceeding did not seem to please the corvette, for she made the
Dolphin the signal to lie to, but James Playfair paid no attention to this warning,
and did not change his ship’s course.

"Now," said he, "we shall see what the Iroquois will do; here is a fine
opportunity for her to try her guns. Go ahead full speed!"

"Good!" exclaimed Mr. Mathew; "she will not be long in saluting us."

Returning to the poop, the Captain saw Miss Halliburtt sitting quietly near
the bulwarks.

"Miss Jenny," said he, "we shall probably be chased by that corvette you see
to windward, and as she will speak to us with shot, I beg to offer you my arm to
take you to your cabin again."

"Thank you, very much, Mr. Playfair," replied the young girl, looking at him,
"but I am not afraid of cannon-shots."

"However, miss, in spite of the distance, there may be some danger."

"Oh, I was not brought up to be fearful; they accustom us to everything in
America, and I assure you that the shot from the Iroquois will not make me
lower my head."

"You are brave, Miss Jenny."

"Let us admit, then, that I am brave, and allow me to stay by you."

"I can refuse you nothing, Miss Halliburtt," replied the Captain, looking at
the young girl’s calm face.

These words were hardly uttered when they saw a line of white smoke issue
from the bulwarks of the corvette; before the report had reached the Dolphin a
projectile whizzed through the air in the direction of the steamer.

At about twenty fathoms from the Dolphin the shot, the speed of which had
sensibly lessened, skimmed over the surface of the waves, marking its passage
by a series of water-jets; then, with another burst, it rebounded to a certain
height, passed over the Dolphin, grazing the mizzen-yards on the starboard side,


fell at thirty fathoms beyond, and was buried in the waves.

"By Jove!" exclaimed James Playfair, "we must get along; another slap like
that is not to be waited for."

"Oh!" exclaimed Mr. Mathew, "they will take some time to reload such
pieces."

"Upon my honour, it is an interesting sight," said Crockston, who, with arms
crossed, stood perfectly at his ease looking at the scene.

"Ah! that’s you,” cried James Playfair, scanning the American from head to
foot.

"It is me, Captain," replied the American, undisturbed. "I have come to see
how these brave Federals fire; not badly, in truth, not badly."

The Captain was going to answer Crockston sharply, but at this moment a
second shot struck the sea on the starboard side.

"Good!" cried James Playfair, "we have already gained two cables on this
Iroquois. Your friends sail like a buoy; do you hear, Master Crockston?"

"I will not say they don’t," replied the American, "and for the first time in my
life it does not fail to please me."

A third shot fell still farther astern, and in less than ten minutes the Dolphin
was out of range of the corvette’s guns.

"So much for patent-logs, Mr. Mathew," said James Playfair; "thanks to those
shot we know how to rate our speed. Now have the fires lowered; it is not worth
while to waste our coal uselessly."

"It is a good ship that you command," said Miss Halliburtt to the young
Captain.

"Yes, Miss Jenny, my good Dolphin makes her seventeen knots, and before
the day is over we shall have lost sight of that corvette."

James Playfair did not exaggerate the sailing qualities of his ship, and the sun
had not set before the masts of the American ship had disappeared below the
horizon.

This incident allowed the Captain to see Miss Halliburtt’s character in a new
light; besides, the ice was broken, henceforward, during the whole of the
voyage; the interviews between the Captain and his passenger were frequent and
prolonged; be found her to be a young girl, calm, strong, thoughtful, and
intelligent, speaking with great ease, having her own ideas about everything, and
expressing her thoughts with a conviction which unconsciously penetrated James
Playfair’s heart.

She loved her country, she was zealous in the great cause of the Union, and
expressed herself on the civil war in the United States with an enthusiasm of
which no other woman would have been capable. Thus it happened, more than


once, that James Playfair found it difficult to answer her, even when questions
purely mercantile arose in connection with the war: Miss Jenny attacked them
none the less vigorously, and would come to no other terms whatever. At first
James argued a great deal, and tried to uphold the Confederates against the
Federals, to prove that the Secessionists were in the right, and that if the people
were united voluntarily they might separate in the same manner. But the young
girl would not yield on this point; she demonstrated that the question of slavery
was predominant in the struggle between the North and South Americans, that it
was far more a war in the cause of morals and humanity than politics, and James
could make no answer. Besides, during these discussions, which he listened to
attentively, it is difficult to say whether he was more touched by Miss
Halliburtt’s arguments or the charming manner in which she spoke; but at last he
was obliged to acknowledge, among other things, that slavery was the principal
feature in the war, that it must be put an end to decisively, and the last horrors of
barbarous times abolished.

It has been said that the political opinions of the Captain did not trouble him
much. He would have sacrificed his most serious opinion before such enticing
arguments and under like circumstances; he made a good bargain of his ideas for
the same reason, but at last he was attacked in his tenderest point; this was the
question of the traffic in which the Dolphin was being employed, and,
consequently, the ammunition which was being carried to the Confederates.

"Yes, Mr. James," said Miss Halliburtt, "gratitude does not hinder me from
speaking with perfect frankness; on the contrary, you are a brave seaman, a
clever merchant, the house of Playfair is noted for its respectability; but in this
case it fails in its principles, and follows a trade unworthy of it."

"How!" cried James, "the house of Playfair ought not to attempt such a
commercial enterprise?"

"No! it is taking ammunition to the unhappy creatures in revolt against the
government of their country, and it is lending arms to a bad cause."

"Upon my honour, Miss Jenny, I will not discuss the right of the
Confederates with you; I will only answer you with one word: I am a merchant,
and as such I only occupy myself with the interests of my house; I look for gain
wherever there is an opportunity of getting it."

"That is precisely what is to be blamed, Mr. James," replied the young girl;
"profit does not excuse it; thus, when you supply arms to the Southerners, with
which to continue a criminal war, you are quite as guilty as when you sell opium
to the Chinese, which stupefies them."

"Oh, for once, Miss Jenny, this is too much, and I cannot admit — "

"No; what I say is just, and when you consider it, when you understand the


part you are playing, when you think of the results for which you are
responsible, you will yield to me in this point, as in so many others."

James Playfair was dumfounded at these words; he left the young girl, a prey
to angry thoughts, for he felt his powerlessness to answer; then he sulked like a
child for half an hour, and an hour later he returned to the singular young girl
who could overwhelm him with convincing arguments with quite a pleasant
smile.

In short, however it may have come about, and although he would not
acknowledge it to himself, Captain James Playfair belonged to himself no
longer; he was no longer commander-in-chief on board his own ship.

Thus, to Crockston’s great joy, Mr. Halliburtt’s affairs appeared to be in a
good way; the Captain seemed to have decided to undertake everything in his
power to deliver Miss Jenny’s father, and for this he would be obliged to
compromise the Dolphin, his cargo, his crew, and incur the displeasure of his
worthy Uncle Vincent.


Chapter VI


SULLIVAN ISLAND CHANNEL


Two days after the meeting with the Iroquois, the Dolphin found herself
abreast of the Bermudas, where she was assailed by a violent squall. These isles
are frequently visited by hurricanes, and are celebrated for shipwrecks. It is here
that Shakespeare has placed the exciting scene of his drama, The Tempest, in
which Ariel and Caliban dispute for the empire of the floods.

The squall was frightful; James Playfair thought once of running for one of
the Bermudas, where the English had a military post: it would have been a sad
waste of time, and therefore especially to be regretted; happily the Dolphin
behaved herself wonderfully well in the storm, and, after flying a whole day
before the tempest, she was able to resume her course towards the American
coast.

But if James Playfair had been pleased with his ship, he had not been less
delighted with the young girl’s bravery; Miss Halliburtt had passed the worst
hours of the storm at his side, and James knew that a profound, imperious,
irresistible love had taken possession of his whole being.

"Yes," said he, "this brave girl is mistress on board; she turns me like the sea
a ship in distress — I feel that I am foundering! What will Uncle Vincent say?
Ah! poor nature, I am sure that if Jenny asked me to throw all this cursed cargo
into the sea, I should do it without hesitating, for love of her."

Happily for the firm of Playfair & Co., Miss Halliburtt did not demand this
sacrifice; nevertheless, the poor Captain had been taken captive, and Crockston,
who read his heart like an open book, rubbed his hands gleefully.

"We will hold him fast!" he muttered to himself, "and before a week has
passed my master will be quietly installed in one of the best cabins of the
Dolphin."

As for Miss Jenny, did she perceive the feelings which she inspired? Did she
allow herself to share them? No one could say, and James Playfair least of all;
the young girl kept a perfect reserve, and her secret remained deeply buried in
her heart.

But whilst love was making such progress in the heart of the young Captain,
the Dolphin sped with no less rapidity towards Charleston.

On the 13th of January, the watch signalled land ten miles to the west. It was
a low-lying coast, and almost blended with the line of the sea in the distance.


Crockston was examining the horizon attentively, and about nine o’clock in the
morning he cried:


"Charleston lighthouse!"

Now that the bearings of the Dolphin were set, James Playfair had but one
thing to do, to decide by which channel he would run into Charleston Bay.

"If we meet with no obstacles," said he, "before three o’clock we shall be in
safety in the docks of the port."

The town of Charleston is situated on the banks of an estuary seven miles
long and two broad, called Charleston Harbour, the entrance to which is rather
difficult. It is enclosed between Morris Island on the south and Sullivan Island
on the north. At the time when the Dolphin attempted to force the blockade
Morris Island already belonged to the Federal troops, and General Gillmore had
caused batteries to be erected overlooking the harbour. Sullivan Island, on the
contrary, was in the hands of the Confederates, who were also in possession of
Moultrie Fort, situated at the extremity of the island; therefore it would be
advantageous to the Dolphin to go as close as possible to the northern shores to
avoid the firing from the forts on Morris Island.

Five channels led into the estuary, Sullivan Island Channel, the Northern
Channel, the Overall Channel, the Principal Channel, and lastly, the Lawford
Channel; but it was useless for strangers, unless they had skilful pilots on board,
or ships drawing less than seven feet of water, to attempt this last; as for
Northern and Overall Channels, they were in range of the Federalist batteries, so
that it was no good thinking of them. If James Playfair could have had his
choice, he would have taken his steamer through the Principal Channel, which
was the best, and the bearings of which were easy to follow; but it was necessary
to yield to circumstances, and to decide according to the event. Besides, the
Captain of the Dolphin knew perfectly all the secrets of this bay, its dangers, the
depths of its water at low tide, and its currents, so that he was able to steer his
ship with the greatest safety as soon as he entered one of these narrow straits.
The great question was to get there.

Now this work demanded an experienced seaman, and one who knew exactly
the qualities of the Dolphin.

In fact, two Federal frigates were now cruising in the Charleston waters. Mr.
Mathew soon drew James Playfair’s attention to them.

"They are preparing to ask us what we want on these shores," said he.

"Ah, well! we won’t answer them," replied the Captain, "and they will not
get their curiosity satisfied."

In the meanwhile the cruisers were coming on full steam towards the


Dolphin, who continued her course, taking care to keep out of range of their
guns. But in order to gain time James Playfair made for the south-west, wishing
to put the enemies’ ships off their guard; the latter must have thought that the
Dolphin intended to make for Morris Island Channel. Now there they had
batteries and guns, a single shot from which would have been enough to sink the
English ship; so the Federals allowed the Dolphin to run towards the south-west,
contenting themselves by observing her without following closely.

Thus for an hour the respective situations of the ships did not change, for
James Playfair, wishing to deceive the cruisers as to the course of the Dolphin,
had caused the fires to be moderated, so that the speed was decreased. However,
from the thick volumes of smoke which escaped from the chimneys, it might
have been thought that he was trying to get his maximum pressure, and,
consequently his maximum of rapidity.

"They will be slightly astonished presently," said James Playfair, "when they
see us slip through their fingers!"

In fact, when the Captain saw that he was near enough to Morris Island, and
before a line of guns, the range of which he did not know, he turned his rudder
quickly, and the ship resumed her northerly course, leaving the cruisers two
miles to windward of her; the latter, seeing this manoeuvre, understood the
steamer’s object, and began to pursue her in earmest, but it was too late. The
Dolphin doubled her speed under the action of the screws, and distanced them
rapidly. Going nearer to the coast, a few shell were sent after her as an acquittal
of conscience, but the Federals were outdone, for their projectiles did not reach
half-way. At eleven o’clock in the morning, the steamer ranging near Sullivan
Island, thanks to her small draft, entered the narrow strait full steam; there she
was in safety, for no Federalist cruiser dared follow her in this channel, the depth
of which, on an average, was only eleven feet at low tide.

"How!" cried Crockston, "and is that the only difficulty?"

"Oh! oh! Master Crockston," said James Playfair, "the difficulty is not in
entering, but in getting out again."

"Nonsense!" replied the American, "that does not make me at all uneasy;
with a boat like the Dolphin and a Captain like Mr. James Playfair, one can go
where one likes, and come out in the same manner."

Nevertheless, James Playfair, with telescope in his hand, was attentively
examining the route to be followed. He had before him excellent coasting
guides, with which he could go ahead without any difficulty or hesitation.

Once his ship was safely in the narrow channel which runs the length of
Sullivan Island, James steered bearing towards the middle of Fort Moultrie as far
as the Pickney Castle, situated on the isolated island of Shute’s Folly; on the


other side rose Fort Johnson, a little way to the north of Fort Sumter.

At this moment the steamer was saluted by some shot which did not reach
her, from the batteries on Morris Island. She continued her course without any
deviation, passed before Moultrieville, situated at the extremity of Sullivan
Island, and entered the bay.

Soon Fort Sumter on the left protected her from the batteries of the
Federalists.

This fort, so celebrated in the civil war, is situated three miles and a half
from Charleston, and about a mile from each side of the bay: it is nearly
pentagonal in form, built on an artificial island of Massachusetts granite; it took
ten years to construct and cost more than 900,000 dollars.

It was from this fort, on the 13th of April, 1861, that Anderson and the
Federal troops were driven, and it was against it that the first shot of the
Confederates was fired. It is impossible to estimate the quantity of iron and lead
which the Federals showered down upon it. However, it resisted for almost three
years, but a few months after the passage of the Dolphin it fell beneath General
Gillmore’s three hundred-pounders on Morris Island.

But at this time it was in all its strength, and the Confederate flag floated
proudly above it.

Once past the fort, the town of Charleston appeared, lying between Ashley
and Cooper Rivers.

James Playfair threaded his way through the buoys which mark the entrance
of the channel, leaving behind the Charleston lighthouse, visible above Morris
Island. He had hoisted the English flag, and made his way with wonderful
rapidity through the narrow channels. When he had passed the quarantine buoy,
he advanced freely into the centre of the bay. Miss Halliburtt was standing on the
poop, looking at the town where her father was kept prisoner, and her eyes filled
with tears.

At last the steamer’s speed was moderated by the Captain’s orders; the
Dolphin ranged along the end of the south and east batteries, and was soon
moored at the quay of the North Commercial Wharf.


Chapter VII


A SOUTHERN GENERAL


The Dolphin, on arriving at the Charleston quay, had been saluted by the
cheers of a large crowd. The inhabitants of this town, strictly blockaded by sea,
were not accustomed to visits from European ships. They asked each other, not
without astonishment, what this great steamer, proudly bearing the English flag,
had come to do in their waters; but when they learned the object of her voyage,
and why she had just forced the passage Sullivan, when the report spread that
she carried a cargo of smuggled ammunition, the cheers and joyful cries were
redoubled.

James Playfair, without losing a moment, entered into negotiation with
General Beauregard, the military commander of the town. The latter eagerly
received the young Captain of the Dolphin, who had arrived in time to provide
the soldiers with the clothes and ammunition they were so much in want of. It
was agreed that the unloading of the ship should take place immediately, and
numerous hands came to help the English sailors.

Before quitting his ship James Playfair had received from Miss Halliburtt the
most pressing injunctions with regard to her father, and the Captain had placed
himself entirely at the young girl’s service.

"Miss Jenny," he had said, "you may rely on me; I will do the utmost in my
power to save your father, but I hope this business will not present many
difficulties. I shall go and see General Beauregard to-day, and, without asking
him at once for Mr. Halliburtt’s liberty, I shall learn in what situation he is,
whether he is on bail or a prisoner."

"My poor father!" replied Jenny, sighing; "he little thinks his daughter is so
near him. Oh that I could fly into his arms!"

"A little patience, Miss Jenny; you will soon embrace your father. Rely upon
my acting with the most entire devotion, but also with prudence and
consideration."

This is why James Playfair, after having delivered the cargo of the Dolphin
up to the General, and bargained for an immense stock of cotton, faithful to his
promise, turned the conversation to the events of the day.

"So," said he, "you believe in the triumph of the slave-holders?"

"I do not for a moment doubt of our final success, and, as regards Charleston,
Lee’s army will soon relieve it: besides, what do you expect from the


Abolitionists? Admitting that which will never be, that the commercial towns of
Virginia, the two Carolinas, Georgia, Alabama, fall under their power, what
then? Will they be masters of a country they can never occupy? No, certainly
not; and for my part, if they are ever victorious, they shall pay dearly for it."

"And you are quite sure of your soldiers?" asked the Captain. "You are not
afraid that Charleston will grow weary of a siege which is ruining her?"

"No, I do not fear treason; besides, the traitors would be punished
remorselessly, and I would destroy the town itself by sword or fire if I
discovered the least Unionist movement. Jefferson Davis confided Charleston to
me, and you may be sure that Charleston is in safe hands."

"Have you any Federal prisoners?" asked James Playfair, coming to the
interesting object of the conversation.

"Yes, Captain," replied the General, "it was at Charleston that the first shot of
separation was fired. The Abolitionists who were here attempted to resist, and,
after being defeated, they have been kept as prisoners of war."

"And have you many?"

"About a hundred."

"Free in the town?"

"They were until I discovered a plot formed by them: their chief succeeded
in establishing a communication with the besiegers, who were thus informed of
the situation of affairs in the town. I was then obliged to lock up these dangerous
guests, and several of them will only leave their prison to ascend the slope of the
citadel, where ten confederate balls will reward them for their federalism."

"What! to be shot!" cried the young man, shuddering involuntarily.

"Yes, and their chief first of all. He is a very dangerous man to have in a
besieged town. I have sent his letters to the President at Richmond, and before a
week is passed his sentence will be irrevocably passed."

"Who is this man you speak of?" asked James Playfair, with an assumed
carelessness.

"A journalist from Boston, a violent Abolitionist with the confounded spirit
of Lincoln."

"And his name?"

"Jonathan Halliburtt."

"Poor wretch!" exclaimed James, suppressing his emotion. "Whatever he
may have done, one cannot help pitying him. And you think that he will be
shot?"

"I am sure of it," replied Beauregard. "What can you expect? War is war; one
must defend oneself as best one can."

"Well, it is nothing to me," said the Captain. "I shall be far enough away


when this execution takes place."

"What! you are thinking of going away already."

"Yes, General, business must be attended to; as soon as my cargo of cotton is
on board I shall be out to sea again. I was fortunate enough to enter the bay, but
the difficulty is in getting out again. The Dolphin is a good ship; she can beat
any of the Federal vessels for speed, but she does not pretend to distance
cannon-balls, and a shell in her hull or engine would seriously affect my
enterprise."

"As you please, Captain,” replied Beauregard; "I have no advice to give you
under such circumstances. You are doing your business, and you are right. I
should act in the same manner were I in your place; besides, a stay at Charleston
is not very pleasant, and a harbour where shells are falling three days out of four
is not a safe shelter for your ship; so you will set sail when you please; but can
you tell me what is the number and the force of the Federal vessels cruising
before Charleston?"

James Playfair did his best to answer the General, and took leave of him on
the best of terms; then he returned to the Dolphin very thoughtful and very
depressed from what he had just heard.

"What shall I say to Miss Jenny? Ought I to tell her of Mr. Halliburtt’s
terrible situation? Or would it be better to keep her in ignorance of the trial
which is awaiting her? Poor child!"

He had not gone fifty steps from the governor’s house when he ran against
Crockston. The worthy American had been watching for him since his departure.

"Well, Captain?"

James Playfair looked steadily at Crockston, and the latter soon understood
he had no favourable news to give him.

"Have you seen Beauregard?" he asked.

"Yes," replied James Playfair.

"And have you spoken to him about Mr. Halliburtt?"

"No, it was he who spoke to me about him."

"Well, Captain?"

"Well, I may as well tell you everything, Crockston."

"Everything, Captain."

"General Beauregard has told me that your master will be shot within a
week."

At this news anyone else but Crockston would have grown furious or given
way to bursts of grief, but the American, who feared nothing, only said, with
almost a smile on his lips:

"Pooh! what does it matter?"


"How! what does it matter?" cried James Playfair. "I tell you that Mr.
Halliburtt will be shot within a week, and you answer, what does it matter?"

"And I mean it — if in six days he is on board the Dolphin, and if in seven
days the Dolphin is on the open sea."

"Right!" exclaimed the Captain, pressing Crockston’s hand. "I understand,
my good fellow, you have got some pluck; and for myself, in spite of Uncle
Vincent, I would throw myself overboard for Miss Jenny."

"No one need be thrown overboard," replied the American, "only the fish
would gain by that: the most important business now is to deliver Mr.
Halliburtt."

"But you must know that it will be difficult to do so."

"Pooh!" exclaimed Crockston.

"Tt is a question of communicating with a prisoner strictly guarded."

"Certainly."

"And to bring about an almost miraculous escape."

"Nonsense," exclaimed Crockston; "a prisoner thinks more of escaping than
his guardian thinks of keeping him; that’s why, thanks to our help, Mr. Halliburtt
will be saved."

"You are right, Crockston."

"Always right."

"But now what will you do? There must be some plan: and there are
precautions to be taken."

"T will think about it."

"But when Miss Jenny learns that her father is condemned to death, and that
the order for his execution may come any day —"

"She will know nothing about it, that is all."

"Yes, it will be better for her and for us to tell her nothing."

"Where is Mr. Halliburtt imprisoned?" asked Crockston.

"In the citadel," replied James Playfair.

"Just so! ... On board now?"

"On board, Crockston!"


Chapter VIII


THE ESCAPE


Miss Jenny, sitting at the poop of the Dolphin, was anxiously waiting the
Captain’s return; when the latter went up to her she could not utter a word, but
her eyes questioned James Playfair more eagerly than her lips could have done.
The latter, with Crockston’s help, informed the young girl of the facts relating to
her father’s imprisonment. He said that he had carefully broached the subject of
the prisoners of war to Beauregard, but, as the General did not seem disposed at
all in their favour, he had thought it better to say no more about it, but think the
matter over again.

"Since Mr. Halliburtt is not free in the town, his escape will be more
difficult; but I will finish my task, and I promise you, Miss Jenny, that the
Dolphin shall not leave Charleston without having your father on board."

"Thank you, Mr. James; I thank you with my whole heart."

At these words James Playfair felt a thrill of joy through his whole being.

He approached the young girl with moist eyes and quivering lips; perhaps he
was going to make an avowal of the sentiments he could no longer repress, when
Crockston interfered:

"This is no time for grieving," said he; "we must go to work, and consider
what to do."

"Have you any plan, Crockston?" asked the young girl.

"T always have a plan," replied the American: "it is my peculiarity."

"But a good one?" said James Playfair.

"Excellent! and all the ministers in Washington could not devise a better; it is
almost as good as if Mr. Halliburtt was already on board."

Crockston spoke with such perfect assurance, at the same time with such
simplicity, that it must have been the most incredulous person who could doubt
his words.

"We are listening, Crockston," said James Playfair.

"Good! You, Captain, will go to General Beauregard, and ask a favour of
him which he will not refuse you."

"And what is that?"

"You will tell him that you have on board a tiresome subject, a scamp who
has been very troublesome during the voyage, and excited the crew to revolt.
You will ask of him permission to shut him up in the citadel; at the same time, on


the condition that he shall return to the ship on her departure, in order to be taken
back to England, to be delivered over to the justice of his country."

"Good!" said James Playfair, half smiling, "I will do all that, and Beauregard
will grant my request very willingly."

"I am perfectly sure of it," replied the American.

"But," resumed Playfair, "one thing is wanting.”

"What is that?"

"The scamp."

"He is before you, Captain."

"What, the rebellious subject?"

"Is myself; don’t trouble yourself about that."

"Oh! you brave, generous heart," cried Jenny, pressing the American’s rough
hands between her small white palms.

"Go, Crockston," said James Playfair; "I understand you, my friend; and I
only regret one thing — that is, that I cannot take your place."

"Everyone his part," replied Crockston; "if you put yourself in my place you
would be very much embarrassed, which I shall not be; you will have enough to
do later on to get out of the harbour under the fire of the Feds and Rebs, which,
for my part, I should manage very badly."

"Well, Crockston, go on."

"Once in the citadel — I know it — I shall see what to do, and rest assured I
shall do my best; in the meanwhile, you will be getting your cargo on board."

"Oh, business is now a very unimportant detail," said the Captain.

"Not at all! And what would your Uncle Vincent say to that? We must join
sentiment with work; it will prevent suspicion; but do it quickly. Can you be
ready in six days?"

"Yes."

"Well, let the Dolphin be ready to start on the 22nd."

"She shall be ready."

"On the evening of the 22nd of January, you understand, send a gig with your
best men to White Point, at the end of the town; wait there till nine o’clock, and
then you will see Mr. Halliburtt and your servant."

"But how will you manage to effect Mr. Halliburtt’s deliverance, and also
escape yourself?"

"That’s my look-out."

"Dear Crockston, you are going to risk your life then, to save my father!"

"Don’t be uneasy, Miss Jenny, I shall risk absolutely nothing, you may
believe me."

"Well," asked James Playfair, "when must I have you locked up?"


"To-day — you understand — I demoralise your crew; there is no time to be
lost."

"Would you like any money? It may be of use to you in the citadel."

"Money to buy the gaoler! Oh, no, it would be a poor bargain; when one
goes there the gaoler keeps the money and the prisoner! No, I have surer means
than that; however, a few dollars may be useful; one must be able to drink, if
needs be."

"And intoxicate the gaoler."

"No, an intoxicated gaoler would spoil everything. No, I tell you I have an
idea; let me work it out."

"Here, my good fellow, are ten dollars."

"It is too much, but I will return what is over."

"Well, then, are you ready?"

"Quite ready to be a downright rogue."

"Let us go to work, then."

"Crockston," said the young girl, in a faltering voice, "you are the best man
on earth."

"I know it," replied the American, laughing good-humouredly. "By the by,
Captain, an important item."

"What is that?"

"If the General proposes to hang your rebel — you know that military men
like sharp work — "

"Well, Crockston?"

"Well, you will say that you must think about it."

"T promise you I will."

The same day, to the great astonishment of the crew, who were not in the
secret, Crockston, with his feet and hands in irons, was taken on shore by a
dozen sailors, and half an hour after, by Captain James Playfair’s request, he was
led through the streets of the town, and, in spite of his resistance, was
imprisoned in the citadel.

During this and the following days the unloading of the Dolphin was rapidly
accomplished; the steam cranes lifted out the European cargo to make room for
the native goods. The people of Charleston, who were present at this interesting
work, helped the sailors, whom they held in great respect, but the Captain did
not leave the brave fellows much time for receiving compliments; he was
constantly behind them, and urged them on with a feverish activity, the reason of
which the sailors could not suspect.

Three days later, on the 18th of January, the first bales of cotton began to be
packed in the hold: although James Playfair troubled himself no more about it,


the firm of Playfair and Co. were making an excellent bargain, having obtained
the cotton which encumbered the Charleston wharves at very far less than its
value.

In the meantime no news had been heard of Crockston. Jenny, without saying
anything about it, was a prey to incessant fears; her pale face spoke for her, and
James Playfair endeavoured his utmost to ease her mind.

"T have all confidence in Crockston," said he; "he is a devoted servant, as you
must know better than I do, Miss Jenny. You must make yourself quite at ease;
believe me, in three days you will be folded in your father’s arms."

"Ah! Mr. James," cried the young girl, "how can I ever repay you for such
devotion? How shall we ever be able to thank you?"

"T will tell you when we are in English seas," replied the young Captain.

Jenny raised her tearful face to him for a moment, then her eyelids drooped,
and she went back to her cabin.

James Playfair hoped that the young girl would know nothing of her father’s
terrible situation until he was in safety, but she was apprised of the truth by the
involuntary indiscretion of a sailor.

The reply from the Richmond cabinet had arrived by a courier who had been
able to pass the line of outposts; the reply contained Jonathan Halliburtt’s death-
warrant. The news of the approaching execution was not long in spreading
through the town, and it was brought on board by one of the sailors of the
Dolphin; the man told the Captain, without thinking that Miss Halliburtt was
within hearing; the young girl uttered a piercing cry, and fell unconscious on the
deck. James Playfair carried her to her cabin, but the most assiduous care was
necessary to restore her to life.

When she opened her eyes again, she saw the young Captain, who, with a
finger on his lips, enjoined absolute silence. With difficulty she repressed the
outburst of her grief, and James Playfair, leaning towards her, said gently:

"Jenny, in two hours your father will be in safety near you, or I shall have
perished in endeavouring to save him!"

Then he left the cabin, saying to himself, "And now he must be carried off at
any price, since I must pay for his liberty with my own life and those of my
crew."

The hour for action had arrived, the loading of the cotton cargo had been
finished since morning; in two hours the ship would be ready to start.

James Playfair had left the North Commercial Wharf and gone into the
roadstead, so that he was ready to make use of the tide, which would be high at
nine o’clock in the evening.

It was seven o’clock when James left the young girl, and began to make


preparations for departure. Until the present time the secret had been strictly kept
between himself, Crockston, and Jenny; but now he thought it wise to inform
Mr. Mathew of the situation of affairs, and he did so immediately.

"Very well, sir," replied Mr. Mathew, without making the least remark, "and
nine o’clock is the time?"

"Nine o’clock, and have the fires lit immediately, and the steam got up."

"Tt shall be done, Captain."

"The Dolphin may remain at anchor; we will cut our moorings and sheer off,
without losing a moment."

"Just so."

"Have a lantern placed at the mainmast-head; the night is dark, and will be
foggy; we must not risk losing our way in returning. You had better have the bell
for starting rung at nine o’clock."

"Your orders shall be punctually attended to, Captain."

"And now, Mr. Mathew, have a shore-boat manned with six of our best men.
I am going to set out directly for White Point. I leave Miss Jenny in your charge,
and may God protect us!"

"May God protect us!" repeated the first officer.

Then he immediately gave the necessary orders for the fires to be lighted,
and the shore-boat provided with men. In a few minutes the boat was ready, and
James Playfair, after bidding Jenny good-bye, stepped into it, whilst at the same
time he saw volumes of black smoke issuing from the chimneys of the ship, and
losing itself in the fog.

The darkness was profound; the wind had fallen, and in the perfect silence
the waters seemed to slumber in the immense harbour, whilst a few uncertain
lights glimmered through the mist. James Playfair had taken his place at the
rudder, and with a steady hand he guided his boat towards White Point. It was a
distance of about two miles; during the day James had taken his bearings
perfectly, so that he was able to make direct for Charleston Point.

Eight o’clock struck from the church of St. Philip when the shore-boat ran
aground at White Point.

There was an hour to wait before the exact time fixed by Crockston; the quay
was deserted, with the exception of the sentinel pacing to and fro on the south
and east batteries. James Playfair grew impatient, and the minutes seemed hours
to him.

At half-past eight he heard the sound of approaching steps; he left his men
with their oars clear and ready to start, and went himself to see who it was; but
he had not gone ten feet when he met a band of coastguards, in all about twenty
men. James drew his revolver from his waist, deciding to make use of it, if needs


be; but what could he do against these soldiers, who were coming on to the
quay?

The leader came up to him, and, seeing the boat, asked:

"Whose craft is that?"

"It is a gig belonging to the Dolphin," replied the young man.

"And who are you?"

"Captain James Playfair."

"I thought you had already started, and were now in the Charleston
channels."

"I am ready to start. I ought even now to be on my way but — "

"But — " persisted the coastguard.

A bright idea shot through James’s mind, and he answered:

"One of my sailors is locked up in the citadel, and, to tell the truth, I had
almost forgotten him; fortunately I thought of him in time, and I have sent my
men to bring him."

"Ah! that troublesome fellow; you wish to take him back to England?"

"Yes.

"He might as well be hung here as there," said the coastguard, laughing at his
joke.

"So I think," said James Playfair, "but it is better to have the thing done in the
regular way."

"Not much chance of that, Captain, when you have to face the Morris Island
batteries."

"Don’t alarm yourself. I got in and I’ll get out again."

"Prosperous voyage to you!"

"Thank you.”

With this the men went off, and the shore was left silent.

At this moment nine o’clock struck; it was the appointed moment. James felt
his heart beat violently; a whistle was heard; he replied to it, then he waited,
listening, with his hand up to enjoin perfect silence on the sailors. A man
appeared enveloped in a large cloak, and looking from one side to another. James
ran up to him.

"Mr. Halliburtt?"

"T am he," replied the man with the cloak.

"God be praised!" cried James Playfair. "Embark without losing a minute.
Where is Crockston?"

"Crockston!" exclaimed Mr. Halliburtt, amazed. "What do you mean?"

"The man who has saved you and brought you here was your servant
Crockston."


"The man who came with me was the gaoler from the citadel," replied Mr.
Halliburtt.

"The gaoler!" cried James Playfair.

Evidently he knew nothing about it, and a thousand fears crowded in his
mind.

"Quite right, the gaoler," cried a well-known voice. "The gaoler is sleeping
like a top in my cell."

"Crockston! you! Can it be you?" exclaimed Mr. Halliburtt.

"No time to talk now, master; we will explain everything to you afterwards.
It is a question of life or death. Get in quick!"

The three men took their places in the boat.

"Push off!" cried the captain.

Immediately the six oars dipped into the water; the boat darted like a fish
through the waters of Charleston Harbour.


Chapter IX


BETWEEN TWO FIRES


The boat, pulled by six robust oarsmen, flew over the water. The fog was
growing dense, and it was with difficulty that James Playfair succeeded in
keeping to the line of his bearings. Crockston sat at the bows, and Mr. Halliburtt
at the stern, next the Captain. The prisoner, only now informed of the presence
of his servant, wished to speak to him, but the latter enjoined silence.

However, a few minutes later, when they were in the middle of the harbour,
Crockston determined to speak, knowing what thoughts were uppermost in Mr.
Halliburtt’s mind.

"Yes, my dear master,” said he, "the gaoler is in my place in the cell, where I
gave him two smart blows, one on the head and the other on the stomach, to act
as a sleeping draught, and this when he was bringing me my supper; there is
gratitude for you. I took his clothes and his keys, found you, and let you out of
the citadel, under the soldiers’ noses. That is all I have done."

"But my daughter — ?" asked Mr. Halliburtt.

"Is on board the ship which is going to take you to England."

"My daughter there! there!" cried the American, springing from his seat.

"Silence!" replied Crockston, "a few minutes, and we shall be saved."

The boat flew through the darkness, but James Playfair was obliged to steer
rather by guess, as the lanterns of the Dolphin were no longer visible through the
fog. He was undecided what direction to follow, and the darkness was so great
that the rowers could not even see to the end of their oars.

"Well, Mr. James?" said Crockston.

"We must have made more than a mile and a half," replied the Captain. "You
don’t see anything, Crockston?"

"Nothing; nevertheless, I have good eyes; but we shall get there all right.
They don’t suspect anything out there."

These words were hardly finished when the flash of a gun gleamed for an
instant through the darkness, and vanished in the mist.

"A signal!" cried James Playfair.

"Whew!" exclaimed Crockston. "It must have come from the citadel. Let us
wait."

A second, then a third shot was fired in the direction of the first, and almost
the same signal was repeated a mile in front of the gig.


"That is from Fort Sumter," cried Crockston, "and it is the signal of escape.
Urge on the men; everything is discovered."

"Pull for your lives, my men!" cried James Playfair, urging on the sailors,
"those gun-shots cleared my route. The Dolphin is eight hundred yards ahead of
us. Stop! I hear the bell on board. Hurrah, there it is again! Twenty pounds for
you if we are back in five minutes!"

The boat skimmed over the waves under the sailors’ powerful oars. A cannon
boomed in the direction of the town. Crockston heard a ball whiz past them.

The bell on the Dolphin was ringing loudly. A few more strokes and the boat
was alongside. A few more seconds and Jenny fell into her father’s arms.

The gig was immediately raised, and James Playfair sprang on to the poop.

"Is the steam up, Mr. Mathew?"

"Yes, Captain."

"Have the moorings cut at once."

A few minutes later the two screws carried the steamer towards the principal
channel, away from Fort Sumter.

"Mr. Mathew," said James, "we must not think of taking the Sullivan Island
channel; we should run directly under the Confederate guns. Let us go as near as
possible to the right side of the harbour out of range of the Federal batteries.
Have you a safe man at the helm?"

"Yes, Captain."

"Have the lanterns and the fires on deck extinguished; there is a great deal
too much light, but we cannot help the reflection from the engine-rooms."

During this conversation the Dolphin was going at a great speed; but in
altering her course to keep to the right side of the Charleston Harbour she was
obliged to enter a channel which took her for a moment near Fort Sumter; and
when scarcely half a mile off all the guns bearing on her were discharged at the
same time, and a shower of shot and shell passed in front of the Dolphin with a
thundering report.

"Too soon, stupids," cried James Playfair, with a burst of laughter. "Make
haste, make haste, Mr. Engineer! We shall get between two fires."

The stokers fed the furnaces, and the Dolphin trembled all over with the
effort of the engine as if she was on the point of exploding.

At this moment a second report was heard, and another shower of balls
whizzed behind the Dolphin.

"Too late, stupids,”" cried the young Captain, with a regular roar.

Then Crockston, who was standing on the poop, cried, "That’s one passed. A
few minutes more, and we shall have done with the Rebs."

"Then do you think we have nothing more to fear from Fort Sumter?" asked


James.

"Nothing at all, but everything from Fort Moultrie, at the end of Sullivan
Island; but they will only get a chance at us for half a minute, and then they must
choose their time well, and shoot straight if they want to reach us. We are getting
near."

"Right; the position of Fort Moultrie will allow us to go straight for the
principal channel. Fire away then, fire away!"

At the same moment, and as if in obedience to James Playfair, the fort was
illuminated by a triple line of lightning. A frightful crash was heard; then a
crackling sound on board the steamer.

"Touched this time!" exclaimed Crockston.

"Mr. Mathew!" cried the Captain to his second, who was stationed at the
bows, "what has been damaged?"

"The bowsprit broken."

"Any wounded?"

"No, Captain."

"Well, then, the masts may go to Jericho. Straight into the pass! Straight! and
steer towards the island."

"We have passed the Rebs!" cried Crockston; "and, if we must have balls in
our hull, I would much rather have the Northerners; they are more easily
digested."

In fact, the Dolphin could not yet consider herself out of danger; for, if
Morris Island was not fortified with the formidable pieces of artillery which
were placed there a few months later, nevertheless its guns and mortars could
easily have sunk a ship like the Dolphin.

The alarm had been given to the Federals on the island, and to the
blockading squadron, by the firing from Forts Sumter and Moultrie. The
besiegers could not make out the reason of this night attack; it did not seem to be
directed against them. However, they were obliged to consider it so, and were
ready to reply.

It occupied James Playfair’s thoughts whilst making towards the passes of
Morris Island; and he had reason to fear, for in a quarter of an hour’s time lights
gleamed rapidly through the darkness. A shower of small shell fell round the
steamer, scattering the water over her bulwarks; some of them even struck the
deck of the Dolphin, but not on their points, which saved the ship from certain
ruin. In fact, these shell, as it was afterwards discovered, could break into a
hundred fragments, and each cover a superficial area of a hundred and twenty
square feet with Greek fire, which would bum for twenty minutes, and nothing
could extinguish it. One of these shell alone could set a ship on fire. Fortunately


for the Dolphin, they were a new invention, and as yet far from perfect. Once
thrown into the air, a false rotary movement kept them inclined, and, when
falling, instead of striking on their points, where is the percussion apparatus,
they fell flat. This defect in construction alone saved the Dolphin. The falling of
these shells did her little harm, and under the pressure of her overheated boilers
she continued to advance into the pass.

At this moment, and in spite of his orders, Mr. Halliburtt and his daughter
went to James Playfair on the poop; the latter urged them to return to their
cabins, but Jenny declared that she would remain by the Captain. As for Mr.
Halliburtt, who had just learnt all the noble conduct of his deliverer, he pressed
his hand without being able to utter a word.

The Dolphin was speeding rapidly towards the open sea. There were only
three miles more before she would be in the waters of the Atlantic; if the pass
was free at its entrance, she was saved. James Playfair was wonderfully well
acquainted with all the secrets of Charleston Bay, and he guided his ship through
the darkness with an unerring hand. He was beginning to think his daring
enterprise successful, when a sailor on the forecastle cried:

"A ship!"

"A ship?" cried James.

"Yes, on the larboard side."

The fog had cleared off, and a large frigate was seen making towards the
pass, in order to obstruct the passage of the Dolphin. It was necessary, cost what
it might, to distance her, and urge the steam-engine to an increase of speed, or all
was lost.

"Port the helm at once!" cried the Captain.

Then he sprang on to the bridge above the engine. By his orders one of the
screws was stopped, and under the action of the other the Dolphin, veering with
an extraordinary rapidity, avoided running foul of the frigate, and advanced like
her to the entrance of the pass. It was now a question of speed.

James Playfair understood that in this lay his own safety, Miss Jenny’s, her
father’s, and that of all his crew.

The frigate was considerably in advance of the Dolphin. It was evident from
the volumes of black smoke issuing from her chimneys that she was getting up
her steam. James Playfair was not the man to be left in the background.

"How are the engines?" cried he to the engineer.

"At the maximum speed," replied the latter; "the steam is escaping by all the
valves."

"Fasten them down," ordered the Captain.

And his orders were executed at the risk of blowing up the ship.


The Dolphin again increased her speed; the pistons worked with frightful
rapidity; the metal plates on which the engine was placed trembled under the
terrific force of their blows. It was a sight to make the boldest shudder.

"More pressure!" cried James Playfair; "put on more pressure!"

"Impossible!" replied the engineer. "The valves are tightly closed; our
furnaces are full up to the mouths."

"What difference! Fill them with cotton soaked in spirits; we must pass that
frigate at any price."

At these words the most daring of the sailors looked at each other, but did not
hesitate. Some bales of cotton were thrown into the engine-room, a barrel of
spirits broached over them, and this expensive fuel placed, not without danger, in
the red-hot furnaces. The stokers could no longer hear each other speak for the
roaring of the flames. Soon the metal plates of the furnaces became red-hot; the
pistons worked like the pistons of a locomotive; the steamgauge showed a
frightful tension; the steamer flew over the water; her boards creaked, and her
chimneys threw out volumes of smoke mingled with flames. She was going at a
headlong speed, but, nevertheless, she was gaining on the frigate — passed her,
distanced her, and in ten minutes was out of the channel.


"Saved!" cried the Captain.

"Saved!" echoed the crew, clapping their hands.

Already the Charleston beacon was disappearing in the south-west; the sound
of firing from the batteries grew fainter, and it might with reason be thought that
the danger was all past, when a shell from a gun-boat cruising at large was
hurled whizzing through the air. It was easy to trace its course, thanks to the line
of fire which followed it.

Then was a moment of anxiety impossible to describe; every one was silent,
and each watched fearfully the arch described by the projectile. Nothing could
be done to escape it, and in a few seconds it fell with a frightful noise on the
fore-deck of the Dolphin.

The terrified sailors crowded to the stern, and no one dared move a step,
whilst the shell was burning with a brisk crackle.

But one brave man alone among them ran up to the formidable weapon of
destruction. It was Crockston; he took the shell in his strong arms, whilst
showers of sparks were falling from it; then, with a superhuman effort, he threw
it overboard.

Hardly had the shell reached the surface of the water when it burst with a
frightful report.

"Hurrah! hurrah!" cried the whole crew of the Dolphin unanimously, whilst


Crockston rubbed his hands.

Some time later the steamer sped rapidly through the waters of the Atlantic;
the American coast disappeared in the darkness, and the distant lights which shot
across the horizon indicated that the attack was general between the batteries of
Morris Island and the forts of Charleston Harbour.


Chapter X


ST. MUNGO


The next day at sunrise the American coast had disappeared; not a ship was
visible on the horizon, and the Dolphin, moderating the frightful rapidity of her
speed, made quietly towards the Bermudas.

It is useless to recount the passage across the Atlantic, which was marked by
no accidents, and ten days after the departure from Queenstown the French coast
was hailed.

What passed between the Captain and the young girl may be imagined, even
by the least observant individuals. How could Mr. Halliburtt acknowledge the
devotion and courage of his deliverer, if it was not by making him the happiest
of men? James Playfair did not wait for English seas to declare to the father and
daughter the sentiments which overflowed his heart, and, if Crockston is to be
believed, Miss Jenny received his confession with a happiness she did not try to
conceal.

Thus it happened that on the 14th of February, 18 — , a numerous crowd was
collected in the dim aisles of St. Mungo, the old cathedral of Glasgow. There
were seamen, merchants, manufacturers, magistrates, and some of every
denomination gathered here. There was Miss Jenny in bridal array and beside
her the worthy Crockston, resplendent in apple-green clothes, with gold buttons,
whilst Uncle Vincent stood proudly by his nephew.

In short, they were celebrating the marriage of James Playfair, of the firm of
Vincent Playfair & Co., of Glasgow, with Miss Jenny Halliburtt, of Boston.

The ceremony was accomplished amidst great pomp. Everyone knew the
history of the Dolphin, and everyone thought the young Captain well
recompensed for his devotion. He alone said that his reward was greater than he
deserved.

In the evening there was a grand ball and banquet at Uncle Vincent’s house,
with a large distribution of shillings to the crowd collected in Gordon Street.
Crockston did ample justice to this memorable feast, while keeping himself
perfectly within bounds.


Everyone was happy at this wedding; some at their own happiness, and
others at the happiness around them, which is not always the case at ceremonies
of this kind.


Late in the evening, when the guests had retired, James Playfair took his
uncle’s hand.

"Well, Uncle Vincent," said he to him.

"Well, Nephew James?"

"Are you pleased with the charming cargo I brought you on board the
Dolphin?" continued Captain Playfair, showing him his brave young wife.

"I am quite satisfied," replied the worthy merchant; "I have sold my cotton at
three hundred and seventy-five per cent. profit."

End of The Blockade Runners


THE FUR COUNTRY
or
Seventy Degrees North Latitude


CHAPTER I.

A SOIREE AT FORT RELIANCE.

On the evening of the 17th March 1859, Captain Craventy gave a féte at Fort
Reliance. Our readers must not at once imagine a grand entertainment, such as a
court ball, or a musical soirée with a fine orchestra. Captain Craventy’s reception
was a very simple affair, yet he had spared no pains to give it éclat.

In fact, under the auspices of Corporal Joliffe, the large room on the ground-
floor was completely transformed. The rough walls, constructed of roughly-
hewn trunks of trees piled up horizontally, were still visible, it is true, but their
nakedness was disguised by arms and armour, borrowed from the arsenal of the
fort, and by an English tent at each corner of the room. Two lamps suspended by
chains, like chandeliers, and provided with tin reflectors, relieved the gloomy
appearance of the blackened beams of the ceiling, and sufficiently illuminated
the misty atmosphere of the room. The narrow windows, some of them mere
loop-holes, were so encrusted with hoar-frost, that it was impossible to look
through them; but two or three pieces of red bunting, tastily arranged about
them, challenged the admiration of all who entered. The floor, of rough joists of
wood laid parallel with each other, had been carefully swept by Corporal Joliffe.
No sofas, chairs, or other modern furniture, impeded the free circulation of the
guests. Wooden benches half fixed against the walls, huge blocks of wood cut
with the axe, and two tables with clumsy legs, were all the appliances of luxury
the saloon could boast of. But the partition wall, with a narrow door leading into
the next room, was decorated in a style alike costly and picturesque. From the


beams hung magnificent furs admirably arranged, the equal of which could not
be seen in the more favoured regions of Regent Street or the Perspective-
Newski. It seemed as if the whole fauna of the ice-bound North were here
represented by their finest skins. The eye wandered from the furs of wolves, grey
bears, polar bears, otters, wolverenes, beavers, muskrats, water polecats,
ermines, and silver foxes; and above this display was an inscription in
brilliantly-coloured and artistically shaped cardboard—the motto of the world-
famous Hudson’s Bay Company—

"PROPELLE CUTUM."

"Really, Corporal Joliffe, you have surpassed yourself !" said Captain
Craventy to his subordinate.

"I think I have, I think I have !" replied the Corporal; "but honour to whom
honour is due, Mrs Joliffe deserves part of your commendation; she assisted me
in everything."

"A wonderful woman, Corporal."

"Her equal is not to be found, Captain."

An immense brick and earthenware stove occupied the centre of the room,
with a huge iron pipe passing from it through the ceiling, and conducting the
dense black smoke into the outer air. This stove contained a roaring fire
constantly fed with fresh shovelfuls of coal by the stoker, an old soldier specially
appointed to the service. Now and then a gust of wind drove back a volume of
smoke into the room, dimming the brightness of the lamps, and adding fresh
blackness to the beams of the ceiling, whilst tongues of flame shot forth from the
stove. But the guests of Fort Reliance thought little of this slight inconvenience;
the stove warmed them, and they could not pay too dearly for its cheering heat,
so terribly cold was it outside in the cutting north wind.

The storm could be heard raging without, the snow fell fast, becoming
rapidly solid and coating the already frosted window panes with fresh ice. The
whistling wind made its way through the cranks and chinks of the doors and
windows, and occasionally the rattling noise drowned every other sound.
Presently an awful silence ensued. Nature seemed to be taking breath; but
suddenly the squall recommenced with terrific fury. The house was shaken to its
foundations, the planks cracked, the beams groaned. A stranger less accustomed
than the habitués of the fort to the war of the elements, would have asked if the
end of the world were come.

But, with two exceptions, Captain Craventy’s guests troubled themselves
little about the weather, and if they had been outside they would have felt no
more fear than the stormy petrels disporting themselves in the midst of the
tempest. Two only of the assembled company did not belong to the ordinary


society of the neighbourhood, two women, whom we shall introduce when we
have enumerated Captain Craventy’s other guests: these were, Lieutenant Jaspar
Hobson, Sergeant Long, Corporal Joliffe, and his bright active Canadian wife, a
certain Mac-Nab and his wife, both Scotch, John Rae, married to an Indian
woman of the country, and some sixty soldiers or employés of the Hudson’s Bay
Company. The neighbouring forts also furnished their contingent of guests, for
in these remote lands people look upon each other as neighbours although their
homes may be a hundred miles apart. A good many employés or traders came
from Fort Providence or Fort Resolution, of the Great Slave Lake district, and
even from Fort Chippeway and Fort Liard further south. A rare break like this in
the monotony of their secluded lives, in these hyberborean regions, was joyfully
welcomed by all the exiles, and even a few Indian chiefs, about a dozen, had
accepted Captain Craventy’s invitation. They were not, however, accompanied
by their wives, the luckless squaws being still looked upon as little better than
slaves. The presence of these natives is accounted for by the fact that they are in
constant intercourse with the traders, and supply the greater number of furs
which pass through the hands of the Hudson’s Bay Company, in exchange for
other commodities. They are mostly Chippeway Indians, well grown men with
hardy constitutions. Their complexions are of the peculiar reddish black colour
always ascribed in Europe to the evil spirits of fairyland. They wear very
picturesque cloaks of skins and mantles of fur, with a head-dross of eagle’s
feathers spread out like a lady’s fan, and quivering with every motion of their
thick black hair.

Such was the company to whom the Captain was doing the honours of Fort
Reliance. There was no dancing for want of music, but the "buffet" admirably
supplied the want of the hired musicians of the European balls. On the table rose
a pyramidal pudding made by Mrs Joliffe’s own hands; it was an immense
truncated cone, composed of flour, fat, reindeer venison, and musk beef. The
eggs, milk, and citron prescribed in recipe books were, it is true, wanting, but
their absence was atoned for by its huge proportions. Mrs Joliffe served out slice
after slice with liberal hands, yet there remained enough and to spare. Piles of
sandwiches also figured on the table, in which ship biscuits took the place of thin
slices of English bread and butter, and dainty morsels of corned beef that of the
ham and stuffed veal of the old world. The sharp teeth of the Chippeway Indians
made short work of the tough biscuits; and for drink there was plenty of whisky
and gin handed round in little pewter pots, not to speak of a great bowl of punch
which was to close the entertainment, and of which the Indians talked long
afterwards in their wigwams.

Endless were the compliments paid to the Joliffes that evening, but they


deserved them; how zealously they waited on the guests, with what easy grace
they distributed the refreshments! They did not need prompting, they anticipated
the wishes of each one. The sandwiches were succeeded by slices of the
inexhaustible pudding, the pudding by glasses of gin or whisky.

"No, thank you, Mr Joliffe."

"You are too good, Corporal; but let me have time to breathe."

"Mrs Joliffe, I assure you, I can eat no more."

"Corporal Joliffe, I am at your mercy."

"No more, Mrs Joliffe, no more, thank you!"

Such were the replies met with on every side by the zealous pair, but their
powers of persuasion were such that the most reluctant yielded in the end. The
quantities of food and drink consumed were really enormous. The hubbub of
conversation increased. The soldiery and employés became excited. Here the
talk was of hunting, there of trade. What plans were laid for next season! The
entire fauna of the Arctic regions would scarcely supply game enough for these
enterprising hunters. They already saw bears, foxes, and musk oxen, falling
beneath their bullets, and polecats by hundreds caught in their traps. Their
imagination pictured the costly furs piled up in the magazines of the Company,
which was this year to realise hitherto unheard of profits. And whilst the spirits
thus freely circulated inflamed the imagination of the Europeans, the large doses
of Captain Craventy’s "fire-water" imbibed by the Indians had an opposite effect.
Too proud to show admiration, too cautious to make promises, the taciturn chiefs
listened gravely and silently to the babel of voices around them.

The captain enjoying the hurly burly, and pleased to see the poor people,
brought back as it were to the civilised world, enjoying themselves so
thoroughly, was here, there, and everywhere, answering all inquiries about the
féte with the words

"Ask Joliffe, ask Joliffe !"

And they asked Joliffe, who had a gracious word for every body.

Some of those employed in the garrison and civil service of Fort Reliance
must here receive a few words of special notice, for they were presently to go
through experiences of a most terrible nature, which no human perspicacity
could possibly have foreseen. Amongst others we must name Lieutenant Jaspar
Hobson, Sergeant Long, Corporal and Mrs Joliffe, and the two foreign women
already alluded to, in whose honour Captain Craventy’s féte was given.

Jaspar Hobson was a man of forty years of age. He was short and slight, with
little muscular power; but a force of will which carried him successfully through
all trials, and enabled him to rise superior to adverse circumstances. He was " a
child of the Company." His father, Major Hobson, an Irishman from Dublin, who


had now been dead for some time, lived for many years at Fort Assiniboin with
his wife. There Jaspar Hobson was born. His childhood and youth were spent at
the foot of the Rocky Mountains. His father brought him up strictly, and he
became a man in self-control and courage whilst yet a boy in years. Jaspar
Hobson was no mere hunter, but a soldier, a brave and intelligent officer. During
the struggles in Oregon of the Hudson’s Bay Company with the rival companies
of the Union, he distinguished himself by his zeal and intrepidity, and rapidly
rose to the rank of lieutenant. His well-known merit led to his appointment to the
command of an expedition to the north, the aim of which was to explore the
northern shores of the Great Bear Lake, and to found a fort on the confines of the
American continent. Jaspar Hobson was to set out on his journey early in April.

If the lieutenant was the type of a good officer, Sergeant Long was that of a
good soldier. He was a man of fifty years of age, with a rough beard that looked
as if it were made of cocoa-nut fibre. Constitutionally brave, and disposed to
obey rather than to command. He had no ambition but to obey the orders he
received never questioning them, however strange they might appear, never
reasoning for himself when on duty for the Company-a true machine in uniform;
but a perfect machine, never wearing out; ever on the march, yet never showing
signs of fatigue. Perhaps Sergeant Long was rather hard upon his men, as he was
upon himself. He would not tolerate the slightest infraction of discipline, and
mercilessly ordered men into confinement for the slightest neglect, whilst he
himself had never been reprimanded. In a word, he was a man born to obey, and
this self-annihilation suited his passive temperament. Men such as he are the
materials of which a formidable army is formed. They are the arms of the
service, obeying a single head. Is not this the only really powerful organisation?
The two types of fabulous mythology, Briareus with a hundred arms and Hydra
with a hundred heads, well represent the two kinds of armies; and in a conflict
between them, which would be victorious? Briareus without a doubt !

We have already made acquaintance with Corporal Joliffe. He was the busy
bee of the party, but it was pleasant to hear him humming. He would have made
a better major-domo than a soldier; and he was himself aware of this. So he
called himself the " Corporal in charge of details," but he would have lost
himself a hundred times amongst these details, had not little Mrs Joliffe guided
him with a firm hand. So it came to pass, that Corporal Joliffe obeyed his wife
without owning it, doubtless thinking to himself, like the philosopher Sancho, "a
woman’s advice is no such great thing, but he must be a fool who does not listen
to it."

It is now time to say a few words of the two foreign women already alluded
to more than once. They were both about forty years old, and one of them well


deserved to take first rank amongst celebrated female travellers. The name of
Paulina Barnett, the rival of the Pfeiffers, Tinnis, and Haimaires of Hull, has
been several times honourably mentioned at the meetings of the Royal
Geographical Society. In her journeys up the Brahmaputra, as far as the
mountains of Thibet, across an unknown corner of New Holland, from Swan
Bay to the Gulf of Carpentaria, Paulina Barnett had given proof of the qualities
of a great traveller. She had been a widow for fifteen years, and her passion for
travelling led her constantly to explore new lands. She was tall, and her face,
framed in long braids of hair, already touched with white, was full of energy. She
was near-sighted, and a double eye-glass rested upon her long straight nose, with
its mobile nostrils. We must confess that her walk was somewhat masculine, and
her whole appearance was suggestive of moral power, rather than of female
grace. She was an Englishwoman from Yorkshire, possessed of some fortune, the
greater part of which was expended in adventurous expeditions, and some new
scheme of exploration had now brought her to Fort Reliance. Having crossed the
equinoctial regions, she was doubtless anxious to penetrate to the extreme limits
of the hyperborean. Her presence at the fort was an event. The governor of the
Company had given her a special letter of recommendation to Captain Craventy,
according to which the latter was to do all in his power to forward the design of
the celebrated traveller to reach the borders of the Arctic Ocean. A grand
enterprise! To follow in the steps of Hearne, Mackenzie, Rae, Franklin, and
others. What fatigues, what trials, what dangers would have to be gone through
in the conflict with the terrible elements of the Polar climate! How could a
woman dare to venture where so many explorers have drawn back or perished?
But the stranger now shut up in Fort Reliance was no ordinary woman; she was
Paulina Barmett, a laureate of the Royal Society.

We must add that the celebrated traveller was accompanied by a servant
named Madge. This faithful creature was not merely a servant, but a devoted and
courageous friend, who lived only for her mistress. A Scotchwoman of the old
type, whom a Caleb might have married without loss of dignity. Madge was
about five years older than Mrs Barnett, and was tall and strongly built. The two
were on the most intimate terms; Paulina looked upon Madge as an elder sister,
and Madge treated Paulina as her daughter.

It was in honour of Paulina Barnett that Captain Craventy was this evening
treating his employés and the Chippeway Indians. In fact, the lady traveller was
to join the expedition of Jaspar Hobson for the exploration of the north. It was
for Paulina Barnett that the large saloon of the factory resounded with joyful
hurrahs. And it was no wonder that the stove consumed a hundredweight of coal
on this memorable evening, for the cold outside was twenty-four degrees


Fahrenheit below zero, and Fort Reliance is situated in 61° 47’ N. Lat., at least
four degrees from the Polar circle.

CHAPTER II.

THE HUDSON’S BAY FUR COMPANY.

"Captain Craventy?"

"Mrs Barnett?"

What do you think of your Lieutenant, Jaspar Hobson?"

"T think he is an officer who will go far."

"What do you mean by the words, Will go far? Do you mean that he will go
beyond the Twenty-fourth parallel?"

Captain Craventy could not help smiling at Mrs Paulina Barmett’s question.
They were talking together near the stove, whilst the guests were passing
backwards and forwards between the eating and drinking tables.

"Madam," replied the Captain, "all that a man can do, will be done by Jaspar
Hobson. The Company has charged him to explore the north of their
possessions, and to establish a factory as near as possible to the confines of the
American continent, and he will establish it."

"That is a great responsibility for Lieutenant Hobson !" said the traveller.

"It is, madam, but Jaspar Hobson has never yet drawn back from a task
imposed upon him, however formidable it may have appeared."

"I can quite believe it, Captain," replied Mrs Barnett, "and we shall now see
the Lieutenant at work. But what induces the Company to construct a fort on the
shores of the Arctic Ocean?"

"They have a powerful motive, madam," replied the Captain.

"I may add a double motive. At no very distant date, Russia will probably
cede her American possessions to the Government of the United States. [*1]
When this cession has taken place, the Company will find access to the Pacific
Ocean extremely difficult, unless the North-west passage discovered by
Mc’Clure be practicable. [*1 Captain Craventy’s prophecy has since been
realised.] Fresh explorations will decide this, for the Admiralty is about to send a
vessel which will coast along the North American continent, from Behring Strait
to Coronation Gulf, on the eastern side of which the new-Art is to be established.
If the enterprise succeed, this point will become an important factory, the centre
of the northern fur trade. The transport of furs across the Indian territories
involves a vast expenditure of time and money, whereas, if the new route be
available, steamers will take them from the new fort to the Pacific Ocean in a
few days."

"That would indeed be an important result of the enterprise, if this North-
west passage can really be used," replied Mrs Paulina Barmett; "but I think you


spoke of a double motive."

"I did, madam," said the Captain, "and I alluded to a matter of vital interest
to the Company. But I must beg of you to allow me to explain to you in a few
words how the present state of things came about, how it is in fact that the very
source of the trade of this once flourishing Company is in danger of destruction."

The Captain then proceeded to give a brief sketch of the history of the
famous Hudson’s Bay Company.

In the earliest times men employed the skins and furs of animals as clothing.
The fur trade is therefore of very great antiquity. Luxury in dress increased to
such an extent, that sumptuary laws were enacted to control too great
extravagance, especially in furs, for which there was a positive passion. Vair and
the furs of Siberian squirrels were prohibited at the middle of the 12th century.

In 1553 Russia founded several establishments in the northern steppes, and
England lost no time in following her example. The trade in sables, ermines, and
beavers, was carried on through the agency of the Samoiedes; but during the
reign of Elizabeth, a royal decree restricted the use of costly furs to such an
extent, that for several years this branch of industry was completely paralysed.

On the 2nd May, 1670, a licence to trade in furs in the Hudson’s Bay
Territory was granted to the Company, which numbered several men of high
rank amongst its shareholders : the Duke of York, the Duke of Albemarle, the
Earl of Shaftesbury, &c. Its capital was then only £8420. Private companies were
formidable rivals to its success; and French agents, making Canada their
headquarters, ventured on hazardous but most lucrative expeditions. The active
competition of these bold hunters threatened the very existence of the infant
Company.

The conquest of Canada, however, somewhat lessened the danger of its
position. Three years after the taking of Quebec, 1776, the fur trade received a
new impulse. English traders became familiar with the difficulties of trade of this
kind; they learned the customs of the country, the ways of the Indians and their
system of exchange of goods, but for all this the Company as yet made no profits
whatever. Moreover, towards 1784 some merchants of Montreal combined to
explore the fur country, and founded that powerful North-west Company, which
soon became the centre of the fur trade. In 1798 the new Company shipped furs
to the value of no less than £120,000, and the existence of the Hudson’s Bay
Company was again threatened.

We must add, that the North-west Company shrank from no act, however
iniquitous, if its interests were at stake. Its agents imposed on their own
employés, speculated on the misery of the Indians, robbed them when they had
themselves made them drunk, setting at defiance the Act of Parliament


forbidding the sale of spirituous liquors on Indian territory; and consequently
realising immense profits, in spite of the competition of the various Russian and
American companies which had sprung up—the American Fur Company
amongst others, founded in 1809, with a capital of a million of dollars, which
was Carrying on operations on the west of the Rocky Mountains.

The Hudson’s Bay Company was probably in greater danger of ruin than any
other; but in 1821, after much discussion, a treaty was made, in accordance with
which its old rival the North-west Company became amalgamated with it, the
two receiving the common title of "The Hudson’s Bay Fur Company."

Now the only rival of this important association is the American St Louis Fur
Company. The Hudson’s Bay Company has numerous establishments scattered
over a domain extending over 3,700,000 square miles. Its principal factories are
situated on James Bay, at the mouth of the Severn, in the south, and towards the
frontiers of Upper Canada, on Lakes Athapeskow, Winnipeg, Superior, Methye,
Buffalo, and near the Colombia, Mackenzie, Saskatchewan, and Assiniboin
rivers, &c. Fort York, commanding the course of the river Nelson, is the
headquarters of the Company, and contains its principal fur depot. Moreover, in
1842 it took a lease of all the Russian establishments in North America at an
annual rent of £40,000, so that it is now working on its own account the vast
tracts of country between the Mississippi and the Pacific Ocean. It has sent out
intrepid explorers in every direction: Hearne, towards the Polar Sea, in 1770, to
the discovery of the Coppermine River; Franklin, in 1819 to 1822, along 5550
miles of the American coast; Mackenzie, who, after having discovered the river
to which he gave his name, reached the shores of the Pacific at 52° 24’ N. Lat.
The following is a list of the quantities of skins and furs despatched to Europe by
the Hudson’s Bay Company in 1833-34, which will give an exact idea of the
extent of its trade:-—


Beavers ........... 1,074
Skins and young Beavers,. . 92,288
Musk Rats,......... 694,092
Badgers,.......... 1,069

| =f: | hc ae ee 7,451
Ermines,.......... 491
BOGS 365344325554 9,937
LVNIXES s Sw dherre Se 14,255
Sables,.......... 64,490
Polecats,......... 25,100
OUCES, osc sees 22,303


Such figures ought to bring in a large profit to the Hudson’s Bay Company,
but unfortunately they have not been maintained, and for the last twenty years
have been decreasing.

The cause of this decline was the subject of Captain Craventy’s explanation
to Mrs Paulina Barnett.

"Until 1839, madam," said he, "the Company was in a flourishing condition.
In that year the number of furs exported was 2,350,000, but since then the trade
has gradually declined, and this number is now reduced by one-half at least."

"But what do you suppose is the cause of this extraordinary decrease in the
exportation of furs?" inquired Mrs Barnett.

"The depopulation of the hunting territories, caused by the activity, and, I
must add, the want of foresight of the hunters. The game was trapped and killed
without mercy. These massacres were conducted in the most reckless and short-
sighted fashion. Even females with young and their little ones did not escape.
The consequence is, that the animals whose fur is valuable have become
extremely rare. The otter has almost entirely disappeared, and is only to be found
near the islands of the North Pacific. Small colonies of beavers have taken
refuge on the shores of the most distant rivers. It is the same with many other
animals, compelled to flee before the invasion of the hunters. The traps, once
crowded with game, are now empty. The price of skins is rising just when a great
demand exists for furs. Hunters have gone away in disgust, leaving none but the
most intrepid and indefatigable, who now penetrate to the very confines of the
American continent."

"Yes," said Mrs Paulina Barnett, "the fact of the fur-bearing animals having
taken refuge beyond the polar circle, is a sufficient explanation of the
Company’s motive in founding a factory on the borders of the Arctic Ocean."

"Not only so, madam," replied the Captain, "the Company is also compelled
to seek a more northern centre of operations, for an Act of Parliament has lately
greatly reduced its domain."

"And the motive for this reduction?" inquired the traveller.

"A very important question of political economy was involved, madam; one
which could not fail greatly to interest the statesmen of Great Britain. In a word,
the interests of the Company and those of civilisation are antagonistic. It is to the
interest of the Company to keep the territory belonging to it in a wild
uncultivated condition. Every attempt at clearing ground was pitilessly put a stop


to, as it drove away the wild animals, so that the monopoly enjoyed by the
Hudson’s Bay Company was detrimental to all agricultural enterprise. All
questions not immediately relating to their own particular trade, were
relentlessly put aside by the governors of the association. It was this despotic,
and, in a certain sense, immoral system, which provoked the measures taken by
Parliament, and, in 1837, a commission appointed by the Colonial Secretary
decided that it was necessary to annex to Canada all the territories suitable for
cultivation, such as the Red River and Saskatchewan districts, and to leave to the
Company only that portion of its land which appeared to be incapable of future
civilisation. The next year the Company lost the western slopes of the Rocky
Mountains, which it held direct from the Colonial Office, and you will now
understand, madam, how the agents of the Company, having lost their power
over their old territories, are determined before giving up their trade to try to
work the little known countries of the north, and so open a communication with
the Pacific by means of the North-west passage."

Mrs Paulina Barnett was now well informed as to the ulterior projects of the
celebrated Company. Captain Craventy had given her a graphic sketch of the
situation, and it is probable he would have entered into further details, had not an
incident cut short his harangue.

Corporal Joliffe announced in a loud voice that, with Mrs Joliffe’s assistance,
he was about to mix the punch. This news was received as it deserved. The bowl
—or rather, the basin—was filled with the precious liquid. It contained no less
than ten pints of coarse rum. Sugar, measured out by Mrs Joliffe, was piled up at
the bottom, and on the top floated slices of lemon shrivelled with age. Nothing
remained to be done but to light this alcoholic lake, and the Corporal, match in
hand, awaited the order of his Captain, as if he were about to spring a mine.

"All right, Joliffe !" at last said Captain Craventy.

The light was applied to the bowl, and in a moment the punch was in flames,
whilst the guests applauded and clapped their hands. Ten minutes afterwards, full
glasses of the delightful beverage were circulating amongst the guests, fresh
bidders for them coming forward in endless succession, like speculators on the
Stock Exchange.

"Hurrah! hurrah! hurrah! three cheers for Mrs Barnett! A cheer for the
Captain.”

In the midst of these joyful shouts cries were heard from outside. Silence
immediately fell upon the company assembled.

"Sergeant Long," said the Captain, "go and see what is the matter."

And at his chief’s order, the Sergeant, leaving his glass unfinished, left the
room.


CHAPTER III.

A SAVANT THAWED.

Sergeant Long hastened to the narrow passage from which opened the outer
door of the fort, and heard the cries redoubled, and combined with violent blows
on the postern gate, surrounded by high walls, which gave access to the court.
The Sergeant pushed open the door, and plunging into the snow, already a foot
deep; he waded through it, although half-blinded by the cutting sleet, and nipped
by the terrible cold.

"What the devil does any one want at this time of night?" exclaimed the
Sergeant to himself, as he mechanically removed the heavy bars of the gate;
"none but Esquimaux would dare to brave such a temperature as this!"

"Open! open! open!" they shouted from without.

"I am opening," replied Sergeant Long, who really seemed to be a long time
about it.

At last the door swung open, and the Sergeant was almost upset by a sledge,
drawn by six dogs, which dashed past him like a flash of lightning. Worthy
Sergeant Long only just escaped being crushed, but he got up without a murmur,
closed the gate, and returned to the house at his ordinary pace, that is to say, at
the rate of seventy-five strides a minute.

But Captain Craventy, Lieutenant Jaspar Hobson, and Corporal Joliffe were
already outside, braving the intense cold, and staring at the sledge, white with
snow, which had just drawn up in front of them.

Aman completely enveloped in furs now descended from it,

"Fort Reliance?;" he inquired.

"The same," replied the Captain.

"Captain Craventy?"

"Behold him! Who are you?"

"A courier of the Company."

"Are you alone?"

"No, I bring a traveller."

"A traveller! And what does he want?"

"He is come to see the moon."

At this reply, Captain Craventy said to himself the man must be a fool. But
there was no time to announce this opinion, for the courier had taken an inert
mass from the sledge, a kind of bag covered with snow, and was about to carry it
into the house, when the Captain inquired

"What is that bag?"

"It is my traveller," replied the courier.

"Who is this traveller?"


"The astronomer, Thomas Black."

"But he is frozen."

"Well, he must be thawed."

Thomas Black, carried by the Sergeant, the Corporal, and the courier, now
made his entrance into the house of the fort, and was taken to a room on the first
floor, the temperature of which was bearable, thanks to a glowing stove. He was
laid upon a bed, and the Captain took his hand.

It was literally frozen. The wrappers and furred mantles, in which Thomas
Black was rolled up like a parcel requiring care, were removed, and revealed a
man of about fifty. He was short and stout, his hair was already touched with
grey, his beard was untrimmed, his eyes were closed, and his lips pressed
together as if glued to one another. If he breathed at all, it was so slightly that the
frost-work on the windows would not have been affected by it. Joliffe undressed
him, and turned him rapidly on to his face and back again, with the words—

"Come, come, sir, when do you mean to return to consciousness?"

But the visitor who had arrived in so strange a manner showed no signs of
returning life, and Corporal Joliffe could think of no better means to restore the
lost vital heat than to give him a bath in the bowl of hot punch.

Very happily for Thomas Black, however, Lieutenant Jaspar Hobson had
another idea.

"Snow, bring snow!" he cried.

There was plenty of it in the court of Fort Reliance; and whilst the Sergeant
went to fetch the snow, Joliffe removed all the astronomer’s clothes. The body of
the unfortunate man was covered with white frost-bitten patches. It was urgently
necessary to restore the circulation of the blood in the affected portions. This
result Jaspar Hobson hoped to obtain by vigorous friction with the snow. We
know that this is the means generally employed in the polar countries to set
going afresh the circulation of the blood arrested by the intense cold, even as the
rivers are arrested in their courses by the icy touch of winter. Sergeant Loin soon
returned, and he and Joliffe gave the new arrival such a rubbing as he had
probably never before received. It was no soft and agreeable friction, but a
vigorous shampooing most lustily performed, more like the scratching of a
curry-comb than the caresses of a human hand.

And during the operation the loquacious Corporal continued to exhort the
unconscious traveller.

"Come, come, sir. What do you mean by getting frozen like this. Now, don’t
be so obstinate !"

Probably it was obstinacy which kept Thomas Black from deigning to show
a sign of life. At the end of half an hour the rubbers began to despair, and were


about to discontinue their exhausting efforts, when the poor man sighed several
times.

"He lives; he is coming to !" cried Jaspar Hobson.

After having warmed the outside of his body, Corporal Joliffe hurried to do
the same for the inside, and hastily fetched a few glasses of the punch. The
traveller really felt much revived by them; the colour returned to his cheeks,
expression to his eyes, and words to his lips, so that Captain Craventy began to
hope that he should have an explanation from Thomas Black himself of his
strange arrival at the fort in such a terrible condition.

At last the traveller, well covered with wraps, rose on his elbow, and said in a
voice still faint

"Fort Reliance?"

"The same," replied the Captain.

"Captain Craventy?"

"He is before you, and is happy to bid you welcome. But may I inquire what
brings you to Fort Reliance?"

"He is come to see the moon," replied the courier, who evidently thought this
a happy answer.

It satisfied Thomas Black too, for he bent his head in assent and resumed—

"Lieutenant Hobson?"

"T am here," replied the Lieutenant.

"You have not yet started?"

"Not. yet, sir."

"Then," replied Thomas Black, "I have only to thank you, and to go to sleep
until to-morrow morning."

The Captain and his companions retired, leaving their strange visitor to his
repose. Half an hour later the féte was at an end, and the guests had regained
their respective homes, either in the different rooms of the fort, or the scattered
houses outside the enceinte.

The next day Thomas Black was rather better. His vigorous constitution had
thrown off the effects of the terrible chill he had had. Any one else would have
died from it; but he was not like other men.

And now who was this astronomer? Where did he come from? Why had he
undertaken this journey across the territories of the Company in the depth of
winter? What did the courier’s reply signify?— To see the moon! The moon
could be seen anywhere; there was no need to come to the hyperborean regions
to look at it!

Such were the thoughts which passed through Captain Craventy’s mind. But
the next day, after an hour’s talk with his new guest, he had learned all he wished


to know.

Thomas Black was an astronomer attached to the Greenwich Observatory, so
brilliantly presided over by Professor Airy. Mr Black was no theorist, but a
sagacious and intelligent observer; and in the twenty years during which he had
devoted himself to astronomy, he had rendered great services to the science of
ouranography. In private life he was a simple nonentity; he existed only for
astronomy; he lived in the heavens, not upon the earth; and was a true
descendant of the witty La Fontaine’s savant who fell into a well. He could talk
of nothing but stars and constellations. He ought to have lived in a telescope. As
an observer be had not his rival; his patience was inexhaustible; he could watch
for months for a cosmical phenomenon. He had a specialty of his own, too; he
had studied luminous meteors and shooting stars, and his discoveries in this
branch of astronomical science were considerable. When ever minute
observations or exact measurements and definitions were required, Thomas
Black was chosen for the service; for his clearness of sight was something
remarkable. The power of observation is not given to everyone, and it will not
therefore be surprising that the Greenwich astronomer should have been chosen
for the mission we are about to describe, which involved results so interesting
for selenographic science.

We know that during a total eclipse of the sun the moon is surrounded by a
luminous corona. But what is the origin of this corona? Is it a real substance? or
is it only an effect of the diffraction of the sun’s rays near the moon? This is a
question which science has hitherto been unable to answer.

As early as 1706 this luminous halo was scientifically described. The corona
was minutely examined during the total eclipse of 1715 by Lonville and Halley,
by Maraldi in 1724, by Antonio de’ Ulloa in 1778, and by Bonditch and Ferrer in
1806; but their theories were so contradictory that no definite conclusion could
be arrived at. During the total eclipse of 1842, learned men of all nations—Airy,
Arago, Keytal, Langier, Mauvais, Otto, Struve, Petit, Baily, &c.—endeavoured
to solve the mystery of the origin of the phenomenon; but in spite of all their
efforts, "the disagreement," says Arago, "of the observations taken in different
places by skilful astronomers of one and the same eclipse, have involved the
question in fresh obscurity, so that it is now impossible to come to any certain
conclusion as to the cause of the phenomenon." Since this was written, other
total eclipses have been studied with no better results.

Yet the solution of the question is of such vast importance to selenographic
science that no price would be too great to pay for it. A fresh opportunity was
now about to occur to study the much-discussed corona. A total eclipse of the
sun—total, at least, for the extreme north of America, for Spain and North Africa


—was to take place on July 18th, 1860. It was arranged between the astronomers
of different countries that simultaneous observations should be taken at the
various points of the zone where the eclipse would be total. Thomas Black was
chosen for the expedition to North America, and was now much in the same
situation as the English astronomers who were transported to Norway and
Sweden on the occasion of the eclipse of 1851.

It will readily be imagined that Thomas Black seized with avidity the
opportunity offered him of studying this luminous halo. He was also to examine
into the nature of the red prominences which appear on different parts of the
edge of the terrestrial satellite when the totality of the eclipse has commenced;
and should he be able satisfactorily to establish their origin, he would be entitled
to the applause of the learned men of all Europe.

Thomas Black eagerly prepared for his journey. He obtained urgent letters of
recommendation to the principal agents of the Hudson’s Bay Company. He
ascertained that an expedition was to go to the extreme north of the continent to
found a new fort. It was an opportunity not to be lost; so he set out, crossed the
Atlantic, landed at New York, traversed the lakes to the Red River settlement,
and pressed on from fort to fort in a sledge, under the escort of a courier of the
Company; in spite of the severity of the winter, braving all the dangers of a
journey across the Arctic regions, and arriving at Fort Reliance on the 19th
March in the condition we have described.

Such was the explanation given by the astronomer to Captain Craventy. He at
once placed himself entirely at Mr Black’s service, but could not refrain from
inquiring why he had been in such a great hurry to arrive, when the eclipse was
not to take place until the following year, 1860?

"But, Captain," replied the astronomer, "I heard that the Company was
sending an expedition along the northern coast of America, and I did not wish to
miss the departure of Lieutenant Hobson."

"Mr Black," replied the Captain, "if the Lieutenant had already started, I
should have felt it my duty to accompany you myself to the shores of the Polar
Sea."

And with fresh assurances of his willingness to serve him, the Captain again
bade his new guest welcome to Fort Reliance.

CHAPTER IV.

A FACTORY.

One of the largest of the lakes beyond the 61st parallel is that called the
Great Slave Lake; it is two hundred and fifty miles long by fifty across, and is
situated exactly at 61° 25’ N. lat. and 114° W. long. The surrounding districts
slope down to it, and it completely fills a vast natural hollow. The position of the


lake in the very centre of the hunting districts. once swarming with game, early
attracted the attention of the Company. Numerous streams either take their rise
from it or flow into it-the Mackenzie, the Athabasca, &c.; and several important
forts have been constructed on its shores—Fort Providence on the north, and
Fort Resolution on the south. Fort Reliance is situated on the north-east
extremity, and is about three hundred miles from the Chesterfield inlet, a long
narrow estuary formed by the waters of Hudson’s Bay.

The Great Slave Lake is dotted with little islands, the granite and gneiss of
which they are formed jutting up in several places. Its northern banks are clothed
with thick woods, shutting out the barren frozen district beyond, not inaptly
called the "Cursed Land." The southern regions, on the other band, are flat,
without a rise of any kind, and the soil is mostly calcareous. The large ruminants
of the polar districts—the buffaloes or bisons, the flesh of which forms almost
the only food of the Canadian and native hunters—seldom go further north than
the Great Slave Lake.

The trees on the northern shores of the lake form magnificent forests. We
need not be astonished at meeting with such fine vegetation in this remote
district. The Great Slave Lake is not really in a higher latitude than Stockholm or
Christiania. We have only to remember that the isothermal lines, or belts of equal
heat, along which heat is distributed in equal quantities, do not follow the
terrestrial parallels, and that with the same latitude, America is ever so much
colder than Europe. In April the streets of New York are still white with snow,
yet the latitude of New York is nearly the same as that of the Azores. The nature
of a country, its position with regard to the oceans, and even the conformation of
its soil, all influence its climate.

In summer Fort Reliance was surrounded with masses of verdure, refreshing
to the sight after the long dreary winter. Timber was plentiful in these forests,
which consisted almost entirely of poplar, pine, and birch. The islets on the lake
produced very fine willows. Game was abundant in the underwood, even during
the bad season. Further south the hunters from the fort successfully pursued
bisons, elks, and Canadian porcupines, the flesh of which is excellent. The
waters of the Slave Lake were full of fish; trout in them attained to an immense
size, their weight often exceeding forty pounds. Pikes, voracious lobes, a sort of
charr or grayling called " blue fish," and countless legions of tittamegs, the
Coregonus of naturalists, disported themselves in the water, so that the
inhabitants of Fort Reliance were well supplied with food. Nature provided for
all their wants; and clothed in the skins of foxes, martens, bears, and other Arctic
animals, they were able to brave the rigour of the winter.

The fort, properly so called, consisted of a wooden house with a ground-floor


and one upper storey. In it lived the commandant and his officers. The barracks
for the soldiers, the magazines of the Company, and the offices where exchanges
were made, surrounded this house. A little chapel, which wanted nothing but a
clergyman, and a powder-magazine, completed the buildings of the settlement.
The whole was surrounded by palisades twenty-five feet high, defended by a
small bastion with a pointed roof at each of the four corners of the parallelogram
formed by the enceinte. The fort was thus protected from surprise, a necessary
precaution in the days when the Indians, instead of being the purveyors of the
Company, fought for the independence of their native land, and when the agents
and soldiers of rival associations disputed the possession of the rich fur country.

At that time the Hudson’s Bay Company employed about a million men on
its territories. It held supreme authority over them, an authority which could
even inflict death. The governors of the factories could regulate salaries, and
arbitrarily fix the price of provisions and furs; and as a result of this irresponsible
power, they often realised a profit of no less than three hundred per cent.

We shall see from the following table, taken from the " Voyage of Captain
Robert Lade," on what terms exchanges were formerly made with those Indians
who have since become the best hunters of the Company. Beavers’ skins were
then the currency employed in buying and selling.

The Indians paid—

For one gun,


10 beavers’ skins
" half a pound of powder,


1 W
" four pounds of shot,


1 WT
"one axe,


1 W
" six knives,


1 W
" one pound of glass beads,


1 W
"one laced coat,


6 W
" one coat not laced,


5 W
" one laced female dress,


6 W
" one pound of tobacco,


1 W
" one box of powder,


1 W
"one comb and one looking glass,


20

But a few years ago beaver-skins became so scarce that the currency had to
be changed. Bison-furs are now the medium of trade. When an Indian presents
himself at the fort, the agents of the Company give him as many pieces of wood
as he brings skins, and he exchanges these pieces of wood for manufactured
articles on the premises; and as the Company fix the price of the articles they
buy and sell, they cannot fail to realise large profits.

Such was the mode of proceeding in Fort Reliance and other factories; so
that Mrs Paulina Barnett was able to watch the working of the system during her


stay, which extended until the 16th April. Many a long talk did she have with
Lieutenant Hobson, many were the projects they formed, and firmly were they
both determined to allow no obstacle to check their advance. As for Thomas
Black, he never opened his lips except when his own special mission was
discussed. He was wrapped up in the subject of the luminous corona and red
prominences of the moon; he lived but to solve the problem, and in the end made
Mrs Paulina Barnett nearly as enthusiastic as himself. How eager the two were to
cross the Arctic Circle, and how far off the 18th July 1860 appeared to both, but
especially to the impatient Greenwich astronomer, can easily be imagined.

The preparations for departure could not be commenced until the middle of
March, and a month passed before they were completed. In fact, it was a
formidable undertaking to organise such an expedition for crossing the Polar
regions. Everything had to betaken with them-food, clothes, tools, arms,
ammunition, and a nondescript collection of various requisites.

The troops, under the command of Lieutenant Jaspar Hobson, were one chief
and two subordinate officers, with ten soldiers, three of whom took their wives
with them. They were all picked men, chosen by Captain Craventy on account of
their energy and resolution. We append a list of the whole party:—

1. Lieutenant Jaspar Hobson.


11. Sabine, soldier.
2. Sergeant Long.


12. Hope, do.
3. Corporal Joliffe.


13. Kellet, do.
4. Petersen, soldier


14. Mrs Rae
5. Belcher, do.


15. Mrs Joliffe.
6. Rae, do


16. Mrs Mac-Nab.


7. Marbre, do


17. Mrs Paulina Barnett.
8. Garry, do


18. Madge.
9. Pond, do


19. Thomas Black
10. Mac-Nab, do.


In all, nineteen persons to be transported several hundreds of miles through a
desert and imperfectly-known country.

With this project in view, however, the Company had collected everything
necessary for the expedition. A dozen sledges, with their teams of dogs, were in
readiness. These primitive vehicles consisted of strong but light planks joined
together by transverse bands. A piece of curved wood, turning up at the end like
a skate, was fixed beneath the sledge, enabling it to cleave the snow without
sinking deeply into it. Six swift and intelligent dogs, yoked two and two, and
controlled by the long thong brandished by the driver, drew the sledges, and
could go at a rate of fifteen miles an hour.

The wardrobe of the travellers consisted of garments made of reindeer-skins,
lined throughout with thick furs. All wore linen next the skin as a protection
against the sudden changes of temperature frequent in these latitudes. Each one,
officer or soldier, male or female, wore seal-skin boots sewn with twine, in the
manufacture of which the natives excel. These boots are absolutely impervious,
and are so flexible that they are admirably adapted for walking. Pine-wood
snow-shoes, two or three feet long, capable of supporting the weight of a man on
the most brittle snow, and enabling him to pass over it with the rapidity of a
skater on ice, can be fastened to the soles of the seal-skin boots. Fur caps and
deer-skin belts completed the costumes.

For arms, Lieutenant Hobson had the regulation musketoons provided by the
Company, pistols, ordnance sabres, and plenty of ammunition; for tools : axes,
saws, adzes, and other instruments required in carpentering. Then there was the
collection of all that would be needed for setting up a factory in the remote
district for which they were bound : a stove; a smelting furnace, two airpumps


for ventilation, an India-rubber boat, only inflated when required, &c., &c.

The party might have relied for provisions on the hunters amongst them.
Some of the soldiers were skilful trackers of game, and there were plenty of
reindeer in the Polar regions. Whole tribes of Indians, or Esquimaux, deprived of
bread and all other nourishment, subsist entirely on this venison, which is both
abundant and palatable. But as delays and difficulties had to be allowed for, a
certain quantity of provisions was taken with them. The flesh of the bison, elk,
and deer, amassed in the large battues on the south of the lake; corned beef,
which will keep for any length of time; and some Indian preparations, in which
the flesh of animals, ground to powder, retains its nutritive properties in a very
small bulk, requiring no cooking, and forming a very nourishing diet, were
amongst the stores provided in case of need.

Lieutenant Hobson likewise took several casks of rum and whisky; but he
was firmly resolved to economise these spirits, so injurious to the health in cold
latitudes, as much as possible. The Company had placed at his disposal a little
portable medicine-chest, containing formidable quantities of lime-juice, lemons,
and other simple remedies necessary to check, or if possible to prevent, the
scorbutic affections which take such a terrible form in these regions.

All the men had been chosen with great care; none were too stout or too thin,
and all had for years been accustomed to the severity of the climate, and could
therefore more easily endure the fatigues of an expedition to the Polar Sea. They
were all brave, high-spirited fellows, who had taken service of their own accord.
Double pay had been promised them during their stay at the confines of the
American continent, should they succeed in making a settlement beyond the
seventieth parallel.

The sledge provided for Mrs Barnett and her faithful Madge was rather more
comfortable than the others. She did not wish to be treated better than her
travelling companions, but yielded to the urgent request of Captain Craventy,
who was but carrying out the wishes of the Company.

The vehicle which brought Thomas Black to Fort Reliance also conveyed
him and his scientific apparatus from it. A few astronomical instruments, of
which there were not many in those days-a telescope for his selenographic
observations, a sextant for taking the latitude, a chronometer for determining the
longitudes, a few maps, a few books, were all stored away in this sledge, and
Thomas Black relied upon his faithful dogs to lose nothing by the way.

Of course the food for the various teams was not forgotten. There were
altogether no less than seventy-two dogs, quite a herd to provide for by the way,
and it was the business of the hunters to cater for them. These strong intelligent
animals were bought of the Chippeway Indians, who know well how to train


them for their arduous calling.

The little company was most skilfully organised. The zeal of Lieutenant
Jaspar Hobson was beyond all praise. Proud of his mission, and devoted to his
task; he neglected nothing which could insure success. Corporal Joliffe, always a
busybody, exerted himself without producing any very tangible results; but his
wife was most useful and devoted; and Mrs Paulina Barnett had already struck
up a great friendship with the brisk little Canadian woman, whose fair hair and
large soft eyes were so pleasant to look at.

We need scarcely add that Captain Craventy did all in his power to further
the enterprise. The instructions he had received from the Company showed what
great importance they attached to the success of the expedition, and the
establishment of a new factory beyond the seventieth parallel. We may therefore
safely affirm that every human effort likely to insure success which could be
made was made; but who could tell what insurmountable difficulties nature
might place in the path of the brave Lieutenant I who could tell what awaited
him and his devoted little band.

CHAPTER V.

FROM FORT RELIANCE TO FORT ENTERPRISE.

The first fine days came at last. The green carpet of the hills began to appear
here and there where the snow had melted. A few migratory birds from the
south-such as swans, bald-headed eagles, &c.—passed through the warmer air.
The poplars, birches, and willows began to bud, and the redheaded ducks, of
which there are so many species in North America, to skim the surface of the
numerous pools formed by the melted snow. Guillemots, puffins, and eider
ducks sought colder latitudes; and little shrews no bigger than a hazel-nut
ventured from their holes, tracing strange figures on the ground with their tiny-
pointed tails. It was intoxicating once more to breathe the fresh air of spring, and
to bask in the sunbeams. Nature awoke once more from her heavy sleep in the
long winter night, and smiled as she opened her eyes.

The renovation of creation in spring is perhaps more impressive in the Arctic
regions than in any other portion of the globe, on account of the greater contrast
with what has gone before.

The thaw was not, however, complete. The thermometer, it is true, marked
41° Fahrenheit above zero; but the mean temperature of the nights kept the
surface of the snowy plains solid—a good thing for the passage of sledges, of
which Jaspar Hobson meant to avail himself before the thaw became complete.

The ice of the lake was still unbroken. During the last month several
successful hunting expeditions had been made across the vast smooth plains,
which were already frequented by game. Mrs Barnett was astonished at the skill


with which the men used their snow-shoes, scudding along at the pace of a horse
in full gallop. Following Captain Craventy’s advice, the lady herself practised
walking in these contrivances, and she soon became very expert in sliding over
the snow.

During the last few days several bands of Indians had arrived at the fort to
exchange the spoils of the winter chase for manufactured goods. The season had
been bad. There were a good many polecats and sables; but the furs of beavers,
otters, lynxes, ermines, and foxes were scarce. It was therefore a wise step for
the Company to endeavour to explore a new country, where the wild animals had
hitherto escaped the rapacity of man.

On the morning of the 16th April Lieutenant Jaspar Hobson and his party
were ready to start. The route across the known districts, between the Slave Lake
and that of the Great Bear beyond the Arctic Circle, was already determined.
Jaspar Hobson was to make for Fort Confidence, on the northern extremity of
the latter lake; and he was to revictual at Fort Enterprise, a station two hundred
miles further to the north-west, on the shores of the Snare Lake, By travelling at
the rate of fifteen miles a day the Lieutenant hoped to halt there about the
beginning of May.

From this point the expedition was to take the shortest route to Cape
Bathurst, on the North American coast. It was agreed that in a year Captain
Craventy should send a convoy with provisions to Cape Bathurst, and that a
detachment of the Lieutenant’s men was to go to meet this convoy, to guide it to
the spot where the new fort was to be erected. This plan was a guarantee against
any adverse circumstances, and left a means of communication with their fellow-
creatures open to the Lieutenant and his voluntary companions in exile.

On the 16th April dogs and sledges were awaiting the travellers at the
postern gate. Captain Craventy called the men of the party together and said a
few kind words to them. He urged them above all things to stand by one another
in the perils they might be called upon to meet; reminded them that the
enterprise upon which they were about to enter required self-denial and
devotion, and that submission to their officers was an indispensable condition of
success. Cheers greeted the Captain’s speech, the adieux were quickly made, and
each one took his place in the sledge assigned to him. Jaspar Hobson and
Sergeant Long went first; then Mrs Paulina Barnett and Madge, the latter
dexterously wielding the long Esquimaux whip, terminating in a stiff thong.
Thomas Black and one of the soldiers, the Canadian, Petersen, occupied the third
sledge ;and the others followed, Corporal and Mrs Joliffe bringing up the rear.
According to the orders of Lieutenant Hobson, each driver kept as nearly as
possible at the same distance from the preceding sledge, so as to avoid all


confusion—a necessary precaution, as a collision between two sledges going at
full speed, might have had disastrous results.

On leaving Fort Reliance, Jaspar Hobson at once directed his course towards
the north-west. The first thing to be done was to cross the large river connecting
Lakes Slave and Wolmsley, which was, however, still frozen so hard as to be
undistinguishable from the vast white plains around. A uniform carpet of snow
covered the whole country, and the sledges, drawn by their swift teams, sped
rapidly over the firm smooth surface.

The weather was fine, but still very cold. The sun, scarce above the horizon,
described a lengthened curve; and its rays, reflected on the snow, gave more light
than heat. Fortunately not a breath of air stirred, and this lessened the severity of
the cold, although the rapid pace of the sledges through the keen atmosphere
must have been trying to any one not inured to the rigour of a Polar climate.

"A good beginning,” said Jaspar Hobson to the Sergeant, who sat motionless
beside him as if rooted to his seat; "the journey has commenced favourably. The
sky is cloudless; the temperature propitious, our equipages shoot along like
express trains, and as long as this fine weather lasts we shall get on capitally.
What do you think, Sergeant Long?"

"I agree with you, Lieutenant," replied the Sergeant, who never differed from
his chief.

"Like myself, Sergeant, you are determined to push on as far north as
possible—are you not?" resumed Lieutenant Hobson.

"You have but to command to be obeyed, Lieutenant."

"I know it, Sergeant; I know that with you to bear is to obey. Would that all
our men understood as you do the importance of our mission, and would devote
themselves body and soul to the interests of the Company! Ah, Sergeant Long, I
know if I gave you an impossible order— "

"Lieutenant, there is no such thing as an impossible order."

"What? Suppose now I ordered you to go to the North Pole?"

"Lieutenant, I should go !"

"And to comeback!" added Jaspar Hobson with a smile.

"I should come back," replied Sergeant Long simply.

During this colloquy between Lieutenant Hobson and his Sergeant a slight
ascent compelled the sledges to slacken speed, and Mrs Barnett and Madge also
exchanged a few sentences. These two intrepid women, in their otter-skin caps
and white bearskin mantles, gazed in astonishment upon the rugged scenery
around them, and at the white outlines of the huge glaciers standing out against
the horizon. They had already left behind them the hills of the northern banks of
the Slave Lake, with their summits crowned with the gaunt skeletons of trees.


The vast plains stretched before them in apparently endless succession. The
rapid flight and cries of a few birds of passage alone broke the monotony of the
scene. Now and then a troop of swans, with plumage so white that the keenest
sight could not distinguish them from the snow when they settled on the ground,
rose into view in the clear blue atmosphere and pursued their journey to the
north.

"What an extraordinary country !" exclaimed Mrs Paulina Barnett. "What a
difference between these Polar regions and the green prairies of Australia! You
remember, Madge, how we suffered from the heat on the shores of the Gulf of
Carpentaria—you remember the cloudless sky and the parching sunbeams?"

My dear," replied Madge, "I have not the gift of remembering like you. You
retain your impressions, I forget mine."

"What, Madge !" cried Mrs Barnett, "you have forgotten the tropical heat of
India arid Australia? You have no recollection of our agonies when water failed
us in the desert, when the pitiless sun scorched us to the bone, when even the
night brought us no relief from our sufferings !"

"No, Paulina," replied Madge, wrapping her furs more closely round her,
"no, I remember nothing. How could I now recollect the sufferings to which you
allude—the heat, the agonies of thirst—when we are surrounded on every side
by ice, and I have but to stretch my arm out of this sledge to pick up a handful of
snow? You talk to me of heat, when we are freezing beneath our bearskins; you
recall the broiling rays of the sun when its April beams cannot melt the icicles on
our lips! No, child, no, don’t try to persuade me it’s hot anywhere else; don’t tell
me I ever complained of being too warm, for I sha’n’t believe you!"

Mrs Paulina Barnett could not help smiling.

"So, poor Madge," she said, "you are very cold!"

"Yes, child, I am cold; but I rather like this climate. I’ve no doubt it’s very
healthy, and I think North America will agree with me. It’s really a very fine
country !"

"Yes, Madge; it is a fine country, and we have as yet seen none of the
wonders it contains. But wait until we reach the Arctic Ocean; wait until the
winter shuts us in with its gigantic icebergs and thick covering of snow; wait till
the northern storms break over us, and the glories of the Aurora Borealis and of
the splendid constellations of the Polar skies are spread out above our heads;
wait till we have lived through the strange long six months’ night, and then
indeed you will understand the infinite variety, the infinite beauty, of our
Creator’s handiwork !"

Thus spoke Mrs Paulina Barnett, carried away by her vivid imagination. She
could see nothing but beauty in these deserted regions, with their rigorous


climate. Her enthusiasm got the better for the time of her judgment. Her
sympathy with nature enabled her to read the touching poetry of the ice-bound
north-the poetry embodied in the Sagas, and sung by the bards of the time of
Ossian. But Madge, more matter of fact than her mistress, disguised from herself
neither the dangers of an expedition to the Arctic Ocean, nor the sufferings
involved in wintering only thirty degrees at the most from the North Pole.

And indeed the most robust had sometimes succumbed to the fatigues,
privations, and mental and bodily agonies endured in this severe climate. Jaspar
Hobson had not, it is true, to press on to the very highest latitudes of the globe,;
he had not to reach the pole itself, or to follow in the steps of Parry, Ross,
Mc’Clure, Kean, Morton, and others. But after once crossing the Arctic Circle,
there is little variation in the temperature; it does not increase in coldness in
proportion to the elevation reached. Granted that Jaspar Hobson did not think of
going beyond the seventieth parallel, we must still remember that Franklin and
his unfortunate companions died of cold and hunger before they had penetrated
beyond 68° N. lat.

Very different was the talk in the sledge occupied by Mr and Mrs Joliffe.
Perhaps the gallant Corporal had too often drunk to the success of the expedition
on starting; for, strange to say, he was disputing with his little wife. Yes, he was
actually contradicting her, which never happened except under extraordinary
circumstances!

"No, Mrs Joliffe," he was saying, "no, you have nothing to fear. A sledge is
not more difficult to guide than a pony-carriage, and the devil take me if I can’t
manage a team of dogs !"

"I don’t question your skill," replied Mrs Joliffe; "I only ask you not to go so
fast. You are in front of the whole caravan now, and I hear Lieutenant Hobson
calling out to you to resume your proper place behind."

"Let him call, Mrs Joliffe, let him call."

And the Corporal, urging on his dogs with a fresh cut of the whip, dashed
along at still greater speed.

"Take care, Joliffe," repeated his little wife; "not so fast, we are going down
hill."

"Down hill, Mrs Joliffe; you call that down hill? why, it’s up hill!"

"T tell you we are going down!" repeated poor Mrs Joliffe.

"And I tell you we are going up; look how the dogs pull !"

Whoever was right, the dogs became uneasy. The ascent was, in fact, pretty
steep; the sledge dashed along at a reckless pace, and was already considerably
in advance of the rest of the party. Mr and Mrs Joliffe bumped up and down
every instant, the surface of the snow became more and more uneven, and the


pair, flung first to one side and then to the other, knocked against each other and
the sledge, and were horribly bruised and shaken. But the Corporal would listen
neither to the advice of his wife nor to the shouts of Lieutenant Hobson. The
latter, seeing the danger of this reckless course, urged on his own animals, and
the rest of the caravan followed at a rapid pace.

But the Corporal became more and more excited-the speed of his equipage
delighted him. He shouted, he gesticulated, and flourished his long whip like an
accomplished sportsman.

"Wonderful things these whips!" he cried; "the Esquimaux wield them with
unrivalled skill !"

"But you are not an Esquimaux!" cried Mrs Joliffe, trying in vain to arrest
the arm of her imprudent husband.

"I have heard tell," resumed the Corporal—" I’ve heard tell that the
Esquimaux can touch any dog they like in any part, that they can even cut out a
bit of one of their ears with the stiff thong at the end of the whip. I am going to
try."

"Don’t try, don’t try, Joliffe !" screamed the poor little woman, frightened out
of her wits.

"Don’t be afraid, Mrs Joliffe, don’t be afraid; I know what I can do. The fifth
dog on the right is misbehaving himself;. I will correct him a little!"

But Corporal Joliffe was evidently not yet enough of an Esquimaux to be
able to manage the whip with its thong four feet longer than the sledge; for it
unrolled with an ominous hiss, and rebounding, twisted itself round Corporal
Joliffe’s own neck, sending his fur cap into the air, perhaps with one of his ears
in it.

At this moment the dogs flung themselves on one side, the sledge was
overturned, and the pair were flung into the snow. Fortunately it was thick and
soft, so that they escaped unhurt. But what a disgrace for the Corporal! how
reproachfully his little wife looked at him, and how stern was the reprimand of
Lieutenant Hobson!

The sledge was picked up, but it was decided that henceforth the reins of the
dogs, like those of the household, were to be in the hands of Mrs Joliffe. The
crest-fallen Corporal was obliged to submit, and the interrupted journey was
resumed.

No incident worth mentioning occurred during the next fifteen days. The
weather continued favourable, the cold was not too severe, and on the 1st May
the expedition arrived at Fort Enterprise.


CHAPTER VI.

A WAPITI DUEL.

Two hundred miles had been traversed since the expedition left Fort
Reliance. The travellers, taking advantage of the long twilight, pressed on day
and night, and were literally overcome with fatigue when they reached Fort
Enterprise, near the shores of Lake Snare.

This fort was no more than a depot of provisions, of little importance,
erected a few years before by the Hudson’s Bay Company. It served as a resting-
place for the men taking the convoys of furs from the Great Bear Lake, some
three hundred miles further to the north-west. About a dozen soldiers formed the
garrison. The fort consisted of a wooden house surrounded by palisades. But few
as were the comforts it offered, Lieutenant Hobson’s companions gladly took
refuge in it and rested there for two days.

The gentle influence of the Arctic spring was beginning to be felt. Here and
there the snow had melted, and the temperature of the nights was no longer
below freezing point. A few delicate mosses and slender grasses clothed the
rugged ground with their soft verdure; and from between the stones peeped the
moist calices of tiny, almost colourless, flowers. These faint signs of
reawakening vegetation, after the long night of winter, were refreshing to eyes
weary of the monotonous whiteness of the snow; and the scattered specimens of
the Flora of the Arctic regions were welcomed with delight.

Mrs Paulina Barmmett and Jaspar Hobson availed themselves of this leisure
time to visit the shores of the little lake. They were both students and
enthusiastic lovers of nature. Together they wandered amongst the ice masses,
already beginning to break up, and the waterfalls created by the action of the
rays of the sun. The surface itself of Lake Snare was still intact, not a crack
denoted the approaching thaw; but it was strewn with the ruins of mighty
icebergs, which assumed all manner of picturesque forms, and the beauty of
which was heightened when the light, diffracted by the sharp edges of the ice,
touched them with all manner of colours. One might have fancied that a rainbow,
crushed in a powerful hand, bad been flung upon the ground, its fragments
crossing each other as they fell.

"What a beautiful scene!" exclaimed Mrs Paulina Barnett. "These prismatic
effects vary at every change of our position. Does it not seem as if we were
bending over the opening of an immense kaleidoscope, or are you already weary
of a sight so new and interesting to me?"

"No, madam," replied the Lieutenant; "although I was born and bred on this
continent, its beauties never pall upon me. But if your enthusiasm is so great
when you see this scenery with the sun shining upon it, what will it be when you


are privileged to behold the terrible grandeur of the winter? To own the truth, I
think the sun, so much thought of in temperate latitudes, spoils my Arctic
home."

"Indeed!" exclaimed Mrs Barnett, smiling at the Lieutenant’s last remark;
"for my part, I think the sun a capital travelling companion, and I shall not be
disposed to grumble at the warmth it gives even in the Polar regions !"

"Ah, madam," replied Jaspar Hobson, "I am one of those who think it best to
visit Russia in the winter, and the Sahara Desert in the summer. You then see
their peculiar characteristics to advantage. The sun is a star of the torrid and
temperate zones, and is out of place thirty degrees from the North Pole. The true
sky of this country is the pure frigid sky of winter, bright with constellations, and
sometimes flushed with the glory of the Aurora Borealis. This land is the land of
the night, not of the day; and you have yet to make acquaintance with the
delights and marvels of the long Polar night."

"Have you ever visited the temperate zones of Europe and America?"
inquired Mrs Barnett.

"Yes, madam; and I admired them as they deserved. But I returned home
with fresh love and enthusiasm for my native land. Cold is my element, and no
merit is due to me for braving it. It has no power over me; and, like the
Esquimaux. I can live for months together in a snow hut."

"Really, Lieutenant Hobson, it is quite cheering to hear our dreaded enemy
spoken of in such terms. I hope to prove myself worthy to be your companion,
and wherever you venture, we will venture together."

"I agree, madam, I agree; and may all the women and soldiers accompanying
me show themselves as resolute as you. If so, God helping us, we shall indeed
advance far."

"You have nothing to complain of yet," observed the lady. "Not a single
accident has occurred, the weather has been propitious, the cold not too severe-
everything has combined to aid us."

"Yes, madam; but the sun which you admire so much will soon create
difficulties for us, and strew obstacles in our path."

"What do you mean, Lieutenant Hobson?"

"I mean that the heat will soon have changed the aspect of the country; that
the melted ice will impede the sliding of the sledges; that the ground will
become rough and uneven; that our panting dogs will no longer carry us along
with the speed of an arrow; that the rivers and lakes will resume their liquid
state, and that we shall have to ford or go round them. All these changes,
madam, due to the influence of the solar rays, will cause delays, fatigue, and
dangers, the very least of which will be the breaking of the brittle snow beneath


our feet, or the falling of the avalanches from the summits of the icebergs. For all
this we have to thank the gradual rise of the sun higher and higher above the
horizon. Bear this in mind, madam: of the four elements of the old creation, only
one is necessary to us here, the air; the other three, fire, earth, and water, are de
trop in the Arctic regions."

Of course the Lieutenant was exaggerating, and Mrs Barnett could easily
have retorted with counter-arguments; but she liked to hear his raptures in praise
of his beloved country, and she felt that his enthusiasm was a guarantee that he
would shrink from no obstacle.

Yet Jaspar Hobson was right when he said the sun would cause difficulties.
This was seen when the party set out again on the 4th May, three days later. The
thermometer, even in the coldest part of the night, marked more than 32°
Fahrenheit. A complete thaw set in, the vast white sheet of snow resolved itself
into water. The irregularities of the rocky soil caused constant jolting of the
sledges, and the passengers were roughly shaken. The roads were so heavy that
the dogs had to go at a slow trot, and the reins were therefore again entrusted to
the hands of the imprudent Corporal

Joliffe. Neither shouts nor flourishings of the whip had the slightest effect on
the jaded animals.

From time to time the travellers lightened the sledges by walking little way.
This mode of locomotion suited the hunters, who were now gradually
approaching the best districts for game in the whole of English America. Mrs
Paulina Barnett and Madge took a great interest in the chase, whilst Thomas
Black professed absolute indifference to all athletic exercise. He had not come
all this distance to hunt the polecat or the ermine, but merely to look at the moon
at the moment when her disc should cover that of the sun. When the queen of the
night rose above the horizon, the impatient astronomer would gaze at her with
eager eyes, and one day the Lieutenant said to him

"Tt would be a bad look-out for you, Mr Black, if by any unlucky chance the
moon should fail to keep her appointment on the 16th July 1860."

"Lieutenant Hobson," gravely replied the astronomer, "if the moon were
guilty of such a breach of good manners, I should indeed have cause to
complain."

The chief hunters of the expedition were the soldiers Marbre and Sabine,
both very expert at their business. Their skill was wonderful; and the cleverest
Indians would not have surpassed them in keenness of sight, precision of aim, or
manual address. They were alike trappers and hunters, and were acquainted with
all the nets and snares for taking sables, otters, wolves, foxes, bears, &c. No
artifice was unknown to them, and Captain Craventy had shown his wisdom in


choosing two such intelligent men to accompany the little troop.

Whilst on the march however, Marbre and Sabine had no time for setting
traps. They could not separate from the others for more than an hour or two at a
time, and were obliged to be content with the game which passed within range of
their rifles. Still they were fortunate enough to kill two of the large American
ruminants, seldom met with in such elevated latitudes.

On the morning of the 15th May the hunters asked permission to follow
some fresh traces they had found, and the Lieutenant not only granted it, but
himself accompanied them with Mrs Paulina Barnett, and they went several
miles out of their route towards the east.

The impressions were evidently the result of the passage of about half-a-
dozen large deer. There could be no mistake about it; Marbre and Sabine were
positive on that point, and could even have named the species to which the
animals belonged.

"You seem surprised to have met with traces of these animals here,
Lieutenant," said Mrs Barnett.

"Well, madam," replied Hobson, "this species is rarely seen beyond 57° N.
lat. We generally hunt them at the south of the Slave Lake, where they feed upon
the shoots of willows and poplars, and certain wild roses to which they are very
partial."

"I suppose these creatures, like those with valuable furs, have fled from the
districts scoured by the hunters."

"IT see no other explanation of their presence at 65° N. lat.," replied the
Lieutenant-"that is, if the men are not mistaken as to the origin of the footprints."

"No, no, sir," cried Sabine; "Marbre and I are not mistaken. These traces
were left by deer, the deer we hunters call red deer, and the natives wapitis."

"He is quite right," added Marbre; "old trappers like us are not to be taken in;
besides, don’t you hear that peculiar whistling sound?"

The party had now reached the foot of a little hill, and as the snow had
almost disappeared from its sides they were able to climb it, and hastened to the
summit, the peculiar whistling noticed by Marbre becoming louder, mingled
with cries resembling the braying of an ass, and proving that the two hunters
were riot mistaken.

Once at the top of the hill, the adventurers looked eagerly towards the east.
The undulating plains were still white with snow, but its dazzling surface was
here and there relieved with patches of stunted light green vegetation. A few
gaunt shrubs stretched forth their bare and shrivelled branches, and huge
icebergs with precipitous sides stood out against the grey background of the sky.

"Wapitis! wapitis!-there they are !" cried Sabine and Marbre at once,


W


pointing to a group of animals distinctly visible about a quarter of a mile to the
east.

"What are they doing?” asked Mrs Barnett.

"They are fighting, madam," replied Hobson; "they always do when the heat
of the Polar sun inflames their blood-another deplorable result of the action of
the radiant orb of day !"

From where they stood the party could easily watch the group of wapitis.
They were fine specimens of the family of deer known under the various names
of stags with rounded antlers, American stags, roebucks, grey elks and red elks,
&c. These graceful creatures have slender legs and brown skins with patches of
red hair, the colour of which becomes darker in the warmer season. The fierce
males are easily distinguished from the females by their fine white antlers, the
latter being entirely without these ornaments. These wapitis were once very
numerous all over North America, and the United States imported a great many;
but clearings were begun on every side, the forest trees fell beneath the axe of
the pioneer of civilisation, and the wapitis took refuge in the more peaceful
districts of Canada; but they were soon again disturbed, and wandered to the
shores of Hudson’s Bay. So that although the wapiti thrives in a cold country,
Lieutenant Hobson was right in saying that it seldom penetrates beyond 57° N.
latitude; and the specimens now found had doubtless fled before the Chippeway
Indians, who hunt them without mercy.

The wapitis were so engrossed in their desperate struggle that they were
unconscious of the approach of the hunters; but they would probably not have
ceased fighting, had they been aware of it. Marbre and Sabine, aware of their
peculiarity in this respect, might therefore have advanced fearlessly upon them,
and have taken aim at leisure.

Lieutenant Hobson suggested that they should do so.

"Beg pardon, sir," replied Marbre; "but let us spare our powder and shot.
These beasts are engaged in a war to the death, and we shall arrive in plenty of
time to pick up the vanquished."

"Have these wapitis a commercial value?" asked Mrs Paulina Barnett.

"Yes, madam," replied Hobson; "and their skin, which is not quite so thick as
that of the elk, properly so called makes very valuable leather. By rubbing this
skin with the fat and brains of the animal itself, it is rendered flexible, and
neither damp nor dryness injures it. The Indians are therefore always eager to
procure the skins of the wapitis."

"Does not the flesh make admirable venison?"

"Pretty good, madam; only pretty good. It is tough, and does not taste very
nice; the fat becomes hard directly it is taken from the fire, and sticks to the


teeth. It is certainly inferior as an article of food to the flesh of other deer; but
when meat is scarce we are glad enough to eat it, and it supports life as well as
anything else."

Mrs Barnett and Lieutenant Hobson had been chatting together for some
minutes, when, with the exception of two, the wapitis suddenly ceased fighting.
Was their rage satiated?- or had they perceived the hunters, and felt the approach
of danger? Whatever the cause, all but two fine creatures fled a towards the east
With incredible speed; in a few instants they were out of sight, and the swiftest
horse could not have caught them up.

Meanwhile, however, two magnificent specimens remained on the field of
battle. Heads down, antlers to antlers, hind legs stretched and quivering, they
butted at each other without a moment’s pause. Like two wrestlers struggling for
a prize which neither will yield, they would not separate, but whirled round and
round together on their front legs as if riveted to one another. What implacable
rage !" exclaimed Mrs Barnett.

"Yes," replied the Lieutenant; "the wapitis really are most spiteful beasts. I
have no doubt they are fighting out an old quarrel."

"Would not this be the time to approach them, when they are blinded with
rage?"

"There’s plenty of time, ma’am," said Sabine; "they won’t escape us now.
They will not stir from where they are when we are three steps from them, the
rifles at our shoulders, and our fingers on the triggers !"

Indeed? Yes, madam," added Hobson, who had carefully examined the
wapitis after the hunter’s remark; "and whether at our hands or from the teeth of
wolves, those wapitis will meet death where they now stand."

"I don’t understand what you mean, Lieutenant," said Mrs Barnett.

"Well, go nearer, madam," he replied; "don’t be afraid of startling the
animals; for, as our hunter says, they are no longer capable of flight."

The four now descended the hill, and in a few minutes gained the theatre of
the struggle. The wapitis had not moved. They were pushing at each other like a
couple of rams, and seemed to be inseparably glued together.

In fact, in the heat of the combat the antlers of the two creatures had become
entangled together to such an extent that they could no longer separate without
breaking them. This often happens in the hunting districts. It is not at all
uncommon to find antlers thus connected lying on the ground; the poor
encumbered animals soon die of hunger, or they become an easy prey to wild
beasts.

Two bullets put an end to the fight between the wapitis; and Marbre and
Sabine taking immediate possession, carried off their skins to be subsequently


prepared, leaving their bleeding carcasses to be devoured by wolves and bears.

CHAPTER VII.

THE ARCTIC CIRCLE.

The expedition continued to advance towards the north-west; but the great
inequalities of the ground made it hard work for the dogs to get along, and the
poor creatures, who could hardly be held in when they started, were now quiet
enough. Eight or ten miles a day were as much as they could accomplish,
although Lieutenant Hobson urged them on to the utmost.

He was anxious to get to Fort Confidence, on the further side of the Great
Bear Lake, where he hoped to obtain some useful information. Had the Indians
frequenting the northern banks of the lake been able to cross the districts on the
shores of the sea? was the Arctic Ocean open at this time of year? These were
grave questions, the reply to which would decide the fate of the new factory.

The country through which the little troop was now passing was intersected
by numerous streams, mostly tributaries of the two large rivers, the Mackenzie
and Coppermine, which flow from the south to the north, and empty themselves
into the Arctic Ocean. Lakes, lagoons, and numerous pools are formed between
these two principal arteries; and as they were no longer frozen over, the sledges
could not venture upon them, and were compelled to go around them, which
caused considerable delay. Lieutenant Hobson was certainly right in saying that
winter is the time to visit the hyperborean regions, for they are then far easier to
traverse. Mrs Paulina Barnett had reason to own the justice of this assertion than
once.

This region, included in the "Cursed Land," was, besides, completely
deserted, as are the greater portion of the districts of the extreme north of
America. It has been estimated that there is but one inhabitant to every ten
square miles. Besides the scattered natives, there are some few thousand agents
or soldiers of the different fur-trading companies; but they mostly congregate in
the southern districts and about the various factories. No human footprints
gladdened the eyes of the travellers, the only traces on the sandy soil were those
of ruminants and rodents. Now and then a fierce polar bear was seen, and Mrs
Paulina Barnett expressed her surprise at not meeting more of these terrible
carnivorous beasts, of whose daily attacks on whalers and persons shipwrecked
in Baffin’s Bay and on the coasts of Greenland and Spitzbergen she had read in
the accounts of those who had wintered in the Arctic regions.

"Wait for the winter, madam," replied the Lieutenant; "wait till the cold
makes them hungry, and then you will perhaps see as many as you care about !"

On the 23d May, after a long and fatiguing journey, the expedition at last
reached the Arctic Circle. We know that this latitude 23° 27’ 57" from the North


Pole, forms the mathematical limit beyond which the rays of the sun do not
penetrate in the winter, when the northern districts of the globe are turned away
from the orb of day. Here, then, the travellers entered the true Arctic region, the
northern Frigid Zone.

The latitude had been very carefully obtained by means of most accurate
instruments, which were handled with equal skill by the astronomer and by
Lieutenant Hobson. Mrs Barnett was present at the operation, and had the
satisfaction of hearing that she was at last about to cross the Arctic Circle. It was
with a feeling of just pride that she received the intelligence.

"You have already passed through the two Torrid Zones in your previous
journeys," said the Lieutenant, "and now you are on the verge of the Arctic
Circle. Few explorers have ventured into such totally different regions. Some, so
to speak, have a specialty for hot countries, and choose Africa or Australia as the
field for their investigations. Such were Barth, Burton, Livingstone Speke,
Douglas, Stuart, &c. Others, on the contrary, have a passion for the Arctic
regions, still so little known. Mackenzie, Franklin, Penny, Kane, Parry, Rae, &c.,
preceded us on our present journey; but we must congratulate you, Mrs Barnett,
on being a more cosmopolitan traveller than all of them."

"I must see everything or at least try to see everything, Lieutenant," replied.
Mrs Paulina; "and I think the dangers and difficulties are about equal
everywhere. Although we have not to dread the fevers of the unhealthy torrid
regions, or the attacks of the fierce black races, in this Frigid Zone, the cold is a
no less formidable enemy; and I suspect that the white bears we are liable to
meet with here will give us quite as warm a reception as would the tiers of
Thibet or the lions of Africa. In Torrid and Frigid Zones alike there are vast
unexplored tracts which will long defy the efforts of the boldest adventurers."

"Yes, madam," replied Jaspar Hobson; "but I think the hyperborean regions
will longer resist thorough exploration. The natives are the chief obstacle in
tropical regions, and I am well aware how many travellers have fallen victims to
savages. But civilisation will necessarily subdue the wild races sooner or later;
whereas in the Arctic and Antarctic Zones it is not the inhabitants who arrest the
progress of the explorer, but Nature herself who repels those who approach her,
and paralyses their energies with the bitter cold !"

"You think, then, that the secrets of the most remote districts of Africa and
Australia will have been fathomed before the Frigid Zone has been entirely
examined?"

"Yes, madam," replied the Lieutenant; "and I think my opinion is founded on
facts. The most intrepid discoverers of the Arctic regions - Parry, Penny,
Franklin, M’Clure, Dane, and Morton — did not get beyond 83° north latitude,


seven degrees from the pole — whereas Australia has several times been crossed
from south to north by the bold Stuart; and even Africa, with all its terrors, was
traversed by Livingstone from the Bay of Loanga to the mouth of the Zambesi.
We are, therefore, nearer to geographical knowledge of the equatorial countries
than of the Polar districts."

"Do you think that the Pole itself will ever be reached by man?" inquired
Mrs Paulina Barnett.

"Certainly," replied Hobson, adding with a smile, "by man or woman. But I
think other means must be tried of reaching this point, where all the meridians of
the globe cross each other, than those hitherto adopted by travellers. We hear of
the open sea, of which certain explorers are said to have caught a glimpse. But if
such a sea, free from ice, really exist, it is very difficult to get at, and no one can
say positively whether it extends to the North Pole. For my part, I think an open
sea would increase rather than lessen the difficulties of explorers. As for me, I
would rather count upon firm footing, whether on ice or rock, all the way. Then I
would organise successive expeditions, establishing depots of provisions and
fuel nearer and nearer to the Pole; and so, with plenty of time, plenty of money,
and perhaps the sacrifice of a good many lives, I should in the end solve the
great scientific problem. I should, I think, at last reach the hitherto inaccessible
goal !"

"I think you are right, Lieutenant," said Mrs Barnett; "and if ever you try the
experiment, I should not be afraid to join you, and would gladly go to set up the
Union Jack at the North Pole. But that is not our present object."

"Not our immediate object, madam," replied Hobson; "but when once the
projects of the Company are realised, when the new fort has been erected on the
confines of the American continent, it may become the natural starting-point of
all expeditions to the north. Besides, should the fur-yielding animals, too
zealously hunted, take refuge at the Pole, we should have to follow them."

"Unless costly furs should go out of fashion," replied Mrs Barnett.

"O madam," cried the Lieutenant, "there will always be some pretty woman
whose wish for a sable muff or an ermine tippet must be gratified !"

"I am afraid so," said Mrs Barnett, laughing; "and probably the first
discoverer of the Pole will have been led thither in pursuit of a sable or a silver
fox."

"That is my conviction," replied Hobson. " Such is human nature, and greed
of gain will always carry a man further than zeal for science."

"What! do you utter such sentiments?" exclaimed Mrs Barnett.

"Well, madam, what am I but an employé of the Hudson’s Bay Company?
and does the Company risk its capital and agents with any other hope than an


increase of profits?"

"Lieutenant Hobson," said Mrs Barnett, "I think I know you well enough to
assert that on occasion you would be ready to devote body and soul to science. If
a purely geographical question called you to the Pole, I feel sure you would not
hesitate to go. But," she added, with a smile, "the solution of this great problem
is still far distant. We have but just reached the verge of the Arctic Circle, but I
hope we may cross it without any very great difficulty."

"That I fear is doubtful," said the Lieutenant, who had been attentively
examining the sky during their conversation. "The weather has looked
threatening for the last few days. Look at the uniformly grey hue of the heavens.
That mist will presently resolve itself into snow; and if the wind should rise ever
so little, we shall have to battle with a fearful storm. I wish we were at the Great
Bear Lake !"

"Do not let us lose any time, then," said Mrs Barnett, rising; "give the signal
to start at once."

The Lieutenant needed no urging. Had he been alone, or accompanied by a
few men as energetic as himself, he would have pressed on day and night; but he
was obliged to make allowance for the fatigue of others, although he never
spared himself. He therefore granted a few hours of rest to his little party, and it
was not until three in the afternoon that they again set out.

Jaspar Hobson was not mistaken in prophesying a change in the weather. It
came very soon. During the afternoon of the same day the mist became thicker,
and assumed a yellowish and threatening hue. The Lieutenant, although very
uneasy, allowed none of his anxiety to appear, but had a long consultation with
Sergeant Long whilst the dogs of his sledge were laboriously preparing to start.

Unfortunately, the district now to be traversed was very unsuitable for
sledges. The ground was very uneven; ravines were of frequent occurrence; and
masses of granite or half-thawed icebergs blocked up the road, causing constant
delay. The poor dogs did their best, but the drivers’ whips no longer produced
any effect upon them.

And so the Lieutenant and his men were often obliged to walk to rest the
exhausted animals, to push the sledges, or even sometimes to lift them when the
roughness of the ground threatened to upset them. The incessant fatigue was,
however, borne by all without a murmur. Thomas Black alone, absorbed in his
one idea, never got out of his sledge, and indeed be was so corpulent that all
exertion was disagreeable to him.

The nature of the soil changed from the moment of entering the Arctic
Circle. Some geological convulsion had evidently upheaved the enormous
blocks strewn upon the surface. The vegetation, too, was of a more distinctive


character. Wherever they were sheltered from the keen north winds, the flanks of
the hills were clothed not only with shrubs, but with large trees, all of the same
species — pines, willows, and firs — proving by their presence that a certain
amount of vegetative force is retained even in the Frigid Zone. Jaspar Hobson
hoped to find such specimens of the Arctic Flora even on the verge of the Polar
Sea; for these trees would supply him with wood to build his fort, and fuel to
warm its inhabitants. The same thought passed through the minds of his
companions, and they could not help wondering at the contrast between this
comparatively fertile region, and the long white plains stretching between the
Great Slave Lake and Fort Enterprise.

At night the yellow mist became more opaque; the wind rose, the snow
began to fall in large flakes, and the ground was soon covered with a thick white
carpet. In less than an hour the snow was a foot deep, and as it did not freeze but
remained in a liquid state, the sledges could only advance with extreme
difficulty; the curved fronts stuck in the soft substance, and the dogs were
obliged to stop again and again.

Towards eight o’clock in the evening the wind became very boisterous. The
snow, driven before it, was flung upon the ground or whirled in the air, forming
one huge whirlpool. The dogs, beaten back by the squall and blinded with snow,
could advance no further. The party was then in a narrow gorge between huge
icebergs, over which the storm raged with fearful fury. Pieces of ice, broken off
by the hurricane, were hurled into the pass; partial avalanches, any one of which
could have crushed the sledges and their inmates, added to its dangers, and to
press on became impossible. The Lieutenant no longer insisted, and after
consulting with Sergeant Long, gave the order to halt. It was now necessary to
find a shelter from the snow-drift; but this was no difficult matter to men
accustomed to Polar expeditions. Jaspar Hobson and his men knew well what
they had to do under the circumstances. It was not the first time they had been
surprised by a tempest some hundred miles from the forts of the Company,
without so much as an Esquimaux hut or Indian hovel in which to lay their
heads.

"To the icebergs! to the icebergs !" cried Jaspar Hobson.

Every one understood what he meant. Snow houses were to be hollowed out
of the frozen masses, or rather holes were to be dug, in which each person could
cower until the storm was over. Knives and hatchets were soon at work on the
brittle masses of ice, and in three-quarters of an hour some ten dens had been
scooped out large enough to contain two or three persons each. The dogs were
left to themselves, their own instinct leading them to find sufficient shelter under
the snow.


Before ten o’clock all the travellers were crouching in the snow houses, in
groups of two or three, each choosing congenial companions. Mrs Barnett,
Madge, and Lieutenant Hobson occupied one hut, Thomas Black and Sergeant
Long another, and so on. These retreats were warm, if not comfortable; and the
Esquimaux and Indians have no other refuge even in the bitterest cold. The
adventurers could therefore fearlessly await the end of the storm as long as they
took care not to let the openings of their holes become blocked up with the snow,
which they had to shovel away every half hour. So violent was the storm that
even the Lieutenant and his soldiers could scarcely set foot outside. Fortunately,
all were provided with sufficient food, and were able to endure their beaver-like
existence without suffering from cold or hunger

For forty-eight hours the fury of the tempest continued to increase. The wind
roared in the narrow pass, and tore off the tops of the icebergs. Loud reports,
repeated twenty times by the echoes, gave notice of the fall of avalanches, and
Jaspar Hobson began to fear that his further progress would be barred by the
masses of debris accumulated between the mountains. Other sounds mingled
with these reports, which Lieutenant Hobson knew too well, and he did not
disguise from Mrs Bamett that bears were prowling about the pass. But
fortunately these terrible animals were too much occupied with their own
concerns to discover the retreat of the travellers; neither the dogs nor the sledges,
buried in the snow, attracted their attention, and they passed on without doing
any harm.

The last night, that of the 25th or 26th May, was even more terrible. So great
was the fury of the hurricane that a general overthrow of icebergs appeared
imminent. A fearful death would then have awaited the unfortunate travellers
beneath the ruins of the broken masses. The blocks of ice cracked with an awful
noise, and certain oscillations gave warning that breaches had been made
threatening their solidity. However, no great crash occurred, the huge mountains
remained intact, and towards the end of the night one of those sudden changes so
frequent in the Arctic regions took place; the tempest ceased suddenly beneath
the influence of intense cold, and with the first dawn of day peace was restored.

CHAPTER VIII.

THE GREAT BEAR LAKE.

This sudden increase of cold was most fortunate. Even in temperate climes
there are generally three or four bitter days in May; and they were most
serviceable now in consolidating the freshly-fallen snow, and making it
practicable for sledges. Lieutenant Hobson, therefore, lost no time in resuming
his journey, urging on the dogs to their utmost speed.

The route was, however, slightly changed. Instead of bearing due north, the


expedition advanced towards the west, following, so to speak, the curve of the
Arctic Circle. The Lieutenant was most anxious to reach Fort Confidence, built
on the northern extremity of the Great Bear Lake. These few cold days were of
the greatest service to him; he advanced rapidly, no obstacle was encountered,
and his little troop arrived at the factory on the 30th May.

At this time Forts Confidence and Good Hope were the most advanced posts
of the Company in the north. Fort Confidence was a most important position,
built on the northern extremity of the lake, close to its waters, which being
frozen over in winter, and navigable in summer, afforded easy access to Fort
Franklin, on the southern shores, and promoted the coming and going of the
Indian hunters with their daily spoils. Many were the hunting and fishing
expeditions which started from Forts Confidence and Good Hope, especially
from the former. The Great Bear Lake is quite a Mediterranean Sea, extending
over several degrees of latitude and longitude. Its shape is very irregular : two
promontories jut into it towards the centre, and the upper portion forms a
triangle; its appearance, as a whole, much resembling the extended skin of a
ruminant without the head.

Fort Confidence was built at the end of the " right paw," at least two hundred
miles from Coronation Gulf, one of the numerous estuaries which irregularly
indent the coast of North America. It was therefore situated beyond the Arctic
Circle, but three degrees south of the seventieth parallel, north of which the
Hudson’s Bay Company proposed forming a new settlement.

Fort Confidence, as a whole, much resembled other factories further south. It
consisted of a house for the officers, barracks for the soldiers, and magazines for
the furs - all of wood, surrounded by palisades. The captain in command was
then absent. He had gone towards the east on a hunting expedition with a few
Indians and soldiers. The last season had not been good, costly furs had been
scarce; but to make up for this the lake had supplied plenty of otter-skins. The
stock of them had, however, just been sent to the central factories in the south, so
that the magazines of Fort Confidence were empty on the arrival of our party.

In the absence of the Captain a Sergeant did the honours of the fort to Jaspar
Hobson and his companions. This second officer, Felton by name was a brother-
in-law of Sergeant Long. He showed the greatest readiness to assist the views of
the Lieutenant, who being anxious to rest his party, decided on remaining two or
three days at Fort Confidence. In the absence of the little garrison there was
plenty of room, and dogs and men were soon comfortably installed. The best
room in the largest house was of course given to Mrs Paulina Barnett, who was
delighted with the politeness of Sergeant Felton.

Jaspar Hobson’s first care was to ask Felton if any Indians from the north


were then beating the shores of the Great Bear Lake

"Yes, Lieutenant," replied the Sergeant; "we have just received notice of the
encampment of a party of Hare Indians on the other northern extremity of the
lake."

"How far from here?" inquired Hobson.

"About thirty miles," replied Sergeant Felton. "Do you wish to enter into
communication with these Indians?"

"Yes," said Hobson; they may be able to give me some valuable information
about the districts bordering on the Arctic Ocean, and bounded by Cape
Bathurst. Should the site be favourable, I propose constructing our new fort
somewhere about there."

"Well, Lieutenant, nothing is easier than to go to the Hare encampment."

"Along the shores of the lake?"

"No, across it; it is now free from ice, and the wind is favourable. We will
place a cutter and a boatman at your service, and in a few hours you will be in
the Indian settlement."

"Thank you, Sergeant; to-morrow, then." Whenever you like, Lieutenant."

The start was fixed for the next morming; and when Mrs Paulina Barnett
heard of the plan, she begged the Lieutenant to allow her to accompany him,
which of course he readily did.

But now to tell how the rest of this first day was passed. Mrs Barnett,
Hobson, two or three soldiers, Madge, Mrs Mac-Nab, and Joliffe explored the
shores of the lake under the guidance of Felton. The neighbourhood was by no
means barren of vegetation; the hills, now free from snow, were crowned by
resinous trees of the Scotch pine species. These trees, which attain a height of
some forty feet, supply the inhabitants of the forts with plenty of fuel through the
long winter. Their thick trunks and dark gloomy branches form a striking feature
of the landscape; but the regular clumps of equal height, sloping down to the
very edge of the water, are somewhat monotonous. Between the groups of trees
the soil was clothed with a sort of whitish weed, which perfumed the air with a
sweet thymy odour. Sergeant Felton informed his guests that this plant was
called the " herb of incense " on account of the fragrance it emits when burnt.

Some hundred steps from the fort the party came to a little natural harbour
shut in by high granite rocks, which formed an admirable protection from the
heavy surf. Here was anchored the fleet of Fort Confidence, consisting of a
single fishing-boat—the very one which was to take Mrs Barnett and Hobson to
the Indian encampment the next day. From this harbour an extensive view was
obtained of the lake; its waters slightly agitated by the wind, with its irregular
shores broken by jagged capes and intersected by creeks. The wooded heights


beyond, with here and there the rugged outline of a floating iceberg standing out
against the clear blue air, formed the background on the north; whilst on the
south a regular sea horizon, a circular line clearly cutting sky and water, and at
this moment glittering in the sunbeams, bounded the sight.

The whole scene was rich in animal and vegetable life. The surface of the
water, the shores strewn with flints and blocks of granite, the slopes with their
tapestry of herbs, the tree-crowned hill-tops, were all alike frequented by various
specimens of the feathered tribe. Several varieties of ducks, uttering their
different cries and calls, eider ducks, whistlers spotted redshanks, "old women,"
those loquacious birds whose beak is never closed, skimmed the surface of the
lake. Hundreds of puffins and guillemots with outspread wings darted about in
every direction, and beneath the trees strutted ospreys two feet high-a kind of
hawk with a grey body, blue beak and claws, and orange-coloured eyes, which
build their huge nests of marine plants in the forked branches of trees. The
hunter Sabine managed to bring down a couple of these gigantic ospreys, which
measured nearly six feet from tip to tip of their wings, and were therefore
magnificent specimens of these migratory birds, who feed entirely on fish, and
take refuge on the shores of the Gulf of Mexico when winter sets in, only
visiting the higher latitudes of North America during the short summer.

But the most interesting event of the day was the capture of an otter, the skin
of which was worth several hundred roubles.

The furs of these valuable amphibious creatures were once much sought after
in China; and although the demand for them has considerably decreased in the
Celestial Empire, they still command very high prices in the Russian market.
Russian traders, ready to buy up sea-otter skins, travel all along the coasts of
New Cornwall as far as the Arctic Ocean; and of course, thus hunted, the animal
is becoming very rare. It has taken refuge further and further north, and the
trackers have now to pursue it on the shores of the Kamtchatka Sea, and in the
islands of the Behring Archipelago.

"But," added Sergeant Felton, after the preceding explanation, "American
inland otters are not to be despised, and those which frequent the Great Bear
Lake are worth from £50 to £60 each."

The Sergeant was right; magnificent otters are found in these waters, and he
himself skilfully tracked and killed one in the presence of his visitors which was
scarcely inferior in value to those from Kamtchatka itself. The creature measured
three feet from the muzzle to the end of its tail; it had webbed feet, short legs,
and its fur, darker on the upper than on the under part of its body, was long and
silky.

"A good shot, Sergeant," said Lieutenant Hobson, who with Mrs Barnett had


been attentively examining the magnificent fur of the dead animal.

"Yes, Lieutenant," replied Felton; "and if each day brought us such a skin as
that, we should have nothing to complain of. But much time is wasted in
watching these animals, who swim and dive with marvellous rapidity. We
generally hunt them at night, as they very seldom venture from their homes in
the trunks of trees or the holes of rocks in the daytime, and even expert hunters
find it very difficult to discover their retreats."

"And are these otters also becoming scarcer and scarcer?" inquired Mrs
Barnett.

"Yes, madam," replied the Sergeant; "and when this species becomes extinct,
the profits of the Company will sensibly decline. All the hunters try to obtain its
fur, and the Americans in particular are formidable rivals to us. Did you not meet
any American agents on your journey up, Lieutenant?"

"Not one," replied Hobson. "Do they ever penetrate as far as this?"

"Oh yes !" said the Sergeant; "and when you hear of their approach, I advise
you to be on your guard."

"Are these agents, then, highway robbers?" asked Mrs Paulina Barnett.

"No, madam," replied the Sergeant; "but they are formidable rivals, and
when game is scarce, hunters often come to blows about it. I daresay that if the
Company’s attempt to establish a fort on the verge of the Arctic Ocean be
successful, its example will at once be followed by these Americans, whom
Heaven confound!"

"Bah!" exclaimed the Lieutenant; "the hunting districts are vast, and there’s
room beneath the sun for everybody. As for us, let’s make a start to begin with.
Let us press on as long as we have firm ground beneath our feet, and God be
with us!"

After a walk of three hours the visitors returned to Fort Confidence, where a
good meal of fish and fresh venison awaited them. Sergeant Long did the
honours of the table, and after a little pleasant conversation, all retired to rest to
forget their fatigues in a healthy and refreshing sleep.

The next day, May 31st, Mrs Barnett and Jaspar Hobson were on foot at five
A.M. The Lieutenant intended to devote this day to visiting the Indian
encampment, and obtaining as much useful information as possible. He asked
Thomas Black to go with him, but the astronomer preferred to remain on terra
firma. He wished to make a few astronomical observations, and to determine
exactly the latitude and longitude of Fort Confidence; so that Mrs Barnett and
Jaspar Hobson had to cross the lake alone, under the guidance of an old boatman
named Norman, who had long been in the Company’s service.

The two travellers were accompanied by Sergeant Long as far as the little


harbour, where they found old Norman ready to embark. Their little vessel was
but an open fishing-boat, six feet long, rigged like a cutter, which one man could
easily manage The weather was beautiful, and the slight breeze blowing from the
north-east was favourable to the crossing. Sergeant Felton took leave of his
guests with many apologies for being unable to accompany them in the absence
of his chief. The boat was let loose from its moorings, and tacking to starboard,
shot across the clear waters of the lake.

The little trip passed pleasantly enough. The taciturn old sailor sat silent in
the stern of the boat with the tiller tucked under his arm. Mrs Barnett and
Lieutenant Hobson, seated opposite to each other, examined with interest the
scenery spread out before them. The boat skirted the northern shores of the lake
at about three miles’ distance, following a rectilinear direction, so that the
wooded heights sloping gradually to the west were distinctly visible. From this
side the district north of the lake appeared perfectly flat, and the horizon receded
to a considerable distance. The whole of this coast contrasted strongly with the
sharp angle, at the extremity of which rose Fort Confidence, framed in green
pines. The flag of the Company was still visible floating from the tower of the
fort. The oblique rays of the sun lit up the surface of the water, and striking on
the floating icebergs, seemed to convert them into molten silver of dazzling
brightness. No trace remained of the solid ice-mountains of the winter but these
moving relies, which the solar rays could scarcely dissolve, and which seemed,
as it were, to protest against the brilliant but not very powerful Polar sun, now
describing a diurnal arc of considerable length.

Mrs Barnett and the Lieutenant, as was their custom, communicated to each
other the thoughts suggested by the strange scenes through which they were
passing. They laid up a store of pleasant recollections for the future whilst the
beat floated rapidly along upon the peaceful waves.

The party started at six in the moming, and at nine they neared the point on
the northern bank at which they were to land. The Indian encampment was
situated at the north-west angle of the Great Bear Lake. Before ten o’clock old
Norman ran the boat aground on a low bank at the foot of a cliff of moderate
height. Mrs Barnett and the Lieutenant landed at once. Two or three Indians,
with their chief, wearing gorgeous plumes, hastened to meet them, and addressed
them in fairly intelligible English.

These Hare Indians, like the Copper and Beaver Indians, all belong to the
Chippeway race, and differ but little in customs and costumes from their fellow-
tribes. They are in constant communication with the factories, and have become,
so to speak, "Britainised" — at least as much so as is possible for savages. They
bring the spoils of the chase to the forts, and there exchange them for the


necessaries of life, which they no longer provide for themselves. They are in the
pay of the Company, they live upon it, and it is not surprising that they have lost
all originality. To find a native race as yet uninfluenced by contact with
Europeans we must go to still higher latitudes, to the ice-bound regions
frequented by the Esquimaux, who, like the Greenlanders, are the true children
of Arctic lands.

Mrs Barnett and Jaspar Hobson accompanied the Indians to their camp,
about half a mile from the shore, and found some thirty natives there, men,
women, and children, who supported themselves by hunting and fishing on the
borders of the lake. These Indians had just come from the northernmost districts
of the American continent, and were able to give the Lieutenant some valuable,
although necessarily incomplete, information on the actual state of the sea-coast
near the seventieth parallel. The Lieutenant heard with considerable satisfaction
that a party of Americans or Europeans had been seen oil the confines of the
Polar Sea, and that it was open at this time of year. About Cape Bathurst,
properly so called, the point for which he intended to make, the Hare Indians
could tell him nothing. Their chief said, however, that the district between the
Great Bear Lake and Cape Bathurst was very difficult to cross, being hilly and
intersected by streams, at this season of the year free from ice. He advised the
Lieutenant to go down the Coppermine river, from the north-east of the lake,
which would take him to the coast by the shortest route. Once at the Arctic
Ocean, it would be easy to skirt along its shores and to choose the best spot at
Which to halt.

Lieutenant Hobson thanked the Indian chief, and took leave after giving him
a few presents. Then accompanied by Mrs Barnett, he explored the
neighbourhood of the camp, not returning to the boat until nearly three o’clock
in the afternoon.

CHAPTER IX.

A STORM ON THE LAKE.

The old sailor was impatiently awaiting the return of the travellers; for
during the last hour the weather had changed, and the appearance of the sky was
calculated to render any one accustomed to read the signs of the clouds uneasy.
The sun was obscured by a thick mist, the wind had fallen, but - an ominous
moaning was heard from the south of the lake. These symptoms of an
approaching change of temperature were developed with all the rapidity peculiar
to these elevated latitudes.

"Let us be off, sir! let us be off!" cried old Norman, looking anxiously at the
fog above his head. " Let us start without losing an instant. There are terrible
signs in the air!"


"Indeed," exclaimed the Lieutenant, "the appearance of the sky is quite
changed, and we never noticed it, Mrs Barnett!"

"Are you afraid of a storm?" inquired the lady of old Norman.

"Yes, madam," replied the old sailor; "and the storms on the Great Bear Lake
are often terrible. The hurricane rages as if upon the open Atlantic Ocean. This
sudden fog bodes us no good; but the tempest may hold back for three or four
hours, and by that time we shall be at Fort Confidence. Let us then start without
a moment’s delay, for the boat would not be safe near these rocks."

The Lieutenant, feeling that the old man, accustomed as he was to navigate
these waters, was better able to judge than himself, decided to follow his advice,
and embarked at once with Mrs Barnett.

But just as they were pushing off, old Norman, as if possessed by some
sudden presentiment, murmured —

"Perhaps it would be better to wait."

Lieutenant Hobson overheard these words, and looked inquiringly at the old
boatman, already seated at the helm. Had he been alone he would not have
hesitated to start, but as Mrs Barnett was with him caution was necessary. The
lady at once saw and understood his hesitation.


"Never mind about me, Lieutenant," she said; "act as if I were not present.
Let us start immediately , as our brave guide suggests."

"We are off, then," cried Norman, letting go the moorings, "to the fort by the
shortest route."

For about an hour the bark made little head. The sail, scarcely filled by the
fitful breeze, flapped against the mast. The fog became thicker. The waves began
to rise and the boat to rock considerably; for the approaching hurricane affected
the water sooner than the atmosphere itself. The two travellers sat still and silent,
whilst the old sailor peered into the darkness with bloodshot eyes. Prepared for
all contingencies, he awaited the shock of the wind, ready to pay out rapidly
should the attack be very violent. The conflict of the elements had not, however,
as yet commenced; and all would have been well if they bad been able to
advance, but after an hour’s sail they were still only about two hours’ distance
from the Indian encampment. A few gusts of wind from the shore drove them
out of their course, and the dense fog rendered it impossible for them to make
out the coastline. Should the wind settle in the north it would probably go hard
with the light boat, which, unable to hold its own course, would be drifted out
into the lake no one knew where.

"We are scarcely advancing at all," said the Lieutenant to old Norman.

"No, sir," replied Norman; "the wind is not strong enough to fill the sail, and
if it were, I fear it comes from the wrong quarter. If so," he added, pointing to the
south, "we may see Fort Franklin before Fort Confidence."

"Well," said Mrs Barnett cheerfully, "our trip will have been all the more
complete. This is a magnificent lake, well worth exploring from north to south. I
suppose, Norman, one might get back even from Fort Franklin?"

"Yes, madam, if we ever reach it," replied the old man. "But tempests lasting
fifteen days are by no means rare on this lake; and if our bad luck should drive
us to the south, it may be a month before Lieutenant Hobson again sees Fort
Confidence."

"Let us be careful, then,” said the Lieutenant; "for such a delay, would hinder
our projects very much. Do the best you can under the circumstances, and if you
think it would be prudent, go back to the north. I don’t suppose Mrs Barnett
would mind a walk of twenty or twenty-five miles."

I should be glad enough to go back to the north, Lieutenant," replied
Norman, "if it were still possible. But look, the wind seems likely to settle
against us. All I can attempt is to get to the cape on the north-east, and if it
doesn’t blow too hard, I hope to succeed."

But at about half-past four the storm broke. The shrill whistling of the wind
was heard far above their heads, but the state of the atmosphere prevented it


from as yet descending upon the lake; this was, however, only delayed for a brief
space of time. The cries of frightened birds flying through the fog mingled with
the noise of the wind. Suddenly the mist was torn open, and revealed low jagged
masses of rain-cloud chased towards the south. The fears of the old sailor were
realised. The wind blew from the north, and it was not long before the travellers
learned the meaning of a squall upon the lake.

"Look out!" cried old Norman, tightening sail so as to get his boat ahead of
the wind, whilst keeping her under control of the helm.

The squall came. It caught the boat upon the flank, and it was turned over on
its side; but recovering itself, it was flung upon the crest of a wave. The billows
surged as if upon an open sea. The waters of the lake not being very deep, struck
against the bottom and rebounded to an immense height.

"Help! help!" cried old Norman, hurriedly struggling to haul down his sail.

Mrs Barnett and Hobson endeavoured to come to his assistance, but without
success, for they knew noticing of the management of a boat. Norman, unable to
leave the helm, and the halliards being entangled at the top of the mast, could not
take in the sail. Every moment the boat threatened to capsize, and heavy seas
broke over its sides. The sky became blacker and blacker, cold rain mingled with
snow fell in torrents, whilst the squall redoubled its fury, lashing the crests of the
waves into foam.

"Cut it! cut it!" screamed Norman above the roaring of the storm.

The Lieutenant, his cap blown away and his eyes blinded by the spray, seized
Norman’s knife and cut the halliard like a harp-string; but the wet cordage no
longer acted in the grooves of the pulleys, and the yard remained attached to the
top of the mast.

Norman, totally unable to make head against the wind, now resolved to tack
about for the south, dangerous as it would be to have the boat before the wind,
pursued by waves advancing at double its speed. Yes, to tack, although this
course would probably bring them all to the southern shores of the lake, far away
from their destination.

The Lieutenant and his brave companion were well aware of the danger
which threatened them. The frail boat could not long resist the blows of the
waves, it would either be crushed or capsized; the lives of those within it were in
the hands of God.

But neither yielded to despair; clinging to the sides of the boat, wet to the
skin, chilled to the bone by the cutting blast, they strove to gaze through the
thick mist and fog. All trace of the land had disappeared, and so great was the
obscurity that at a cable’s length from the boat clouds and waves could not be
distinguished from each other. Now and then the two travellers looked


inquiringly into old Norman’s face, who, with teeth set and hands clutching the
tiller; tried to keep his boat as much as possible under wind.

But the violence of the squall became such that the boat could not long
maintain this course. The waves which struck its bow would soon have
inevitably crushed it; the front planks were already beginning to separate, and
when its whole weight was flung into the hollows of the waves it seemed as if it
could rise no more.

"We must tack, we must tack, whatever happens !" murmured the old sailor.

And pushing the tiller and paying out sail, he turned the head of the boat to
the south. The sail, stretched to the utmost, brought the boat round with giddy
rapidity, and the immense waves, chased by the wind, threatened to engulf the
little bark. This was the great danger of shifting with the wind right aft. The
billows hurled themselves in rapid succession upon the boat, which could not
evade them. It filled rapidly, and the water bad to be baled out without a
moment’s pause, or it must have foundered. As they got nearer and nearer to the
middle of the lake the waves became rougher. Nothing there broke the fury of
the wind; no clumps of trees, no hills, checked for a moment the headlong course
of the hurricane. Now and then momentary glimpses were obtained through the
fog of icebergs dancing like buoys upon the waves, and driven towards the south
of the lake.

It was half-past five. Neither Norman nor the Lieutenant had any idea of
where they were, or whither they were going. They had lost all control over the
boat, and were at the mercy of the winds and waves.

And now at about a hundred feet behind the boat a huge wave upreared its
foam-crowned crest, whilst in front a black whirlpool was formed by the sudden
sinking of the water. All surface agitation, crushed by the wind, had disappeared
around this awful gulf, which, growing deeper and blacker every moment, drew
the devoted little vessel towards its fatal embrace. Ever nearer came the mighty
wave, all lesser billows sinking into insignificance before it. It gained upon the
boat, another moment and it would crush it to atoms. Norman, looking round,
saw its approach; and Mrs Barnett and the Lieutenant, with eyes fixed and
staring, awaited in fearful suspense the blow from which there was no escape.
The wave broke over them with the noise of thunder; it enveloped the stern of
the boat in foam, a fearful crash was heard, and a cry burst from the lips of the
Lieutenant and his companion, smothered beneath the liquid mass.

They thought that all was over, and that the boat had sunk; but no, it rose
once more, although more than half filled with water.

The Lieutenant uttered a cry of despair. Where was Norman? The poor old
sailor had disappeared !


Mrs Paulina Barnett looked inquiringly at Hobson.

"Norman!" he repeated, pointing to his empty place.

"Unhappy man !" murmured Mrs Barnett; and at the risk of being flung from
the boat rocking on the waves, the two started to their feet and looked around
them. But they could see and hear nothing. No cry for help broke upon their ears.
No dead body floated in the white foam. The old sailor had met his death in the
element he loved so well.

Mrs Barnett and Hobson sank back upon their seats. They were now alone,
and must see to their own safety; but neither of them knew anything of the
management of a boat, and even an experienced hand could scarcely have
controlled it now. They were at the mercy of the waves, and the bark, with
distended sail, swept along in mad career. What could the Lieutenant do to check
or direct its course?

What a terrible situation for our travellers, to be thus overtaken by a tempest
in a frail bark which they could not manage !

"We are lost!" said the Lieutenant.

"No, Lieutenant," replied Mrs Barnett; "let us make another effort. Heaven
helps those who help themselves !"

Lieutenant Hobson now for the first time realised with how intrepid a woman
fate had thrown him.

The first thing to be done was to get rid of the water which weighed down
the boat. Another wave shipped would have filled it in a moment, and it must
have sunk at once. The vessel lightened, it would have a better chance of rising
on the waves; and the two set to work to bale out the water. This was no easy
task; for fresh waves constantly broke over them, and the scoop could not be laid
aside for an instant. Mrs Barnett was indefatigable, and the Lieutenant, leaving
the baling to her, took the helm himself, and did the best he could to guide the
boat with the wind right aft.

To add to the danger, night, or rather darkness, for in these latitudes night
only lasts a few hours at this time of year, fell upon them. Scarce a ray of light
penetrated through the heavy clouds and fog. They could not see two yards
before them, and the boat must have been dashed to pieces had it struck a
floating iceberg. This danger was indeed imminent, for the loose ice-masses
advance with such rapidity that it is impossible to get out of their way.

"You have no control over the helm?" said Mrs Barnett in a slight lull of the
storm.

No, madam he replied; "and you must prep are for the worst."

"I am ready!" replied the courageous woman simply.

As she spoke a loud rippling sound was heard. The sail, torn away by the


wind, disappeared like a white cloud. The boat sped rapidly along for a few
instants, and then stopped suddenly, the waves buffeting it about like an
abandoned wreck. Mrs Barnett and Hobson, flung to the bottom of the boat,
bruised, shaken, and torn, felt that all was lost. Not a shred of canvas was left to
aid in navigating the craft; and what with the spray, the snow, and the rain, they
could scarcely see each other, whilst the uproar drowned their voices. Expecting
every moment to perish, they remained for an hour in painful suspense,
commending themselves to God, who alone could save them.

Neither of them could have said how long they waited when they were
aroused by a violent shock.

The boat had just struck an enormous iceberg, a floating block with rugged,
slippery sides, to which it would be impossible to cling.

At this sudden blow, which could not have been parried, the bow of the boat
was split open, and the water poured into it in torrents.

"We are sinking! we are sinking !" cried Jasper Hobson.

He was right. The boat was settling down; the water had already reached the
seats.

"Madam, madam, I am here! I will not leave you!" added the Lieutenant.

"No, no," cried Mrs Barnett : "alone, you may save yourself; together, we
should perish. Leave me! leave me!"

"Never!" cried Hobson.

But he had scarcely pronounced this word when the boat, struck by another
wave, filled and sank.

Both were drawn under water by the eddy caused by the sudden settling
down of the boat, but in a few instants they rose to the surface. Hobson was a
strong swimmer, and struck out with one arm, supporting his companion with the
other. But it was evident that he could not long sustain a conflict with the furious
waves, and that he must perish with her he wished to save.

At this moment a strange sound attracted his attention. It was not the cry of a
frightened bird, but the shout of a human voice! By one supreme effort Hobson
raised himself above the waves and looked around him.

But he could distinguish nothing in the thick fog. And yet he again beard
cries, this time nearer to him. Some bold men were coming to his succour! Alas!
if it were so, they would arrive too late. Encumbered by his clothes, the
Lieutenant felt himself sinking with the unfortunate lady, whose head he could
scarcely keep above the water. With a last despairing effort he uttered a
heartrending cry and disappeared beneath the waves.

It was, however, no mistake-he had heard voices. Three men, wandering
about by the lake, had seen the boat in danger, and put off to its rescue. They


were Esquimaux, the only men who could have hoped to weather such a storm,
for theirs are the only boats constructed to escape destruction in these fearful
tempests.

The Esquimaux boat or kayak is a long pirogue raised at each end, made of a
light framework of wood, covered with stretched sealskins strongly stitched with
the sinews of the Walrus. In the upper part of the boat; also covered with skins,
is an opening in which the Esquimaux takes his place, fastening his waterproof
jacket to the back of his seat; so that he is actually joined to his bark, which riot
a drop of water can penetrate. This light, easily-managed kayak, floating as it
does, on the crests of the waves, can never be submerged; and if it be sometimes
capsized, a blow of the paddle rights it again directly; so that it is able to live and
make way in seas in which any other boat would certainly be dashed to pieces.

The three Esquimaux, guided by the Lieutenant’s last despairing cry, arrived
at the scene of the wreck joints in time. Hobson and Mrs Barnett, already half
drowned, felt themselves drawn up by powerful hands; but in the darkness they
were unable to discover who were their deliverers. One of the men took the
Lieutenant and laid him across his own boat, another did the sane for Mrs
Barnett, and the three kayaks, skilfully managed with the paddles, six feet long,
sped rapidly over the white foam.

Half an hour afterwards, the shipwrecked travellers were lying on the sandy
beach three miles above Fort Providence.

The old sailor alone was missing !

CHAPTER X.

A RETROSPECT.

It was about ten o’clock the same night when Mrs Barnett and Lieutenant
Hobson knocked at the postern gate of the fort. Great was the joy on seeing
them, for they had been given up for lost; but this joy was turned to mourning at
the news of the death of Norman. The brave fellow had been beloved by all, and
his loss was sincerely mourned. The intrepid and devoted Esquimaux received
phlegmatically the earnest expressions of gratitude of those they had saved, and
could riot be persuaded to come to the fort. What they had done seemed to them
only natural, and these were not the first persons they had rescued; so they
quietly returned to their wild life of adventure on the lake, where they hunted the
otters and water-birds day and night.

For the next three nights the party rested. Hobson always intended to set out
on June 2d; and on that day, all having recovered from their fatigues and the
storm having abated, the order was given to start.

Sergeant Felton had done all in his power to make his guests comfortable and
to aid their enterprise; some of the jaded dogs were replaced by fresh animals,


and now the Lieutenant found all his sledges drawn up in good order at the door
of the enceinte, and awaiting the travellers.

The adieux were soon over. Each one thanked Sergeant Felton for his
hospitality, and Mrs Paulina Barnett was most profuse in her expressions of
gratitude. A hearty shake of the hand between the Sergeant and his brother-in-
law, Long, completed the leave-taking,

Each pair got into the sledge assigned to them; but this time Mrs Bamett and
the Lieutenant shared one vehicle, Madge and Sergeant Long following them.

According to the advice of the Indian chief, Hobson determined to get to the
coast by the shortest route, and to take a north-easterly direction. After
consulting, his map, which merely gave a rough outline of the configuration of
the country, it seemed best to him to descend the valley of the Coppermine, a
large river which flows into Coronation Gulf.

The distance between Fort Confidence and the mouth of this river is only a
degree and a half-that is to say, about eighty-five or ninety miles. The deep
hollow formed by the gulf is bounded on the north by Cape Krusenstein, and
from it the coast juts out towards the north-west, ending in Cape Bathurst, which
is above the seventieth parallel.

The Lieutenant, therefore, now changed the route he had hitherto followed,
directing his course to the east, so as to reach the river in a few hours.

In the afternoon of the next day, June 3d, the river was gained. It was now
free from ice, and its clear and rapid waters flowed through a vast valley,
intersected by numerous but easily fordable streams. The sledges advanced
pretty rapidly, and as they went along, Hobson gave his companion some
account of the country through which they were passing. A sincere friendship
founded on mutual esteem, had sprung up between these two. Mrs Paulina
Barnett was an earnest student with a special gift for discovery, and was
therefore always glad to converse with travellers and explorers. Hobson, who
knew his beloved North America by heart, was able to answer all her inquiries
fully.

"About ninety years ago," he said, "the territory through which the
Coppermine flows was unknown, and we are indebted for its discovery to the
agents of the Hudson’s Bay Company. But as always happens in scientific
matters, in seeking one thing, another was found. Columbus was trying to find
Asia, and discovered America."

"And what were the agents of the Hudson’s Bay Company seeking? The
famous North-West Passage?"

"No, madam," replied the young Lieutenant. "A century ago the Company
had no interest in the opening of a new route, which would have been more


valuable to its rivals than to it. It is even said that in 1741 a certain Christopher
Middleton, sent to explore these latitudes, was publicly charged with receiving a
bribe of £500 from the Company to say that there was not, and could not be, a
sea passage between the oceans."

"That was not much to the credit of the celebrated Company," said Mrs
Barnett.

"I do not defend it in the matter," replied Hobson; "and its interference was
severely censured by Parliament in 1746, when a reward of £20,000 was offered
by the Government for the discovery of the passage in question. In that year two
intrepid explorers, William Moor and Francis Smith, penetrated as far as Repulse
Bay in the hope of discovering the much-longed-for passage. But they were
unsuccessful, and returned to England after an absence of a year and a half."

"But did not other captains follow in their steps, resolved to conquer where
they had failed?" inquired Mrs Barnett.

"No, madam; and in spite of the large reward offered by Parliament, no
attempt was made to resume explorations in English America until thirty years
afterwards, when some agents of the Company took up the unfinished task of
Captains Moor and Smith."

"The Company had then relinquished the narrow-minded egotistical position
it had taken up?"

"No, madam, not yet. Samuel Hearne, the agent, only went to reconnoitre the
position of a copper-mine which native miners had reported. On November 6,
1769, this agent left Fort Prince of Wales, on the river Churchill, near the
western shores of Hudson’s Bay. He pressed boldly on to the north-west; but the
excessive cold and the exhaustion of his provisions compelled him to return
without accomplishing anything. Fortunately he was not easily discouraged, and
on February 23d of the next year he set out again, this time taking some Indians
with him. Great hardships were endured in this second journey. The fish and
game on which Hearne had relied often failed him; and he had once nothing to
eat for seven days but wild fruit, bits of old leather, and burnt bones. He was
again compelled to return to the fort a disappointed man. But he did not even yet
despair, and started a third time, December 7th, 1770; and after a struggle of
nineteen months, he discovered the Coppermine river, July 13th, 1772, the
course of which he followed to its mouth. According to his own account, he saw
the open sea, and in any case he was the first to penetrate to the northern coast of
America."

"But the North-West Passage-that is to say, the direct communication by sea
between the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans—was not then discovered?"

"Oh no, madam," replied the Lieutenant; "and what countless adventurous


sailors have since gone to seek it! Phipps in 1773, James Cook and Clerke in
1776 to 1779, Kotzebue in 1815 to 1818, Ross, Parry, Franklin, and others have
attempted this difficult task; but it was reserved to M’Clure in our own day to
pass from one ocean to the other across the Polar Sea."

"Well, Lieutenant, that was a geographical discovery of which we English
may well be proud. But do tell me if the Hudson’s Bay Company did not adopt
more generous views, and send out some other explorer after the return of
Hearne."

"Tt did, madam; and it was thanks to it that Captain Franklin was able to
accomplish his voyage of 1819 to 1822 between the river discovered by Hearne
and Cape Turnagain. This expedition endured great fatigue and hardships;
provisions often completely failed, and two Canadians were assassinated and
eaten by their comrades. But in spite of all his sufferings, Captain Franklin
explored no less than five thousand five hundred and fifty miles of the hitherto
unknown coast of North America!"

"He was indeed a man of energy," added Mrs Barnett; "and he gave proof of
his great qualities in starting on a fresh Polar expedition after all he had gone
through."

"Yes," replied the Lieutenant; "and he met a terrible death in the land his own
intrepidity had discovered. It has now been proved, however, that all his
companions did not perish with him. Many are doubtless still wandering about
on the vast ice-fields. I cannot think of their awful condition without a shudder.
One day," be added earnestly, and with strange emotion—" one day I will search
the unknown lands where the dreadful catastrophe took place, and— "

"And," exclaimed Mrs Barnett, pressing his hand, "I will accompany you.
Yes, this idea has occurred to me more than once, as it has to you; and my heart
beats high when I think that fellow countrymen of my own-Englishmen-are
awaiting succour."

"Which will come too late for most of them, madam," said the Lieutenant;
"but rest assured some will even yet be saved."

"God grant it, Lieutenant!" replied Mrs Barnett; "and it appears to me that
the agents of the Company, living as they do close to the coast, are better fitted
than any one else to fulfil this duty of humanity."

"I agree with you, madam; they are, as they have often proved, inured to the
rigours of the Arctic climate. Was it not they who aided Captain Back in his
voyage in 1834, when he discovered King William’s Land, where Franklin met
his fate? Was it not two of us, Dease and Simpson, who were sent by the
Governor of Hudson’s Bay to explore the shores of the Polar Sea in 1838, and
whose courageous efforts first discovered Victoria Land? It is my opinion that


the future reserves for the Hudson’s Bay Company the final conquest of the
Arctic regions. Gradually its factories are advancing further and further north,
following the retreat of the fur-yielding animals; and one day a fort will be
erected on the Pole itself, that mathematical point where meet all the meridians
of the globe."

During this and the succeeding journeys Jaspar Hobson related his own
adventures since he entered the service of the Company his struggles with the
agents of rival associations, and his efforts to explore the unknown districts of
the north or west; and Mrs Barnett, on her side, told of her travels in the tropics.
She spoke of all she had done, and of all she hoped still to accomplish; so that
the long hours, lightened by pleasant conversation, passed rapidly away.

Meanwhile the dogs advanced at full gallop towards the north. The
Coppermine valley widened sensibly as they neared the Arctic Ocean. The hills
on either side sank lower and lower, and only scattered clumps of resinous trees
broke the monotony of the landscape. A few blocks of ice, drifted down by the
river, still resisted the action of the sun; but each day their number decreased,
and a canoe, or even a good-sized boat, might easily have descended the stream,
the course of which was unimpeded by any natural barrier or aggregation of
rocks. The bed of the Coppermine was both deep and wide; its waters were very
clear, and being fed by the melted snow, flowed on at a considerable pace, never,
however, forming dangerous rapids. Its course, at first very sinuous, became
gradually less and less winding, and at last stretched along in a straight line for
several miles. Its banks, composed of fine firm sand, and clothed in part with
short dry herbage, were wide and level, so that the long train of sledges sped
rapidly over them.

The expedition travelled day and night-if we can speak of the night, when the
sun, describing an almost horizontal circle, scarcely disappeared at all. The true
night only lasted two hours, and the dawn succeeded the twilight almost
immediately. The weather was fine; the sky clear, although somewhat misty on
the horizon; and everything combined to favour the travellers.

For two days they kept along the river-banks without meeting with any
difficulties. They saw but few fur-bearing animals; but there were plenty of
birds, which might have been counted by thousands. The absence of otters,
sables, beavers, ermines, foxes, &c., did not trouble the Lieutenant much, for he
supposed that they had been driven further north by over-zealous tracking; and
indeed the marks of encampments, extinguished fires, &c., told of the more or
less recent passage of native hunters. Hobson knew that he would have to
penetrate a good deal further north, and that part only of his journey would be
accomplished when he got to the mouth of the Coppermine river. He was


therefore most eager to reach the limit of Hearne’s exploration, and pressed on as
rapidly as possible.

Every one shared the Lieutenant’s impatience, and resolutely resisted fatigue
in order to reach the Arctic Ocean with the least possible delay. They were
drawn onwards by an indefinable attraction; the glory of the unknown dazzled
their sight. Probably real hardships would commence when they did arrive at the
much-desired coast. But no matter, they longed to battle with difficulties, and to
press straight onwards to their aim. The district they were now traversing could
have no direct interest for them; the real exploration would only commence on
the shores of the Arctic Ocean. Each one, then, would gladly hail the arrival in
the elevated western districts for which they were bound, cut across though they
were by the seventieth parallel of north latitude.

On the 5th June, four days after leaving Fort Confidence the river widened
considerably. The western banks, curving slightly, ran almost due north; whilst
the eastern rounded off into the coastline, stretching away as far as the eye could
reach.

Lieutenant Hobson paused, and waving his hand to his companions, pointed
to the boundless ocean.

CHAPTER XI.

ALONG THE COAST.

Coronation Gulf, the large estuary dotted with the islands forming the Duke
of York Archipelago, which the party had now reached, was a sheet of water
with irregular banks, let in, as it were, into the North American continent. At its
western angle opened the mouth of the Coppermine; and on the east a long
narrow creek called Bathurst Inlet ran into the mainland, from which stretched
the jagged broken coast with its pointed capes and rugged promontories, ending
in that confusion of straits, sounds, and channels which gives such a strange
appearance to the maps of North America. On the other side the coast turned
abruptly to the north beyond the mouth of the Coppermine River, and ended in
Cape Krusenstern.

After consulting with Sergeant Long, Lieutenant Hobson decided to give his
party a day’s rest here.

The exploration, properly so called, which was to enable the Lieutenant to
fix upon a suitable site for the establishment of a fort, was now really about to
begin. The Company had advised him to keep as much as possible above the
seventieth parallel, and on the shores of the Arctic Ocean. To obey his orders
Hobson was obliged to keep to the west; for on the east—with the exception,
perhaps, of the land of Boothia, crossed by the seventieth parallel—the whole
country belongs rather to the Arctic Circle, and the geographical conformation of


Boothia is as yet but imperfectly known.

After carefully ascertaining the latitude and longitude, and verifying his
position by the map, the Lieutenant found that he was a hundred miles below the
seventieth degree. But beyond Cape Krusenstern, the coastline, running in a
north-easterly direction, abruptly crosses the seventieth parallel at a sharp angle
near the one hundred and thirtieth meridian, and at about the same elevation as
Cape Bathurst, the spot named as a rendezvous by Captain Craventy. He must
therefore make for that point, and should the site appear suitable the new fort
would be erected there.

"There," said the Lieutenant to his subordinate, Long, "we shall be in the
position ordered by the Company. There the sea, open for a great part of the year,
will allow the vessels from Behring Strait to come right up to the fort, bringing
us fresh provisions and taking away our commodities."

"Not to mention,” added Sergeant Long, "that our men will be entitled to
double pay all the time they are beyond the seventieth parallel."

"Of course that is understood," replied Hobson; "and I daresay they will
accept it without a murmur."

"Well then, Lieutenant," said Long simply, "we have now only to start for
Cape Bathurst."

But as a day of rest had been promised, the start did not actually take place
until the next day, June 6th.

The second part of the journey would naturally be very different from the
first. The rules with regard to the sledges keeping their rank need no longer be
enforced, and each couple drove as it pleased them. Only short distances were
traversed at a time; halts were made at every angle of the coast, and the party
often walked. Lieutenant Hobson only urged two things upon his companions
not to go further than three miles from the coast, and to rally their forces twice a
day, at twelve o’clock and in the evening. At night they all encamped in tents.

The weather continued very fine and the temperature moderate, maintaining
a mean height of 59° Fahrenheit above zero. Two or three times sudden
snowstorms came on; but they did not last long, and exercised no sensible
influence upon the temperature.

The whole of the American coast between Capes Krusenstern and Parry,
comprising an extent of more than two hundred and fifty miles, was examined
with the greatest care between the 6th and 20th of June. Geographical
observations were accurately taken, and Hobson, most effectively aided by
Thomas Black, was able to rectify certain errors in previous marine surveys;
whilst the primary object of the expedition—the examination into the quality and
quantity of the game in the surrounding districts-was not neglected.


Were these lands well stocked with game? Could they count with certainty
not only on a good supply of furs, but also of meat? Would the resources of the
country provide a fort with provisions in the summer months at least? Such were
the grave questions which Lieutenant Hobson had to solve, and which called for
immediate attention. We give a summary of the conclusions at which he arrived.

Game, properly so called, of the kind for which Corporal Joliffe amongst
others had a special predilection, was not abundant. There were plenty of birds
of the duck tribe; but only a few Polar hares, difficult of approach, poorly
represented the rodents of the north. There seemed, however, to be a good many
bears about. Marbre and Sabine had come upon the fresh traces of several. Some
were even seen and tracked; but, as a rule, they kept at a respectful distance. In
the winter, however, driven by famine from higher latitudes, there would
probably be more than enough of these ravenous beasts prowling about the
shores of the Arctic Ocean.

"There is certainly no denying,” said Corporal Joliffe, "that bear’s flesh is
very good eating when once it’s in the larder; but there is something very
problematical about it beforehand, and it’s always just possible that the hunters
themselves may meet the fate they intended for the bears!"

This was true enough. It was no use counting upon the bears to provision
their fort. Fortunately traces were presently found of herds of a far more useful
animal, the flesh of which is the principal food of the Indians and Esquimaux.
We allude to the reindeer; and Corporal Joliffe announced with the greatest
satisfaction that there were plenty of these ruminants on this coast. The ground
was covered with the lichen to which they are so partial, and which they cleverly
dig out from under the snow.

There could be no mistake as to the footprints left by the reindeer, as, like the
camel, they have a small nail-like hoof with a convex surface. Large herds,
sometimes numbering several thousand animals, are seen running wild in certain
parts of America. Being easily domesticated, they are employed to draw sledges;
and they also supply the factories with excellent milk, more nourishing than that
of cows. Their dead bodies are not less useful. Their thick skin provides clothes,
their hair makes very good thread, and their flesh is palatable; so that they are
really the most valuable animals to be found in these latitudes, and Hobson,
being assured of their presence, was relieved from half his anxiety.

As he advanced he had also reason to be satisfied with regard to the fur-
bearing animals. By the little streams rose many beaver lodges and musk-rat
tunnels. Badgers, lynxes, ermines, wolverenes, sables, polecats, &c., frequented
these districts, hitherto undisturbed by hunters. They had thus far come to no
trace of the presence of man, and the animals had chosen their refuge well.


Footprints were also found of the fine blue and silver foxes, which are becoming
more and more rare, and the fur of which is worth its weight in gold. Sabine and
Mac-Nab might many a time have shot a very valuable animal on this excursion,
but the Lieutenant had wisely forbidden all hunting of the kind. He did not wish
to alarm the animals before the approaching season-that is to say, before the
winter months, when their furs become thicker and more beautiful. It was also
desirable not to overload the sledges. The hunters saw the force of his reasoning;
but for all that, their fingers itched when they came within shot-range of a sable
or some valuable fox. Their Lieutenant’s orders were, however, not to be
disobeyed.

Polar bears and birds were, therefore, all that the hunters had to practise upon
in this second stage of their journey. The former, however, not yet rendered bold
by hunger, soon scampered off, and no serious struggle with them ensued.

The poor birds suffered for the enforced immunity of the quadrupeds. White-
headed eagles, huge birds with a harsh screeching cry; fishing hawks, which
build their nests in dead trees and migrate to the Arctic regions in the summer;
snow buntings with pure white plumage, wild geese, which afford the best food
of all the Anseres tribe; ducks with red heads and black breasts; ash-coloured
crows, a kind of mocking jay of extreme ugliness; eider ducks; scoters or black
divers, &c. &c., whose mingled cries awake the echoes of the Arctic regions, fell
victims by hundreds to the unerring aim of Marbre and Sabine. These birds
haunt the high latitudes by millions, and it would -be impossible to form an
accurate estimate of their number on the shores of the Arctic Ocean. Their flesh
formed a very pleasant addition to the daily rations of biscuit and corned beef,
and we can understand that the hunters laid up a good stock of them in the
fifteen days during which they were debarred from attacking more valuable
game.

There would then be no lack of animal food; the magazines of the Company
would be well stocked with game, and its offices filled with furs and traders; but
something more was wanted to insure success to the undertaking. Would it be
possible to obtain a sufficient supply of fuel to contend with the rigour of an
Arctic winter at so elevated a latitude?

Most fortunately the coast, was well wooded; the hills which sloped down
towards the sea were crowned with green trees, amongst which the pine
predominated. Some of the woods might even be called forests, and would
constitute an admirable reserve of timber for the fort. Here and there Hobson
noticed isolated groups of willows, poplars, dwarf birch-trees, and numerous
thickets of arbutus. At this time of the warm season all these trees were covered
with verdure, and were an unexpected and refreshing sight to eyes so long


accustomed to the rugged, barren polar landscape. The ground at the foot of the
hills was carpeted with a short herbage devoured with avidity by the reindeer,
and forming their only sustenance in winter. On the whole, then, the Lieutenant
had reason to congratulate himself on having chosen the north-west of the
American continent for the foundation of a new settlement.

We have said that these territories, so rich in animals, were apparently
deserted by men. The travellers saw neither Esquimaux, who prefer the districts
round Hudson’s Bay, nor Indians, who seldom venture so far beyond the Arctic
Circle. And indeed in these remote latitudes hunters may be overtaken by
storms, or be suddenly surprised by winter, and cut off from all communication
with their fellow-creatures. We can easily imagine that Lieutenant Hobson was
by no means sorry not to meet any rival explorers. What he wanted was an
unoccupied country, a deserted land, suitable as a refuge for the fur-bearing
animals; and in this matter he had the full sympathy of Mrs Barnett, who, as the
guest of the Company, naturally took a great interest in the success of its
schemes.

Fancy, then, the disappointment of the Lieutenant, when on the morning of
the 20th June he came to an encampment but recently abandoned.

It was situated at the end of a narrow creek called Darnley Bay, of which
Cape Parry is the westernmost point. There at the foot of a little hill were the
stakes which had served to mark the limits of the camp, and heaps of cinders, the
extinct embers of the fires.

The whole party met at this encampment, and all understood how great a
disappointment it involved for Lieutenant Hobson.

"What a pity!" he exclaimed. "I would rather have met a whole family of
polar bears!"

"But I daresay the men who encamped here are already far off," said Mrs
Barnett; "very likely they have returned to their usual hunting grounds."

"That is as it may be," replied the Lieutenant. "If these be the traces of
Esquimaux, they are more likely to have gone on than to have turned back; and
if they be those of Indians, they are probably, like ourselves, seeking a new
hunting district; and in either case it will be very unfortunate for us."

"But," said Mrs Barnett, "cannot we find out to what race the travellers do
belong? Can’t we ascertain if they be Esquimaux or Indians from the south? I
should think tribes of such a different origin, and of such dissimilar customs,
would not encamp in the same manner."

Mrs Barmett was right; they might possibly solve the mystery after a
thorough examination of the ground.

Jaspar Hobson and others set to work, carefully examining every trace, every


object left behind, every mark on the ground; but in vain, there was nothing to
guide them to a decided opinion. The bones of some animals scattered about told
them nothing, and the Lieutenant, much annoyed, was about to abandon the
useless search, when he heard an exclamation from Mrs Joliffe, who had
wandered a little way to the left.

All hurried towards the young Canadian, who remained fixed to the spot,
looking attentively at the ground before her.

As her companions came up she said—

"You are looking for traces, Lieutenant; well, here are some."

And Mrs Joliffe pointed to a good many footprints clearly visible in the firm
clay.

These might reveal something; for the feet of the Indians and Esquimaux, as
well as their boots, are totally different from each other.

But what chiefly struck Lieutenant Hobson was the strange arrangement of
these impressions. They were evidently made by a human foot, a shod foot; but,
strange to say, the ball alone appeared to have touched the ground! The marks
were very numerous, close together, often crossing one another, but confined to a
very small circle.

Jaspar Hobson called the attention of the rest of the party to this singular
circumstance.

"These were not made by a person walking," he said.

"Nor by a person jumping," added Mrs Barnett; "for there is no mark of a
heel."

"No," said Mrs Joliffe; "these footprints were left by a dancer."

She was right, as further examination proved. They were the marks left by a
dancer, and a dancer engaged in some light and graceful exercise, for they were
neither clumsy nor deep.

But who could the light-hearted individual be who had been impelled to
dance in this sprightly fashion some degrees above the Arctic Circle?

"Tt was certainly not an Esquimaux," said the Lieutenant.

"Nor an Indian," cried Corporal Joliffe.

"No, it was a Frenchman," said Sergeant Long quietly.

And all agreed that none but a Frenchman could have been capable of
dancing on such a spot.

CHAPTER XII.

THE MIDNIGHT SUN.

Sergeant Long’s assertion must appear to have been founded on insufficient
evidence. That there had been dancing no one could deny, but that the dancer
was a Frenchman, however probable, could not be considered proved.


However, the Lieutenant shared the opinion of his subordinate, which did not
appear too positive to any of the party, who all agreed in feeling sure that some
travellers, with at least one compatriot of Vestris amongst them, had recently
encamped on this spot.

Of course Lieutenant Hobson was by no means pleased at this he was afraid
of having been preceded by rivals in the north-western districts of English
America; and secret as the Company had kept its scheme, it had doubtless been
divulged in the commercial centres of Canada and the United States.

The Lieutenant resumed his interrupted march; but he was full of care and
anxiety, although he would not now have dreamed of retracing his steps.

"Frenchmen are then sometimes met with in these high latitudes?" was Mrs
Barnett’s natural question after this incident.

"Yes, madam," replied the Lieutenant; "or if not exactly Frenchmen, the
descendants of the masters of Canada when it belonged to France, which comes
to much the same thing. These men are in fact our most formidable rivals."

"But I thought," resumed Mrs Barnett, "that after the absorption by the
Hudson’s Bay Company of the old North-West Company, that it had no longer
any rivals on the American continent."

"Although there is no longer any important association for trading in furs
except our own, there are a good many perfectly independent private companies,
mostly American, which have retained French agents or their descendants in
their employ."

"Are these agents then held in such high esteem?" asked Mrs Barnett.

"Yes, madam, and with good reason. During the ninety-four years of French
supremacy in Canada, French agents always proved themselves superior to ours.
We must be just even to our rivals."

"Especially to our rivals," added Mrs Barnett.

"Yes, especially. . . At that time French hunters, starting from Montreal, their
headquarters, pressed on to the north with greater hardihood than any others.
They lived for years with the Indian tribes, sometimes intermarrying with them.
The natives called them the ‘Canadian travellers,’ and were on the most intimate
terms with them. They were bold, clever fellows, expert at navigating streams,
light-hearted and merry, adapting themselves to circumstances with the easy
flexibility of their race, and always ready to sing or dance."

"And do you suppose that hunting is the only object of the party whose
traces we have just discovered?"

"I don’t think any other hypotheses at all likely," replied Hobson. "They are
sure to be seeking new hunting grounds. But as we cannot possibly stop them,
we must make haste to begin our own operations, and compete boldly with all


rivals."

Lieutenant Hobson was now prepared for the competition he could not
prevent, and he urged on the march of his party as much as possible, hoping that
his rivals might not follow him beyond the seventieth parallel.

The expedition now descended towards the south for some twenty miles, in
order the more easily to pass round Franklin Bay. The country was still covered
with verdure, and the quadrupeds and birds already enumerated were as plentiful
as ever; so that they could reasonably hope that the whole of the north-western
coasts of the American continent were populated in the same manner.

The ocean which bathed these shores stretched away as far as the eye could
reach Recent atlases give no land beyond the north American coastline, and it is
only the icebergs which impede the free navigation of the open sea from Behring
Strait to the Pole itself.

On the 4th July the travellers skirted round another deep bay called
Washburn Bay, and reached the furthest point of a little lake, until then
imperfectly known, covering but a small extent of territory, scarcely two square
miles-in fact it was rather a lagoon, or large pond of sweet water, than a lake.

The sledges went on easily and rapidly, and the appearance of the country
was most encouraging to the explorers. It seemed that the extremity of Cape
Bathurst would be a most favourable site for the new fort, as with this lagoon
behind them, and the sea open for four or five months in the warm season, and
giving access to the great highway of Behring Strait, before them, it would be
easy for the exiles to lay in fresh provisions and to export their commodities.

On the 5th June, about three o’clock in the afternoon, the party at last halted
at the extremity of Cape Bathurst. It remained to ascertain the exact position of
this cape, which the maps place above the seventieth parallel. It was, however,
impossible to rely upon the marine surveys of the coast, as they had never yet
been made with exactitude. Jaspar Hobson decided to wait and ascertain the
latitude and longitude.

"What prevents us from settling here?" asked Corporal Joliffe. "You will
own, Lieutenant, that it is a very inviting spot."

"It will seem more inviting still if you get double pay here, my worthy
Corporal," replied Hobson.

"No doubt," said Joliffe; "and the orders of the Company must be obeyed."

"Then wait patiently till to-morrow," added Hobson; "and if we find that
Cape Bathurst is really beyond 70° north latitude, we will pitch our tent here."

The site was indeed admirably suited for the foundation of a new settlement.
The wooded heights surrounding the lagoon would supply plenty of pine, birch,
and other woods for the construction of the fort, and for stocking, it with’ fuel.


The Lieutenant and some of his companions went to the very edge of the cape,
and found that towards the west the coastline formed a lengthened curve, beyond
which icebergs of a considerable height shut out the view. The water of the
lagoon, instead of being brackish as they expected from its close vicinity to the
sea, was perfectly sweet; but had it not been so, drinkable water would not have
failed the little colony, as a fresh and limpid stream ran a few yards to the south-
east of Cape Bathurst, and emptied itself into the Arctic Ocean through a narrow
inlet, which, protected by a singular accumulation of sand and earth instead of
by rocks, would have afforded a refuge to several vessels from the winds of the
offing, and might be turned to account for the anchorage of the ships which it
was hoped would come to the new settlement from Behring Strait. Out of
compliment to the lady of the party, and much to her delight, Lieutenant Hobson
named the stream Paulina river, and the little harbour Port Barnett.

By building the fort a little behind the actual cape, the principal house and
the magazines would be quite sheltered from the coldest winds. The elevation of
the cape would help to protect them from the snow-drifts, which sometimes
completely bury large buildings beneath their heavy avalanches in a few hours.
There was plenty of room between the foot of the promontory and the bank of
the lagoon for all the constructions necessary to a fort. It could even be
surrounded by palisades, which would break the shock of the icebergs; and the
cape itself might be surrounded with a fortified redoubt, if the vicinity of rivals
should render such a purely defensive erection necessary; and the Lieutenant,
although with no idea of commencing anything of the kind as yet, naturally
rejoiced at having met with an easily defensible position.

The weather remained fine, and it was quite warm enough. There was not a
cloud upon the sky; but, of course, the clear blue air of temperate and torrid
zones could not be expected here, and the atmosphere was generally charged
with a light mist. What would Cape Bathurst be like in the long winter night of
four months when the ice-mountains became fixed and rigid, and the hoarse
north wind swept down upon the icebergs in all its fury? None of the party gave
a thought to that time now; for the weather was beautiful, the verdant landscape
smiled, and the waves sparkled in the sunbeams, whilst the temperature
remained warm and pleasant.

A provisional camp, the sledges forming its only material, was arranged for
the night on the banks of the lagoon; and towards evening Mrs Barnett, the
Lieutenant, Sergeant Long, and even Thomas Black, explored the surrounding
district in order to ascertain its resources. It appeared to be in every respect
suitable; and Hobson was eager for the next day, that he might determine the
exact situations, and find out if it fulfilled the conditions imposed by the


Company.

"Well, Lieutenant," said the astronomer when the examination was over, "this
is really a charming spot, such as I should not have imagined could have existed
beyond the Arctic Circle."

"Ah, Mr Black!" cried Hobson, "the finest countries in the world are to be
found here, and I am impatient to ascertain our latitude and longitude."

"Especially the latitude," said the astronomer, whose eclipse was never out of
his thoughts; "and I expect your brave companions are as eager as yourself.
Double pay beyond the seventieth parallel!"

"But, Mr Black," said Mrs Barnett, "do you not yourself take an interest a
purely scientific interest, in getting beyond that parallel?"

"Of course, madam, of course I am anxious to get beyond it, but not so
terribly eager. According to our calculations, however, made with absolute
accuracy, the solar eclipse which I am ordered to watch will only be total to an
observer placed beyond the seventieth degree, and on this account I share the
Lieutenant’s impatience to determine the position of Cape Bathurst."

"But I understand, Mr Black," said Mrs Barnett, "that this solar eclipse will
not take place until the 18th July 1860?"

"Yes, madam, on the 18th July 1860."

"And it is now only the 15th June 1859! So that the phenomenon will not be
visible for more than a year!"

"IT am quite aware of it, Mrs Barnett," replied the astronomer; "but if I had
not started till next year I should have run a risk of being too late."

"You would, Mr Black," said Hobson, "and you did well to start a year
beforehand. You are now quite sure not to miss your eclipse. I own that our
journey from Fort Reliance has been accomplished under exceptionally
favourable circumstances. We have had little fatigue and few delays. To tell you
the truth, I did not expect to get to this part of the coast until the middle of
August; and if the eclipse had been expected this year, instead of next; you really
might have been too late. Moreover, we do not yet know if we are beyond the
seventieth parallel."

"I do not in the least regret the journey I have taken in your company,
Lieutenant, and I shall patiently wait until next year for my eclipse. The fair
Phoebe, I fancy, is a sufficiently grand lady to be waited for."

The next day, July 6th, a little after noon, Hobson and the astronomer made
their preparations for taking the exact bearings of Cape Bathurst. The sun shone
clearly enough for them to take the outlines exactly. At this season of the year,
too, it had reached its maximum height above the horizon; and consequently its
culmination, on its transit across the meridian, would facilitate the work of the


two observers.

Already the night before, and the same morning, by raking different
altitudes, and by means of a calculation of right ascensions, the Lieutenant and
the astronomer had ascertained the longitude with great accuracy. But it was
about the latitude that Hobson was most anxious; for what would the meridian of
Cape Bathurst matter to him should it not be situated beyond the seventieth
parallel?

Noon approached. The men of the expedition gathered round the observers
with their sextants ready in their hands. The brave fellows awaited the result of
the observation with an impatience which will be readily understood. It was now
to be decided whether they had come to the end of their journey, or whether they
must search still further for a spot fulfilling the conditions imposed by the
Company.

Probably no good result would have followed upon further explorations,
According to the maps of North America-imperfect, it is true-the western coast
beyond Cape Bathurst sloped down below the seventieth parallel, not again
rising above it until it entered Russian America, where the English had as yet no
right to settle; so that Hobson had shown considerable judgment in directing his
course to Cape Bathurst after a thorough examination of the maps of these
northern regions. This promontory is, in fact, the only one which juts out beyond
the seventieth parallel along the whole of the North American continent,
properly so called-that is to say, in English America. It remained to be proved
that it really occupied the position assigned to it in maps.

At this moment the sun was approaching the culminating-point of its course,
and the two observers pointed the telescopes of their sextants upon it. By means
of inclined mirrors attached to the instruments, the sun ought apparently to go
back to the horizon itself; and the moment when it seemed to touch it with the
lower side of its disc would be precisely that at which it would occupy the
highest point of the diurnal arc, and consequently the exact moment when it
would pass the meridian-in other words, it would be noon at the place where the
observation was taken.

All watched in anxious silence.

"Noon!" cried Jaspar Hobson and the astronomer at once.

The telescopes were immediately lowered. The Lieutenant and Thomas
Black read on the graduated limbs the value of the angles they had just obtained,
and at once proceeded to note down their observations.

A few minutes afterwards, Lieutenant Hobson rose and said, addressing his
companions

"My friends, from this date, July 6th, I promise you double pay in the name


of the Hudson’s Bay Company!"

"Hurrah! hurrah! hurrah for the Company!" shouted the worthy companions
of the Lieutenant with one voice.

Cape Bathurst and its immediate neighbourhood were in very truth above the
seventieth degree of north latitude.

We give the result of these simultaneous observations, which agreed to a
second.

Longitude, 127° 36’ 12" west of the meridian of Greenwich.

Latitude, 70° 44’ 37" north.

And that very evening these hardy pioneers, encamped so far from the
inhabited world, watched the mighty luminary of day touch the edges of the
western horizon without dipping beneath it.

For the first time they saw the shining of the midnight sun.

CHAPTER XIII.

FORT HOPE.

The site of the new fort was now finally determined on. It would be
impossible to find a better situation than on the level ground behind Cape
Bathurst, on the eastern bank of the lagoon Hobson determined to commence the
construction of the principal house at once. Meanwhile all must accommodate
themselves as best they could; and the sledges were ingeniously utilised to form
a provisional encampment.

His men being very skilful, the Lieutenant hoped to have the principal house
ready in a month. It was to be large enough to accommodate for a time the
nineteen persons of the party. Later, and before the excessive cold set in, if there
should be time, the barracks for the soldiers and the magazines for the furs and
skins were to be built. There was not much chance of getting it all done before
the end of September; and after that date, the winter, with its first bitter frosts
and long nights, would arrest all further progress.

Of the ten soldiers chosen by Captain Craventy, two-Marbre and Sabine-
were skilful hunters; the other eight handled the hatchet with as much address as
the musket. Like sailors, they could turn their hands to anything, and were now
to be treated more like workmen than soldiers, for they were to build a fort
which there was as yet no enemy to attack. Petersen, Belcher, Rae, Garry, Pond,
Hope, and Kellet formed a body of clever, zealous carpenters, under the able
superintendence of lilac-Nab, a Scotchman from Stirling, who had had
considerable experience in the building both of houses and boats. The men were
well provided with tools-hatchets, centre-bits, adzes, planes, hand-saws, mallets,
hammers, chisels, &c. &c. Rae was most skilful at blacksmith’s work, and with
the aid of a little portable forge he was able to make all the pins, tenons, bolts,


nails, screws, nuts, &e., required in carpentry. They had no mason in the party;
but none was wanted, as all the buildings of the factories in the north are of
wood. Fortunately there were plenty of trees about Cape Bathurst, although as
Hobson had already remarked to Mrs Barnett, there was not a rock, a stone, not
even a flint or a pebble, to be seen. The shore was strewn with innumerable
quantities of bivalve shells broken by the surf, and with seaweed or zoophytes,
mostly sea-urchins and asteriade; but the soil consisted entirely of earth and
sand, without a morsel of silica or broken granite; and the cape itself was but an
accumulation of soft earth, the particles of which were scarcely held together by
the vegetation with which it was clothed.

In the afternoon of the same day, July 6th Hobson and Mac-Nab the
carpenter went to choose the site of the principal house on the plateau at the foot
of Cape Bathurst. From this point the view embraced the lagoon and the western
districts to a distance of ten or twelve miles. On the right, about four miles off,
towered icebergs of a considerable height. partly draped in mist; whilst on the
left stretched apparently boundless plains, vast steppes which it would be
impossible to distinguish from the frozen surface of the lagoon or from the sea
itself in the winter.

The spot chosen, Hobson and Mac-Nab set out the outer walls of the house
with the line. This outline formed a rectangle measuring sixty feet on the larger
side, and thirty on the smaller. The fagade of the house would therefore have a
length of sixty feet it was to have a door and three windows on the side of the
promontory, where the inner court was to be situated, and four windows on the
side of the lagoon. The door was to open at the left corner, instead of in the
middle, of the back of the house, for the sake of warmth. This arrangement
would impede the entrance of the outer air to the further rooms, and add
considerably to the comfort of the inmates of the fort.

According to the simple plan agreed upon by the Lieutenant and his master-
carpenter, there were to be four compartments in the house: the first to be an
antechamber with a double door to keep out the wind; the second to serve as a
kitchen, that the cooking which would generate damp, might be all done quite
away from the living-rooms; the third, a large hall, where the daily meals were to
be served in common; and the fourth, to be divided into several cabins, like the
state-rooms on board ship.

The soldiers were to occupy the dining-hall provisionally, and a kind of
camp-bed was arranged for them at the end of the room. The Lieutenant, Mrs
Barnett, Thomas Black, Madge, Mrs Joliffe, Mrs Mac-Nab, and Mrs Rae were to
lodge in the cabins of the fourth compartment. They would certainly be packed
pretty closely; but it was only a temporary state of things, and when the barracks


were constructed, the principal house would be reserved to the officer in
command, his sergeant, Thomas Black, Mrs Barnett, and her faithful Madge,
who never left her. Then the fourth compartment might perhaps be divided into
three cabins, instead of four; for to avoid corners as much as possible is a rule
which should never be forgotten by those who winter in high latitudes Nooks
and comers are, in fact, so many receptacles of ice. The partitions impede the
ventilation; and the moisture, generated in the air, freezes readily, and makes the
atmosphere of the rooms unhealthy causing grave maladies to those who sleep in
them.

On this account many navigators who have to winter in the midst of ice have
one large room in the centre of their vessel, which is shared by officers and
sailors in common. For obvious reasons, however, Hobson could not adopt this
plan.

From the preceding description we shall have seen that the future house was
to consist merely of a ground-floor. The roof was to be high, and its sides to
slope considerably, so that water could easily run off them. The snow would,
however, settle upon them; and when once they were covered with it, the house
would be, so to speak, hermetically closed, and the inside temperature would be
kept at the same mean height. Snow is, in fact, a very bad conductor of beat: it
prevents it from entering, it is true; but, what is more important in an Arctic
winter, it also keeps it from getting out.

The carpenter was to build two chimneys-one above the kitchen, the other in
connection with the stove of the large dining-room, which was to heat it and the
compartment containing the cabins. The architectural effect of the whole would
certainly be poor; but the house would be as comfortable as possible, and what
more could any one desire?

Certainly an artist who had once seen it would not soon forget this winter
residence, set down in the gloomy Arctic twilight in the midst of snow-drifts,
half hidden by icicles, draped in white from roof to foundation, its walls
encrusted with snow, and the smoke from its fires assuming strangely-contorted
forms in the wind.

But now to tell of the actual construction of this house, as yet existing only in
imagination. This, of course, was the business of Mac-Nab and his men; and
while the carpenters were at work, the foraging party to whom the commissariat
was entrusted would not be idle. There was plenty for every one to do.

The first step was to choose suitable timber, and a species of Scotch fir was
decided on, which grew conveniently upon the neighbouring hills, and seemed
altogether well adapted to the multifarious uses to which it would be put. For in
the rough and ready style of habitation which they were planning, there could be


no variety of material; and every part of the house-outside and inside walls,
flooring, ceiling, partitions, rafters, ridges, framework, and tiling-would have to
be contrived of planks, beams, and timbers. As may readily be supposed,
finished workmanship was riot necessary for such a description of building, and
Mac-Nab was able to proceed very rapidly without endangering the safety of the
building. About a hundred of these firs were chosen and felled-they were neither
barked nor squared-and formed so many timbers, averaging some twenty feet in
length. The axe and the chisel did not touch them except at the ends, in order to
form the tenons and mortises by which they were to be secured to one another.
Very few days sufficed to complete this part of the work, and the timbers were
brought down by the dogs to the site fixed on for the principal building. To start
with, the Bite had been carefully levelled. The soil, a mixture of fine earth and
sand, had been beaten and consolidated with heavy blows. The brushwood with
which it was originally covered was burnt, and the thick layer of ashes thus
produced would prevent the damp from penetrating the floors. A clean and dry
foundation having been thus secured on which to lay the first joists, upright posts
were fixed at each corner of the site, and at the extremities of the inside walls, to
form the skeleton of the building. The posts were sunk to a depth of some feet in
the ground, after their ends had been hardened in the fire; and were slightly
hollowed at each side to receive the crossbeams of the outer wall, between which
the openings for the doors and windows had been arranged for. These posts were
held together at the top by horizontal beams well let into the mortises, and
consolidating the whole building. On these horizontal beams, which represented
the architraves of the two fronts, rested the high trusses of the roof, which
overhung the walls like the eaves of a chalet. Above this squared architrave were
laid the joists of the ceiling, and those of the floor upon the layer of ashes.

The timbers, both in the inside and outside walls, were only laid side by side.
To insure their being properly joined, Rae the blacksmith drove strong iron bolts
through them at intervals; and when even this contrivance proved insufficient to
close the interstices as hermetically as was necessary, Mac-Nab had recourse to
calking, a process which seamen find invaluable in rendering vessels watertight;
only as a substitute for tow he used a sort of dry moss, with which the eastern
side of the cape was covered, driving it into the crevices with calking-irons and a
hammer, filling up each hollow with layers of hot tar, obtained without difficulty
from the pine-trees, and thus making the walls and boarding impervious to the
rain and damp of the winter season.

The door and windows in the two fronts were roughly but strongly built, and
the small panes of the latter glazed with isinglass, which, though rough, yellow,
and almost opaque, was yet the best substitute for glass which the resources of


the country afforded; and its imperfections really mattered little, as the windows
were sure to be always open in fine weather; while during, the long night of the
Arctic winter they would be useless, and have to be kept closed and defended by
heavy shutters with strong bolts against the violence of the gales. Meanwhile the
house was being quickly fitted up inside. By means of a double door between the
outer and inner halls a too sudden change of temperature was avoided, and the
wind was prevented from blowing with unbroken force into the rooms. The air-
pumps, brought from Fort Reliance, were so fixed as to let in fresh air whenever
excessive cold prevented the opening of doors or windows -one being made to
eject the impure air from within, the other to renew the supply; for the
Lieutenant had given his whole mind to this important matter.

The principal cooking utensil was a large iron furnace, which had been
brought piecemeal from Fort Reliance, and which the carpenter put up without
any difficulty. The chimneys for the kitchen and ball, however, seemed likely to
tax the ingenuity of the workmen to the utmost, as no material within their reach
was strong enough for the purpose, and stone, as we have said before, was
nowhere to be found in the country around Cape Bathurst.

The difficulty appeared insurmountable, when the invincible Lieutenant
suggested that they should utilise the shells with which the shore was strewed.

"Make chimneys of shells!" cried the carpenter.

"Yes, Mac-Nab," replied Hobson; "we must collect the shells, grind them,
burn them, and make them into lime, then mould the lime into bricks, and use
them in the same way."

"Let us try the shells, by all means," replied the carpenter; and so the idea
was put in practice at once, and many tons collected of calcareous shells
identical with those found in the lowest stratum of the Tertiary formations.

A furnace was constructed for the decomposition of the carbonate which is
so large an ingredient of these shells, and thus the lime required was obtained in
the space of a few hours. It would perhaps be too much to say that the substance
thus made was as entirely satisfactory as if it had gone through all the usual
processes; but it answered its purpose, and strong conical chimneys soon
adorned the roof, to the great satisfaction of Mrs Paulina Barnett, who
congratulated the originator of the scheme warmly on its success, only adding
laughingly, that she hoped the chimneys would riot smoke.

"Of course they will smoke, madam," replied Hobson coolly; "all chimneys
do!"

All this was finished within a month, and on the 6th of August they were to
take possession of the new house.

While Mac-Nab and his men were working so hard, the foraging party, with
the Lieutenant at its head, had been exploring the environs of Cape Bathurst, and
satisfied themselves that there would be no difficulty in supplying the
Company’s demands for fur and feathers, so soon as they could set about hunting
in earnest. In the meantime they prepared the way for future sport, contenting
themselves for the present with the capture of a few couples of reindeer, which
they intended to domesticate for the sake of their milk and their young. They
were kept in a paddock about fifty yards from the house, and entrusted to the
care of Mac-Nabs wife, an Indian woman, well qualified to take charge of them.

The care of the household fell to Mrs Paulina Barnett, and this good woman,
with Madge’s help, was invaluable in providing for all the small wants, which
would inevitably have escaped the notice of the men.

After scouring the country within a radius of several miles, the Lieutenant
notified, as the result of his observations, that the territory on which they had
established themselves, and to which he gave the name of Victoria Land, was a
large peninsula about one hundred and fifty square miles in extent, with very
clearly-defined boundaries, connected with the American continent by an
isthmus, extending from the lower end of Washburn Bay on the east, as fair as
the corresponding slope on the opposite coast. The Lieutenant next proceeded to
ascertain what were the resources of the lake and river, and found great reason to
be satisfied with the result of his examination. The shallow waters of the lake
teemed with trout, pike, and other available fresh-water fish; and the little river
was a favourite resort of salmon and shoals of white bait and smelts. The supply
of sea-fish was not so good; and though many a grampus and whale passed by in
the offing, the latter probably flying from the harpoons of the Behring Strait
fishermen there were no means of capturing them unless one by chance
happened to get stranded on the coast; nor would Hobson allow any of the seals
which abounded on the western shore to be taken until a satisfactory conclusion
should be arrived at as to how to use them to the best advantage.

The colonists now considered themselves fairly installed stalled in their new
abode, and after due deliberation unanimously agreed to bestow upon the
settlement the name of Fort Good Hope.

Alas! the auspicious title was never to be inscribed upon a map. The
undertaking, begun so bravely and with such prospects of success, was destined
never to be carried out, and another disaster would have to be added to the long
list of failures in Arctic enterprise.

CHAPTER XIV.

SOME EXCURSIONS.

It did not take long to furnish the new abode. A camp-bed was set up in the
hall, and the carpenter Mac-Nab constructed a most substantial table, around


which were ranged fixed benches. A few movable seats and two enormous
presses completed the furniture of this apartment. The inner room, which was
also ready, was divided by solid partitions into six dormitories, the two end ones
alone being lighted by windows looking to the front and back. The only furniture
was a bed and a table. Mrs Paulina Barnett and Madge were installed in one
which looked immediately out upon the lake. Hobson offered the other with the
window in it to Thomas Black, and the astronomer took immediate possession of
it. The Lieutenant’s own room was a dark cell adjoining the hall, with no
window but a bull’s eye pierced through the partition. Mrs Joliffe, Mrs Mac-Nab,
and Mrs Rae, with their husbands, occupied the other dormitories. These good
people agreed so well together that it would have been a pity to separate them.
Moreover, an addition was expected shortly to the little colony; and Mac-Nab
had already gone so far as to secure the services of Mrs Barnett as god-mother,
an honour which gave the good woman much satisfaction. The sledges had been
entirely unloaded, and the bedding carried into the different rooms. All utensils,
stores, and provisions which were not required for immediate use were stowed
away in a garret, to which a ladder gave access. The winter clothing-such as
boots, overcoats, furs, and skins-were also taken there, and protected from the
damp in large chests. As soon as these arrangements were completed, the
Lieutenant began to provide for the heating of the house.

Knowing that the most energetic measures were necessary to combat the
severity of the Arctic winter, and that during the weeks of intensest cold there
would be no possibility of leaving the house to forage for supplies, he ordered a
quantity of fuel to be brought from the wooded hills in the neighbourhood, and
took care to obtain a plentiful store of oil from the seals which abounded on the
shore.

In obedience to his orders, and under his directions, the house was provided
with a condensing apparatus which would receive the internal moisture, and was
so constructed that the ice which would form in it could easily be removed.

This question of heating was a very serious one to the Lieutenant.

"I am a native of the Polar regions, madam," he often said to Mrs Barnett; "I
have some experience in these matters, and I have read over and over again
books written by those who have wintered in these latitudes. It is impossible to
take too many precautions in preparing to pass a winter in the Arctic regions,
and nothing must be left to chance where a single neglect may prove fatal to the
enterprise."

"Very true, Mr Hobson," replied Mrs Barnett; "and you have evidently made
up your mind to conquer the cold; but there is the food to be thought of too."

"Yes, indeed; I have been thinking of that, and mean to make all possible use


of the produce of the country so as to economise our stores. As soon as we can,
we will make some foraging expeditions. We need not think about the furs at
present, for there will be plenty of time during the winter to stock the Company’s
depots. Besides, the furred animals have not got their winter clothing on yet, and
the skins would lose fifty per cent. of their value if taken now. Let us content
ourselves for the present with provisioning Fort Hope. Reindeer, elk, - and any
wapitis that may have ventured so far north are the only game worth our notice
just now; it will be no small undertaking to provide food for twenty people and
sixty dogs."

The Lieutenant loved order, and determined to do everything in the most
methodical manner, feeling confident that if his companions would help him to
the utmost of their power, nothing need be wanting to the success of the
expedition.

The weather at this season was almost always fine, and might be expected to
continue so for five weeks longer, when the snow would begin to fall. It was
very important that the carpenters-should make all possible use of the interval;
and as soon as the principal house was finished, Hobson set them to work to
build an enormous kennel or shed in which to keep the teams of dogs. This
doghouse was built at the very foot of the promontory, against the hill, and about
forty yards to the right of the house. Barracks for the accommodation of the men
were to be built opposite this kennel on the left, while the store and powder
magazines were to occupy the front of the enclosure.

Hobson determined with almost excessive prudence to have the Factory
enclosed before the winter set in. A strong fence of pointed stakes, planted
firmly in the ground, was set up as a protection against the inroads of wild
animals or the hostilities of the natives. The Lieutenant had not forgotten an
outrage which had been committed along the coast at no great distance from Fort
Hope, and he well knew how essential it was to be safe from a coup de main.
The factory was therefore entirely encircled, and at each extremity of the lagoon
Mac-Nab undertook to erect a wooden sentry-box commanding the coastline,
from which a watch could be kept without any danger. The men worked
indefatigably, and it seemed likely that everything would be finished before the
cold season set in.

In the meantime hunting parties were organised. The capture of seals being
put off for a more convenient season, the sportsmen prepared to supply the fort
with game, which might be dried and preserved for consumption during the bad
season.

Accordingly Marbre and Sabine, sometimes accompanied by the Lieutenant
and Sergeant Long, whose experience was invaluable, scoured the country daily


for miles round; and it was no uncommon sight to see Mrs Paulina Bamett join
them and step briskly along shouldering her gun bravely, and never allowing
herself to be outstripped by her companions.

Throughout the month of August these expeditions were continued with
great success, and the store of provisions increased rapidly. Marbre and Sabine
were skilled in all the artifices which sportsmen employ in stalking their prey-
particularly the reindeer, which are exceedingly wary. How patiently they would
face the wind lest the creature’s keen sense of smell should warn it of their
approach! and how cunningly they lured it on to its destruction by displaying the
magnificent antlers of some former victim above the birch-bushes !

They found a useful alley (sic) in a certain little traitorous bird to which the
Indians have given the name of "monitor." It is a kind of daylight owl, about the
size of a pigeon, and has earned its name by its habit of calling the attention of
hunters to their quarry, by uttering a sharp note like the cry of a child.

When about fifty reindeer, or, to give them their Indian name, "caribous,"
had been brought down by the guns, the flesh was cut into long strips for food,
the skins being kept to be tanned and used for shoe-leather.

Besides the caribous, there were also plenty of Polar hares, which formed an
agreeable addition to the larder. They were much less timorous than the
European species, and allowed themselves to be caught in great numbers. They
belong to the rodent family, and have long ears, brown eyes, and a soft fur
resembling swan’s down. They weigh from ten to fifteen pounds each, and their
flesh is excellent. Hundreds of them were cared for winter use, and the
remainder converted into excellent pies by the skilful hands of Mrs Joliffe.

While making provision for future wants, the daily supplies were not
neglected. In addition to the Polar bares, which underwent every variety of
culinary treatment from Mrs Joliffe, and won for her compliments innumerable
from hunters and workmen alike, many waterfowl figured in the bill of fare.
Besides the ducks which abounded on the shores of the lagoon, large flocks of
grouse congregated round the clumps of stunted willows. They belong, as their
zoological name implies, to the partridge family, and might be aptly described as
white partridges with long black-spotted feathers in the tail. The Indians call
them willow-fowl; but to a European sportsman they are neither more nor less
than blackcock (Tetrao tetrix). When roasted slightly before a quick clear fire
they proved delicious.

Then there were the supplies furnished by lake and stream. Sergeant Long
was a first-rate angler, and nothing could surpass the skill and patience with
which he whipped the water and cast his s line. The faithful Madge, another
worthy disciple of Isaak Walton was perhaps his only equal. Day after day the


two sallied forth together rod in hand, to spend the day in mute companionship
by the river-side, whence they were sure to return in triumph laden with some
splendid specimens of the salmon tribe.

But to return to our sportsmen; they soon found that their hunting excursions
were not to be free from peril. Hobson perceived with some alarm that bears
were very numerous in the neighbourhood and that scarcely a day passed
without one or more of them being sighted. Sometimes these unwelcome visitors
belonged to the family of brown bears, so common throughout the whole
"Cursed Land; "but now and then a solitary specimen of the formidable Polar
bear warned the hunters what dangers they might have to encounter so soon as
the first frost should drive great numbers of these fearful animals to the
neighbourhood of Cape Bathurst. Every book of Arctic explorations is full of
accounts of the frequent perils to which travellers and whalers are exposed from
the ferocity of these animals.

Now and then, too, a distant pack of wolves was seen, which receded like a
wave at the approach of the hunters, or the sound of their bark was heard as they
followed the trail of a reindeer or wapiti. These creatures were large grey
wolves, about three feet high, with long tails, whose fur becomes white in the
winter. They abounded in this part of the country, where food was plentiful; and
frequented wooded spots, where they lived in holes like foxes. During the
temperate season, when they could get as much as they wanted to eat, they were
scarcely dangerous, and fled with the characteristic cowardice of their race at the
first sign of pursuit; but when impelled by hunger, their numbers rendered them
very formidable; and from the fact of their lairs being close at hand, they never
left the country even in the depth of winter.

One day the sportsmen returned to Fort Hope, bringing with them an
unpleasant-looking animal, which neither Mrs Paulina Barnett nor the
astronomer, Thomas Black, had ever before seen. It was a carnivorous creature
of the plantigrada family, and greatly resembled the American glutton, being
strongly built, with short legs, and, like all animals of the feline tribe, a very
supple back; its eyes were small and horny, and it was armed with curved claws
and formidable jaws.

"What is this horrid creature?" inquired Mrs Paulina Barnett of Sabine, who
replied in his usual sententious manner—

"A Scotchman would call it a ‘quick-hatch,’ an Indian an ‘okelcoo-haw-gew,’
and a Canadian a ‘carcajou."”

"And what do you call it?"

"A wolverene, ma’am," returned Sabine, much delighted with the elegant
way in which he had rounded his sentence.


The wolverene, as this strange quadruped is called by zoologists, lives in
hollow trees or rocky caves, whence it issues at night and creates great havoc
amongst beavers, musk-rats, and other rodents, sometimes fighting with a fox or
a wolf for its spoils. Its chief characteristics are great cunning, immense
muscular power, and an acute sense of smell. It is found in very high latitudes;
and the short fur with which it is clothed becomes almost black in the winter
months, and forms a large item in the Company’s exports.

During their excursions the settlers paid as much attention to the Flora of the
country as to its Fauna; but in those regions vegetation, has necessarily a hard
struggle for existence, as it must brave every season of the year, whereas the
animals are able to migrate to a warmer climate during the winter.

The hills on the eastern side, of the lake were well covered with pine and fir
trees; and Jaspar also noticed the "tacamahac," a species of poplar which grows
to a great height and shoots forth yellowish leaves which turn green in the
autumn. These trees and larches were, however, few and sickly looking, as if
they found the oblique rays of the sun insufficient to make them thrive. The
black fir, or Norway spruce fir, throve better, especially when situated in ravines
well sheltered from the north wind. The young shoots of this tree are very
valuable, yielding a favourite beverage known in North America as " spruce-
beer." A good crop of these branchlets was gathered in and stored in the cellar of
Fort Hope. There were also the dwarf birch, a shrub about two feet high, native
to very cold climates, and whole thickets of cedars, which are so valuable for
fuel.

Of vegetables which could be easily grown and used for food, this barren
land yielded but few; and Mrs Joliffe, who took a great interest in " economic "
botany, only met with .two plants which were available in cooking.

One of these, a bulb, very difficult to classify, because its leaves fall off just
at the flowering season, turned out to be a wild leek, and yielded a good crop of
onions, each about the size of an egg.

The other plant was that known throughout North America as "Labrador
tea;" it grew abundantly on the shores of the lagoon between the clumps of
willow and arbutus, and formed the principal food of the Polar hares. Steeped in
boiling water, and flavoured with a few drops of brandy or gin, it formed an
excellent beverage, and served to economise the supply of China tea which the
party had brought from Fort Reliance.

Knowing the scarcity of vegetables, Jaspar Hobson had plenty of seeds with
him, chiefly sorrel and scurvy-grass (Cochlearia), the antiscorbutic properties of
which are invaluable in these latitudes. In choosing the site of the settlement,
such care bad been taken to find a spot sheltered from the keen blasts, which


shrivel vegetation like a fire, that there was every chance of these seeds yielding
a good crop in the ensuing season.

The dispensary of the new fort contained other antiscorbutics, in the shape of
casks of lemon and lime juice, both of which are absolutely indispensable to an
Arctic expedition. Still the greatest economy was necessary with regard to the
stores, as a long period of bad weather might cut off the communication between
Fort Hope and the southern stations.

CHAPTER XV.

FIFTEEN MILES FROM CAPE BATHURST.

September had now commenced, and as upon the most favourable
calculation only three more weeks would intervene before the bad season set in
and interrupted the labours of the explorers, the greatest haste was necessary in
completing the new buildings, and Mae-Nab and his workmen surpassed
themselves in industry. The doghouse was on the eve of being finished, and very
little remained to be done to the palisading which was, to encircle the fort. An
inner court had been constructed, in the shape of a half-moon, fenced with tall
pointed stakes, fifteen feet high, to which a postern gave entrance. Jaspar
Hobson favoured the system of an unbroken enclosure with detached forts (a
great improvement upon the tactics of Vauban and Cormontaigne), and knew
that to make his defence complete the summit of Cape Bathurst, which was the
key of the position, must be fortified; until that could be done, however, he
thought the palisading would be a sufficient protection, at least against
quadrupeds.

The next thing was to lay in a supply of oil and lights, and accordingly an
expedition was organised to a spot about fifteen miles distant where seals were
plentiful, Mrs Paulina Barnett being invited to accompany the sportsmen, not
indeed for the sake of watching the poor creatures slaughtered, but to satisfy her
curiosity with regard to the country around Cape Bathurst, and to see some
cliff’s on that part of the coast which were worthy of notice. The Lieutenant
chose as his other companions, Sergeant Long, and the soldiers Petersen, Hope,
and Kellet, and the party set off at eight o’clock in the morning in two sledges,
each drawn by six dogs, on which the bodies of the seals were to be brought
back. The weather was fine, but the fog which lay low along the horizon veiled
the rays of the sun, whose yellow disk was now beginning to disappear for some
hours during the night, a circumstance which attracted the Lieutenant’s attention,
for reasons which we will explain.

That part of the shore to the west of Cape Bathurst rises but a few inches
above the level of the sea, and the tides are-or are said to be-very high in the
Arctic Ocean-many navigators, such as Parry, Franklin, the two Rosses,


M’Clure, and M’Clintock, having observed that when the sun and moon were in
conjunction the waters were sometimes twenty-five feet above the ordinary
level. How then was it to be explained that the sea did not at high tide inundate
Cape Bathurst, which possessed no natural defences such as cliffs or downs?
What was it, in fact, which prevented the entire submersion of the whole district,
and the meeting of the waters of the lake with those of the Arctic Ocean?

Jaspar Hobson could not refrain from remarking on this peculiarity to Mrs
Barnett, who replied somewhat hastily that she supposed that there were-in spite
of all that had been said to the contrary-no tides in the Arctic Ocean.

"On the contrary, madam," said Hobson, "all navigators agree that the ebb
and flow of Polar seas are very distinctly marked, and it is impossible to believe
that they can have been mistaken on such a subject."

"How is it, then," inquired Mrs Barnett, "that this land is not flooded when it
is scarcely ten feet above the sea level at low tide?"

"That is just what puzzles me," said Hobson; "for I have been attentively
watching the tides all through this month, and during that time they have not
varied more than a foot, and I feel certain, that even during the September
equinox, they will not rise more than a foot and a half all along the shores of
Cape Bathurst."

"Can you not explain this phenomenon?" inquired Mrs Barnett.

"Well, madam," replied the Lieutenant, "two conclusions are open to us,
either of which I find it difficult to believe; such men as Franklin, Parry, Ross,
and others, are mistaken, and there are no tides on this part of the American
coast; or, as in the Mediterranean, to which the waters of the Atlantic have not
free ingress, the straits are too narrow to be affected by the ocean currents."

"The latter would appear to be the more reasonable hypothesis, Mr Hobson."

"Tt is riot, however, thoroughly satisfactory," said the Lieutenant, "and I feel
sure that if we could but find it, there is some simple and natural explanation of
the phenomenon."

After a monotonous journey along a flat and sandy shore, the party reached
their destination, and, having unharnessed the teams, they were left behind lest
they should startle the seals.

At the first glance around them, all were equally struck with the contrast
between the appearance of this district and that of Cape Bathurst.

Here the coast line was broken and fretted, showing manifest traces of its
igneous origin; whereas the site of the fort was of sedimentary formation and
aqueous origin. Stone, so conspicuously absent at the cape, was here plentiful;
the black sand and porous lava were strewn with huge boulders deeply imbedded
in the soil, and there were large quantities of the aluminium, silica, and felspar


pebbles peculiar to the crystalline strata of one class of igneous rocks. Glittering
Labrador stones, and many other kinds of felspar, red, green, and blue, were
sprinkled on the unfrequented beach, with grey and yellow pummice-stone, and
lustrous variegated obsidian. Tall cliffs, rising some two hundred feet above the
sea, frowned down upon the bay; and the Lieutenant resolved to climb them, and
obtain a good view of the eastern side of the country. For this there was plenty of
time, as but few of the creatures they had come to seek were as yet to be seen,
and the proper time for the attack would be when they assembled for the
afternoon siesta in which the. amphibious mammalia always indulge. The
Lieutenant, however, quickly discovered that the animals frequenting this coast
were not, as he had been led to suppose, true seals, although they belonged to the
Phocide family, but morses or walruses, sometimes called sea-cows. They
resemble the seals in general form, but the canine teeth of the upper jaw curved
down-wards are much more largely developed.

Following the coast line, which curved considerably, and to which they gave
the name of " Walruses’ Bay," the party soon reached the foot of the cliff, and
Petersen, Hope, and Kellet, took up their position as sentinels on the little
promontory, whilst Mrs Barnett, Hobson, and Long, after promising not to lose
sight of their comrades, and to be on the look-out for their signal, proceeded to
climb the cliff, the summit of which they reached in about a quarter of an hour.
From this position they were able to survey the whole surrounding country; at
their feet lay the vast sea, stretching northwards as far as the eye .could reach, its
expanse so entirely unbroken by islands or icebergs that the travellers came to
the conclusion, that this portion of the Arctic waters was navigable as far as
Behring Straits, and that during the summer season the North-West Passage to
Cape Bathurst would, be open to the Company’s ships. On the west, the aspect
of the country explained the presence of the volcanic débris on the shore; for at a
distance of about ten miles was a chain of granitic hills, of conical form, with
blunted crests, looking as if their summits had been cut off, and with jagged
tremulous outlines standing out against the sky. They bad hitherto escaped the
notice of our party, as they were concealed by the cliffs on the Cape Bathurst
side, and Jaspar Hobson examined them in silence, but with great attention,
before he proceeded to stud the eastern side, which consisted of a long strip of
perfectly level coastline stretching away to Cape Bathurst. Any one provided
with a good field-glass would have been able to distinguish the fort of Good
Hope, and perhaps even the cloud of blue smoke, which was no doubt at that
very moment issuing from Mrs Joliffe’s kitchen chimney.

The country behind them seemed to possess two entirely distinct characters;
to the east and south the cape was bounded by a vast plain, many hundreds of


square miles in extent, while behind the cliff, from "Walruses’ Bay" to the
mountains mentioned above, the country had undergone terrible convulsions,
showing clearly that it owed its origin to volcanic eruptions. The Lieutenant was
much struck with this marked contrast, and Sergeant Long asked him whether he
thought the mountains on the western horizon were volcanoes.

"Undoubtedly," said Hobson; "all these pumice-stones and pebbles have been
discharged by them to this distance, and if we were to go two or three miles
farther, we should find ourselves treading upon nothing but lava and ashes."

"Do you suppose," inquired the Sergeant, "that all these volcanoes are still
active?"

"That I cannot tell you yet."

"But there is no smoke issuing from any of them," added the Sergeant.

"That proves nothing; your pipe is not always in your mouth, and it is just
the same with volcanoes, they are not always smoking."

"I see," said the Sergeant; "but it is a great puzzle to me how volcanoes can
exist at all. on Polar continents."

"Well, there are riot many of them !" said Mrs Barnett.

"No, madam," replied Jaspar, "but they are not so very rare either; they are to
be found in Jan Mayen’s Land, the Aleutian Isles, Kamtchatka, Russian
America, and Iceland, as well as in the Antarctic circle, in Tierra del Fuego, and
Australasia. They are the chimneys of the great furnace in the centre of the earth,
where Nature makes her chemical experiments, and it appears to me that the
Creator of all things has taken care to place these safety-valves wherever they
were most needed."

"I suppose so," replied the Sergeant; "and yet it does seem very strange to
find them in this icy climate."

"Why should they not be here as well as anywhere else, Sergeant? I should
say that ventilation holes are likely to be more numerous at the Poles than at the
Equator !"

"Why so?" asked the Sergeant in much surprise.

"Because, if these safety-valves are forced open by the pressure of
subterranean gases, it will most likely be at the spots where the surface of the
earth is thinest, and as the globe is flattened at the poles, it would appear natural
that-but Kellet is making signs to us," added the Lieutenant, breaking off
abruptly; "will you join us, Mrs Barnett?"

"No, thank you. I will stay here until we return to the fort. I don’t care to
watch the walrus slaughtered!"

"Very well," replied Hobson, "only don’t forget to join us in an hour’s time,
meanwhile you can enjoy the view."


The beach was soon reached, and some hundred walrus had collected, either
waddling about on their clumsy webbed feet, or sleeping in family groups. Some
few of the larger males-creatures nearly four feet long, clothed with very short
reddish fur-kept guard over the herd.

Great caution was required in approaching these formidable looking animals,
and the hunters took advantage of every bit of cover afforded by rocks and
inequalities of the ground, so as to get within easy range of them and cut off their
retreat to the sea.


On land these creatures are clumsy and awkward, moving in jerks or with
creeping motions like huge caterpillars, but in water -their native element—they
are nimble and even graceful; indeed their strength is so great, that they have
been known to overturn the whalers in pursuit of them.

As the hunters drew near the sentinels took alarm, and raising their heads
looked searchingly around them; but before they could warn their companions of
danger, Hobson and Kellet rushed upon them from one side, the Sergeant,
Petersen, and Hope from the other, and after lodging a ball in each of their
bodies, despatched them with their spears, whilst the rest of the herd plunged
into the sea.

The victory was an easy one; the five victims were very large and their tusks,
though slightly rough, of the best quality. They were chiefly valuable, however,
on account of the oil; of which-being in excellent condition-they would yield a
large quantity. The bodies were packed in the sledges, and proved no light
weight for the dogs.

It was now one o’clock, and Mrs Barnett having joined them, the party set
out on foot-the sledges being full-to return to the fort. There were but ten miles
to be traversed, but ten miles in a straight line is a weary journey, proving the
truth of the adage "It’s a long lane that has no turning.” They beguiled the
tediousness of the way by chatting pleasantly, and Mrs Barnett was ready to join
in the conversation, or to listen with interest to the accounts the worthy soldiers
gave of former adventures; but in spite of the brave struggle against ennui they
advanced but slowly, and the poor dogs found it hard work to drag the heavily-
laden sledges over the rough ground. Had it been covered with frozen snow the
distance would have been accomplished in a couple of hours.

The merciful Lieutenant often ordered a halt to give the teams breathing-
time, and the Sergeant remarked that it would be much more convenient for the
inhabitants of the fort, if the morses would settle a little nearer Cape Bathurst.

"They could riot find a suitable spot," replied the Lieutenant, with a
melancholy shake of the head.


"Why not?" inquired Mrs Barnett with some surprise.

"Because they only congregate where the slope of the beach is gradual
enough to allow of their creeping up easily from the sea. Now Cape Bathurst
rises abruptly, like a perpendicular wall, from water three hundred fathoms deep.
It is probable that ages ago portion of the continent was rent away in some
violent volcanic convulsion, and flung into the Arctic Ocean. Hence the absence
of morses on the beach of our cape."

CHAPTER XVI.

TWO SHOTS.

The first half of September passed rapidly away. Had Fort Hope been
situated at the Pole itself, that is to say, twenty degrees farther north, the polar
night would have set in on the 21st of that month But under the seventieth
parallel the sun would be visible above the horizon for another month.
Nevertheless, the temperature was already decidedly colder, the thermometer fell
during the night to 31° Fahrenheit; and thin coatings of ice appeared here and
there, to be dissolved again in the day-time.

But the settlers were able to await the coming of winter without alarm; they
had a more than sufficient store of provisions, their supply of dried venison had
largely increased, another score of morses had been killed, the tame reindeer
were warmly and comfortably housed, and a huge wooden shed behind the
house was filled with fuel. In short, everything was prepared for the Polar night.

And now all the wants of the inhabitants of the fort being provided for, it was
time to think of the interests of the Company. The Arctic creatures had now
assumed their winter furs, and were therefore of the greatest value, and Hobson
organised shooting parties for the remainder of the fine weather, intending to set
traps when the snow should prevent further excursions.

They would have plenty to do to satisfy the requirements of the Company,
for so far north it was of no use to depend on the Indians, who are generally the
purveyors of the factories.

The first expedition was to the haunt of a family of beavers, long since noted
by the watchful Lieutenant, on a tributary of the stream already referred to. It is
true, the fur of the beaver is not now as valuable as when it was used for hats,
and fetched £16 per kilogramme (rather more than 2 |b.); but it still commands a
high price as the animal is becoming very scarce, in consequence of the reckless
way in which it has been hunted.

When the party reached their destination, the Lieutenant called Mrs Barnett’s
attention to the great ingenuity displayed by beavers in the construction of their
submarine city. There were some hundred animals in the little colony now to be
invaded, and they lived together in pairs in the "holes" or "vaults" they had


hollowed out near the stream. They had already commenced their preparations
for the winter, and were hard at work constructing their dams and laying up their
piles of wood. A dam of admirable structure had already been built across the
stream, which was deep and rapid enough not to freeze far below the surface,
even in the severest weather. This dam, which was convex towards the current,
consisted of a collection of upright stakes interlaced with branches and roots, the
whole being cemented together and rendered watertight with the clayey mud of
the river, previously pounded by the animals’ feet. The beavers use their tails-
which are large and flat, with scales instead of hair at the root-for plastering over
their buildings and beating the clay into shape.

"The object of this dam," said the Lieutenant to Mrs Barnett, "is to secure to
the beavers a sufficient depth of water at all seasons of the year, and to enable
the engineers of the tribe to build the round buts .called houses or lodges, the
tops of which you can just see. They are extremely solid structures, and the walls
made of stick, clay, roots, &c., are two feet thick., They can only be entered from
below the water, and their owners have therefore to dive when they go home-an
admirable arrangement for their protection. Each lodge contains two stories; in
the lower the winter stock of branches, bark, and roots, is laid up, and the upper
is the residence of the householder and his family."

"There is, however, not a beaver in sight," said Mrs Barnett; "is this a
deserted village?"

"Oh no," replied the Lieutenant, "the inhabitants are now all asleep and
resting; they only work in the night, and we mean to surprise them in their
holes."

This was, in fact, easily done, and in an hour’s time about a hundred of the
ill-fated rodents had been captured, twenty of which were of very great value,
their fur being black, and therefore especially esteemed. That of the others was
also long, glossy, and silky, but of a reddish hue mixed with chestnut brown.
Beneath the long fur, the beavers have a second coat of close short hair of a
greyish-white colour.

The hunters returned to the fort much delighted with the result of their
expedition. The beavers’ skins were warehoused and labelled as "parchments" or
"young beavers," according to their value.

Excursions of a similar kind were carried on throughout the month of
September, and during the first half of October, with equally happy results.

A few badgers were taken, the skin being used as an ornament for the collars
of draught horses, and the hair for making brushes of every variety. These
carnivorous creatures belong to the bear family, and the specimens obtained by
Hobson were of the genus peculiar to North America, sometimes called the


Taxel badger.

Another animal of the rodent family, nearly as industrious as the beaver,
largely contributed to the stores of the Company. This was the musk-rat or
musquash. Its head and body are about a foot long and its tail ten inches. Its fur
is in considerable demand. These creatures, like the rest of their family, multiply
with extreme rapidity, and a great number were easily unearthed.

In the pursuit of lynxes and wolverines or gluttons, fire-arms bad to be used.
The lynx has all the suppleness and agility of the feline tribe to which it belongs,
and is formidable even to the reindeer; Marbre and Sabine were, however, well
up to their work, and succeeded in killing more than sixty of them. A few
wolverines or gluttons were also despatched, their fur is reddish-brown, and that
of the lynx, light-red with black spots; both are of considerable value.

Very few ermines or stoats were seen, and Jaspar Hobson ordered his men to
spare any which happened to cross their path until the winter, when they should
have assumed their beautiful snow-white coats with the one black spot at the tip
of the tail. At present the upper fur was reddish-brown and the under yellowish
white, so that, as Sabine expressed it, it was desirable to let them " ripen," or, in
other words,-to wait for the cold to bleach them.

Their cousins, the polecats, however, which emit so disagreeable an odour,
fell victims in great numbers to the hunters, who either tracked them to their
homes in hollow trees, or shot them as they glided through the branches.

Martens, properly so-called, were hunted with great zeal. Their fur is in
considerable demand, although not so valuable as that of the sable, which
becomes a dark lustrous brown in the winter. The latter did not, however, come
in the way of our hunters, as it only frequents the north of Europe and Asia as far
as Kamtchatka, and is chiefly hunted by the inhabitants of Siberia. They had to
be cone tent with the polecats and pine-martens, called " Canada-martens,"
which frequent the shores of the Arctic Ocean.

All the weasels and martens are very difficult to catch; they wriggle their
long supple bodies through the smallest apertures with great ease, and thus elude
their pursuers. In the winter, however, they are easily taken in traps, and Marbre
and Sabine looked forward to make up for lost time then, when, said they, "there
shall be plenty of their furs in the Company’s stores."

We have now only to mention the Arctic or blue and silver foxes, to
complete the list of animals which swelled the profits of the Hudson’s Bay
Company.

The furs of these foxes are esteemed in the Russian and English markets
above all others, and that of the blue fox is the most valuable of all. This pretty
creature has a black muzzle, and the fur is not as one would suppose blue, but


whitish-brown; its great price-six times that of any other kind-arises from its
superior softness, thickness, and length. A cloak belonging to the Emperor of
Russia, composed entirely of fur from the neck of the blue fox (the fur from the
neck is considered better than that from any other part), was shown at the
London Exhibition of 1851, and valued at £3400 sterling.

Several of these foxes were sighted at Cape Bathurst, but all escaped the
hunters; whilst only about a dozen silver foxes fell into their hands. The fur of
the latter-of a lustrous black dotted with white-is much sought after in England
and Russia, although it does not command so high a price as that of the foxes
mentioned above.

One of the silver foxes captured was a splendid creature, with a coal-black
fur tipped with white at the extreme end of the tail, and with a dash of the same
on the forehead. The circumstances attending its death deserve relation in detail,
as they proved that Hobson was right in the precautions he had taken

On the morning of the 24th September, two sledges conveyed Mrs Barnett,
the Lieutenant, Sergeant Long. Marbre, and Sabine, to Walruses’ Bay. Some
traces of foxes had been noticed the evening before, amongst some rocks clothed
with scanty herbage and the direction taken by the animals was very clearly
indicated. The hunters followed up the trail of a large animal, and were rewarded
by bringing down a very fine silver fox.

Several other animals of the same species were sighted, and the hunters
divided into two parties-Marbre and Sabine going after one foe, and Mrs Barnett,
Hobson, and the Sergeant, trying to cut off the retreat of another fine animal
hiding behind some rocks.

Great caution and some artifice was necessary to deal with this crafty animal,
which took care not to expose itself to a shot. The pursuit lasted for half-an-hour
without success; but at last the poor creature, with the sea on one side and its
three enemies on the other, had recourse in its desperation to a flying leap,
thinking thus to escape with its life. But Hobson was too quick for it; and as it
bounded by like a flash of lightning, it was struck by a shot, and to every one’s
surprise, the report of the Lieutenant’s gun was succeeded by that of another, and
a second ball entered the body of the fox, which fell to the ground mortally
wounded.

"Hurrah! hurrah !" cried Hobson, "it is mine!"

"And mine!" said another voice, and a stranger stept forward and placed his
foot upon the fox just as the Lieutenant was about to raise it.

Hobson drew back in astonishment. He thought the second ball had been
fired by the Sergeant, and found himself face to face with a stranger whose gun
was still smoking.


The rivals gazed at each other in silence.

The rest of the party now approached, and the stranger was quickly joined by
twelve comrades, four of whom were like himself " Canadian travellers," and
eight Chippeway Indians.

The leader was a tall man-a fine specimen of his class-those Canadian
trappers described in the romances of Washington Irving, whose competition
Hobson had dreaded with such good reason. He wore the traditional costume
ascribed to his fellow-hunters by the great American writer; a blanket loosely
arranged about his person, a striped cotton shirt, wide cloth trousers, leather
gaiters, deerskin mocassins, and a sash of checked woollen stuff round the waist,
from which were suspended his knife, tobacco-pouch, pipe, and a few useful
tools.

Hobson was right. The man before him was a Frenchman, or at least a
descendant of the French Canadians, perhaps an agent of the American
Company come to act as a spy on the settlers in the fort. The other four
Canadians wore a costume resembling that of their leader, but of coarser
materials.

The Frenchman bowed politely to Mrs Barnett, and the Lieutenant was the
first to break the silence, during which he had not removed his eyes from his
rival’s face.

"This fox is mine, sir," he said quietly.

"Tt is if you killed it !" replied the other in good English, but with a slightly
foreign accent.

"Excuse me, sir," replied Hobson rather sharply, "it is mine in any case."

The stranger smiled. scornfully at this lofty reply, so exactly what be
expected from an agent of the Hudson’s Bay Company, which claims supremacy
over all the northern districts, from the Atlantic to the Pacific.

"Do you mean to say," he said at last, gracefully toying with his gun, "that
you consider the Hudson’s Bay Company mistress of the whole of North
America?"

"Of course I do," said Hobson; "and if, as I imagine, you belong to an
American company—

"To the St Louis Fur Company," replied the stranger with a bow.

"T think," added the Lieutenant, "that you will find it difficult to show the
grants entitling you to any privileges here."

"Grants! privileges !" cried the Canadian scormfully, "old world terms which
are out of place in America !"

"You are not now on American but on English ground," replied the
Lieutenant proudly.


"This is no time for such a discussion," said the hunter rather warmly. "We
all know the old claims made by the English in general, and the Hudson’s Bay
Company in particular, to these hunting grounds; but I expect coming events will
soon alter this state of things, and America will be America from the Straits of
Magellan to the North Pole !"

"I do not agree with you," replied Hobson dryly.

"Well, sir, however that may be," said the Canadian, "let us suffer this
international question to remain in abeyance for the present. Whatever rights the
Company may arrogate to itself, it is very clear that in the extreme north of the
continent, and especially on the coast, the territory belongs to whoever occupies
it. You have founded a factory on Cape Bathurst, therefore we will respect your
domain, and you on your side will avoid ours, when the St Louis fur-traders have
established their projected fort at another point on the northern shore of
America."

The Lieutenant frowned at this speech, for he well knew what complications
would arise in the future when the Hudson’s Bay Company would be compelled
to struggle for supremacy with powerful rivals, and that quarrelling and even
bloodshed would ensue; he could not, however, but acknowledge that this was
not the time to begin the discussion, and he was not sorry when the hunter,
whose manners, to tell the truth, were very polite, placed the dispute on another
footing.

"As for this present matter,” said the Canadian, "it is of minor importance,
and we must settle it according to the rules of the chase. Our guns are of
different calibre, and our balls can be easily distinguished; let the fox belong to
whichever of us really killed it."

The proposition was a fair one, and the body of the victim was examined
accordingly. One ball had entered at the side, the other at the heart; and the latter
was from the gun of the Canadian.

"The fox is your property, sir," said Jaspar Hobson, vainly endeavouring to
conceal his chagrin at seeing this valuable spoil fall into the enemy’s hands.

The Canadian took it, but instead of throwing it over his shoulder and
carrying it off, he turned to Mrs Barnett, and said " Ladies are fond of beautiful
furs, and although, perhaps, if they knew better what dangers and difficulties
have to be surmounted in order to obtain them, they might not care so much
about them, they are not likely to refuse to wear them on that account, and I
hope, madam, you will favour me by accepting this one in remembrance of our
meeting.”

Mrs Barnett hesitated for a moment, but the gift was offered with so much
courtesy and kindliness of manner, that it would have seemed churlish to refuse,


and she therefore accepted it with many thanks.

This little ceremony over, the stranger again bowed politely, and, followed
by his comrades, quickly disappeared behind the rocks, whilst the Lieutenant
and his party returned to Fort Good Hope. Hobson was very silent and
thoughtful all the way; for he could not but feel that the existence of a rival
company would greatly compromise the success of his undertaking, and lead to
many future difficulties.

CHAPTER XVII.

THE APPROACH OF WINTER.

It was the 21st of September. The sun was then passing through the autumnal
equinox, that is to say, the day and night were of equal length all over the world.
These successive alternations of light and darkness were hailed with delight by
the inhabitants of the fort. It is easier to sleep in the absence of the sun, and
darkness refreshes and strengthens the eyes, weary with the unchanging
brightness of several months of daylight.

We know that during the equinox the tides are generally at their greatest
height; we have high water or flood, for the sun and moon being in conjunction,
their double influence is brought to bear upon the waters. It was, therefore,
necessary to note carefully the approaching tide at Cape Bathurst. Jaspar Hobson
had made bench marks some days before, so as to estimate exactly the amount of
vertical displacement of the waters between high and low tide; he found,
however, that in spite of all the reports of previous observers, the combined solar
and lunar influence was hardly felt in this part of the Arctic Ocean. There was
scarcely any tide at all, and the statements of navigators on the subject were
contradicted.

"There is certainly something unnatural here !" said Lieutenant Hobson to
himself.

He did not in fact know what to think, but other cares soon occupied his
mind, and he did not long endeavour to get to the rights of this singular
peculiarity.

On the 29th September the state of the atmosphere changed considerably.
The thermometer fell to 41° Fahrenheit, and the sky became covered with clouds
which were soon converted into heavy rain. The bad season was approaching.

Before the ground should be covered with snow, Mrs Joliffe was busy
sowing the seeds of Cochlearia (scurvy grass) and sorrel, in the hope that as they
were very hardy, and would be well protected from the rigour of the winter by
the snow itself, they would come up in the spring. Her garden, consisting of
several acres hidden behind the cliff of the cape, had been prepared beforehand,
and it was sown during the last days of September.


Hobson made his companions assume their winter garments before the great
cold set in, and all were soon suitably clothed in the linen under vests, deerskin
cloaks, sealskin pantaloons, fur bonnets, and waterproof boots with which they
were provided. We may also say that the rooms were suitably dressed; the
wooden walls were hung with skins, in order to prevent the formation upon them
of coats of ice in sudden falls of temperature. About this time, Rae set up his
condensers for collecting the vapour suspended in the air, which were to be
emptied twice a week. The heat of the stove was regulated according to the
variations of the external temperature, so as to keep the thermometer of the
rooms at 50° Fahrenheit. The house would soon be covered with thick snow,
which would prevent any waste of the internal warmth, and by this combination
of natural and artificial protections they hoped to be able successfully to contend
with their two most formidable enemies, cold and damp.

On the 2nd October the thermometer fell still lower, and the first snow storm
came on; there was but little wind, and there were therefore none of those violent
whirlpools of snow called drifts, but a vast white carpet of uniform thickness
soon clothed the cape, the enceinte of fort, and the coast. The waters of the lake
and sea, not yet petrified by the icy hand of winter, were of a dull, gloomy,
greyish hue, and on the northern horizon the first icebergs stood out against the
misty sky. The blockade had not yet commenced, but nature was collecting her
materials, soon to be cemented by the cold into an impenetrable barrier.

The " young ice " was rapidly forming on the liquid surfaces of sea and lake.
The lagoon was the first to freeze over; large whitish-grey patches appeared here
and there, signs of a hard frost setting in, favoured by the calmness of the
atmosphere. and after a night during which the thermometer had remained at 15°
Fahrenheit, the surface of the lake was smooth and firm enough to satisfy the
most fastidious skaters of the Serpentine. On the verge of the horizon, the sky
assumed that peculiar appearance which whalers call ice-blink, and which is the
result of the glare of light reflected obliquely from the surface of the ice against
the opposite atmosphere. Vast tracts of the ocean became gradually solidified,
the ice-fields, formed by the accumulation of icicles, became welded to the
coast, presenting a surface broken and distorted by the action of the waves, and
contrasting strongly with the smooth mirror of the lake. Here and there floated
these long pieces, scarcely cemented together at the edges, known as " drift ice,"
and the " hummocks," or protuberances caused by the squeezing of one piece
against another, were also of frequent occurrence.

In a few days the aspect of Cape Bathurst and the surrounding districts was
completely changed. Mrs Barnett’s delight and enthusiasm knew no bounds;
everything was new to her, and she would have thought no fatigue or suffering


too great to be endured for the sake of witnessing such a spectacle. She could
imagine nothing more sublime than this invasion of winter with all its mighty
forces, this conquest of the northern regions by the cold. All trace of the
distinctive features of the country had disappeared; the land was
metamorphosed, a new country was springing into being before her admiring
eyes, a country gifted with a grand and touching beauty. Details were lost, only
the large outlines were given, scarcely marked out against the misty sky. One
transformation scene followed another with magic rapidity. The ocean, which
but lately lifted up its mighty waves, was hushed and still; the verdant soil of
various hues was replaced by a carpet of dazzling whiteness; the woods of trees
of different kinds were converted into groups of gaunt skeletons draped in hoar-
frost; the radiant orb of day had become a pale disc, languidly running its
allotted course in the thick fog, and visible but for a few hours a day, whilst the
sea horizon, no longer clearly cut against the sky, was hidden by an endless
chain of icebergs, broken into countless rugged forms, and building up that
impenetrable ice-wall, which Nature has set up between the Pole and the bold
explorers who endeavour to reach it.

We can well understand to how many discussions and conversations the
altered appearance of the country gave rise. Thomas Black was the only one who
remained indifferent to the sublime beauty of the scene. But what could one
expect of an astronomer so wrapped up in his one idea, that he might be said to
be present in the little colony in the body, but absent in spirit? He lived in the
contemplation of the heavenly bodies, passing from the examination of one
constellation to that of another, roving in imagination through the vast realms of
space, peopled by countless radiant orbs, and fuming with rage when fogs or
clouds hid the objects of his devotion from his sight. Hobson consoled him by
promising him fine cold nights admirably suited to astronomical observations,
when he could watch the beautiful Aurora Borealis, the lunar halos, and other
phenomena of Polar countries worthy even of his admiration.

The cold was not at this time too intense; there was no wind, and it is the
wind which makes the cold so sharp and biting. Hunting was vigorously carried
on for some days. The magazines became stocked with new furs, and fresh
stores of provisions were laid up. Partridges and ptarmigans on their way to the
south passed over the fort in great numbers, and supplied fresh and wholesome
meat. Polar or Arctic hares were plentiful, and had already assumed their white
winter robes. About a hundred of these rodents formed a valuable addition to the
reserves of the colony.

There were also large flocks of the whistling swan or hooper, one of the
finest species of North America. The hunters killed several couples of them,


handsome birds, four or five feet in entire length, with white plumage, touched
with copper colour on the head and upper part of neck. They were on their way
to a more hospitable zone, where they could find the aquatic plants and insects
they required for food, and they sped through the air at a rapid pace, for it is as
much their native element as water. Trumpeter swans, with a cry like the shrill
tone of a clarion, which are about the same size as the hoopers, but have black
feet and beaks, also passed in great numbers, but neither Marbre nor Sabine were
fortunate enough to bring down any of them. However, they shouted out "au
revoir" in significant tones, for they knew that they would return with the first
breezes of spring and that they could then be easily caught. Their skin, plumage,
and down, are all of great value, and they are therefore eagerly hunted. In some
favourable years tens of thousands of them have been exported, fetching half a
guinea a piece.

During these excursions, which only lasted for a few hours, and were often
interrupted by bad weather, packs of wolves were often met with. There was no
need to go far to find them, for, rendered bold by hunger, they already ventured
close to the factory. Their scent is very keen, and they were attracted by the
smell from the kitchen. During the night they could be heard howling in a
threatening manner. Although not dangerous individually, these carnivorous
beasts are formidable in packs, and the hunters therefore took care to be well
armed when they went beyond the enceinte of the fort.

The bears were still more aggressive. Not a day passed without several of
these animals being seen. At night they would come close up to the enclosure,
and sane were even wounded with shot, but got off, staining the snow with their
blood, so that up to October 10th not one had left its warm and valuable fur in
the hands of the hunters. Hobson would not have them molested, rightly judging
that with such formidable creatures it was best to remain on the defensive, and it
was not improbable that, urged on by hunger, they might attack Fort Hope before
very long. Then the little colony could defend itself, and provision its stores at
the same time.

For a few days the weather continued dry and cold, the surface of the snow
was firm and suitable for walking, so that a few excursions were made without
difficulty along the coast on the south of the fort. The Lieutenant was anxious to
ascertain if the agents of the St Louis Fur Company had left the country. No
traces were, however, found of their return march, and it was therefore
concluded that they had gone down to some southern fort to pass the winter by
another route.

The few fine days were soon over, and in the first week of November the
wind veered round to the south, making the temperature warmer, it is true, but


also bringing heavy snowstorms. The ground was soon covered with a soft
Cushion several feet thick, which had to be cleared away round the house every
day, whilst a lane was made through it to the postern, the shed, and the stable of
the dogs and reindeer. Excursions became more and more rare, and it was
impossible to walk without snow-shoes.

When the snow has become hardened by frost, it easily sustains the weight of
a man; but when it is soft and yielding, and the unfortunate pedestrian sinks into
it up to his knees, the snow-shoes used by Indians are invaluable.

Lieutenant Hobson and his companions were quite accustomed to walk in
them, and could glide about over the snow as rapidly as skaters on ice; Mrs
Barnett had early practised wearing them, and was quite as expert in their use as
the rest of the party. The frozen lake as well as the coast was scoured by these
indefatigable explorers, who were even able to advance several miles from the
shore on the solid surface of the ocean now covered with ice several feet thick. It
was, however, very tiring work, for the ice-fields were rugged and uneven,
strewn with piled-up ridges of ice and hummocks which had to be turned.
Further out a chain of icebergs, some five hundred feet high, barred their
progress. These mighty icebergs, broken into fantastic and picturesque forms,
were a truly magnificent spectacle. Here they looked like the whitened ruins of a
town with curtains battered in, and monuments and columns overthrown; there
like some volcanic land torn and convulsed by earthquakes and eruptions; a
confusion of glaciers and glittering ice-peaks with snowy ramparts and
buttresses, valleys, and crevasses, mountains and hillocks, tossed and distorted
like the famous Alps of Switzerland. A few scattered birds, petrels, guillemots,
and puffins, lingering behind their fellows, still enlivened the vast solitude with
their piercing cries; huge white bears roamed about amongst the hummocks,
their dazzling coats scarcely distinguishable from the shining ice-truly there was
enough to interest and excite our adventurous lady traveller, and even Madge,
the faithful Madge, shared the enthusiasm of her mistress. How far, how very far,
were both from the tropic zones of India or Australia!

The frozen ocean was firm enough to have allowed of the passage of a park
of artillery, or the erection of a monument, and many were the excursions on its
surface until the sudden lowering of the temperature rendered all exertion so
exhausting that they had to be discontinued. The pedestrians were out of breath
after taking a few steps, and the dazzling whiteness of the glittering snow could
not be endured by the naked eye; indeed, the reverberation or flickering glare of
the undulatory reflection of the light from the surface of the snow, has been
known to cause several cases of blindness amongst the Esquimaux.

A singular phenomenon due to the refraction of rays of light was now


observed: distances, depths, and heights lost their true proportions, five or six
yards of ice looked like two, and many were the falls and ludicrous results of this
optical illusion.

On October 14th the thermometer marked 3° Fahrenheit below zero, a severe
temperature to endure, especially when the north wind blows strongly. The air
seemed to be made of needles, and those who ventured out of the house were in
great danger of being frost-bitten, when death or mortification would ensue if the
suspended circulation of the blood were not restored by immediate friction with
snow. Garry, Belcher, Hope, and other members of the little community were
attacked by frost-bite, but the parts affected being rubbed in time they escaped
without serious injury.

It will readily be understood that all manual labour had now become
impossible. The days were extremely short, the sun was only above the horizon
for a few hours and the actual winter, implying entire confinement within doors,
was about to commence. The last Arctic birds forsook the gloomy shores of the
Polar Sea, only a few pairs of those speckled quails remained which the Indians
appropriately call " winter birds," because they wait in the Arctic regions until
the commencement of the Polar night, but they too were soon to take their
departure.

Lieutenant Hobson, therefore, urged on the setting of the traps and snares
which were to remain in different parts of Cape Bathurst throughout the winter.

These traps consisted merely of rough joists supported on a square, formed
of three pieces of wood so balanced as to fall on the least touchin fact, the same
sort of trap as that used for snaring birds in fields on a large scale. The end of the
horizontal piece of wood was baited with venison, and every animal of a
moderate height, a fox or a marten, for instance, which touched it with its paw,
could not fail to be crushed. Such were the traps set in the winter over a space of
several miles by the famous hunters whose adventurous life has been so
poetically described by Cooper. Some thirty of these snares were set round Fort
Hope, and were to be visited at pretty frequent intervals.

On the 12th November a new member was born to the little colony. Mrs
Mac-Nab was safely confined of a fine healthy boy, of whom the head carpenter
was extremely proud. Mrs Barnett stood god-mother to the child, which received
the name of Michael Hope. The ceremony of baptism was performed with
considerable solemnity, and a kind of féte was held in honour of the little
creature which had just come into the world beyond the 70th degree N. Lat.

A few days afterwards, on November .20th, the sun sunk below the horizon
not to appear again for two months. The Polar night had commenced!

CHAPTER XVIII.


THE POLAR NIGHT.

The long night was ushered in by a violent storm. The cold was perhaps a
little less severe, but the air was very damp, and, in spite of every precaution, the
humidity penetrated into the house, and the condensers, which were emptied
every morning, contained several pounds of ice.

Outside drifts whirled past like waterspouts-the snow seemed no longer to
fall horizontally but vertically. The Lieutenant was obliged to insist upon the
door being kept shut, for had it been opened the passages would immediately
have become blocked up. The explorers were literally prisoners.

The window shutters were hermetically closed, and the lamps were kept
burning through the long hours of the sleepless night.

But although darkness reigned without, the noise of the tempest replaced the
silence usually so complete in these high latitudes. The roaring of the wind
between the house and the cliff never ceased for a moment, the house trembled
to its foundations, and had it not been for the solidity of its construction, must
have succumbed to the violence of the hurricane. Fortunately the accumulation
of snow round the walls broke the force of the squall, and Mac-Nabs only fear
was for the chimneys, which were liable to be blown over. However, they
remained firm, although they had constantly to be freed from the snow which
blocked up the openings.

In the midst of the whistling of the wind, loud reports were heard, of which
Mrs Barnett could not conjecture the cause. It was the falling of icebergs in the
offing. The echoes caught up the sounds, which were rolled along like the
reverberations of thunder. The ,,round shook as the ice-fields split open, crushed
by the falling of these mighty mountains, and none but those thoroughly inured
to the horrors of these wild rugged climates could witness these strange
phenomena without a shudder. Lieutenant Hobson and his companions were
accustomed to all these things, and Mrs Barnett and Madge were gradually
becoming so, and were, besides, not altogether unfamiliar with those terrible
winds which move at the rate of forty miles an hour, and overturn twenty-four
pounders. Here, however, the darkness and the snow aggravated the dread might
of the storm; that which was not crushed was buried and smothered, and,
probably twelve hours after the commencement of the tempest, house, kennel,
shed, and enceinte would have disappeared beneath a bed of snow of uniform
thickness.

The time was not wasted during this long imprisonment. All these good
people agreed together perfectly, and neither ill-humour nor ennui marred the
contentment of the little party shut up in such a narrow space. They were used to
life under similar conditions at Forts Enterprise and Reliance, and there was


nothing to excite Mrs Barnett’s surprise in their ready accommodation of
themselves to circumstances.

Part of the day was occupied with work, part with reading and games.
Garments had to be made and mended, arms to be kept bright and in good repair,
boots to be manufactured, and the daily journal to be issued in which Lieutenant
Hobson recorded the slightest events of this northern wintering-the weather, the
temperature, the direction of the wind, the appearance of meteors so frequent in
the Polar regions, &c., &c. Then the house had to be kept in order, the rooms
must be swept, and the stores of furs must be visited every day to see if they
were free from damp; the fires and stoves, too, required constant
superintendence, and perpetual vigilance was necessary to prevent the
accumulation of particles of moisture in the corners.

To each one was assigned a task, the duty of each one was laid down in rules
fixed up in the large room, so that without being overworked, the occupants of
the fort were never without something to do. Thomas Black screwed and
unscrewed his instruments, and looked over his astronomical calculations,
remaining almost always shut up in his cabin, fretting and funning at the storm
which prevented him from making nocturnal observations. The three married
women had also plenty to see to : Mrs Mac-Nab busied herself with her baby
who got on wonderfully, whilst Mrs Joliffe, assisted by Mrs Rae, and with the
Corporal always at her heels, presided in the kitchen.

When work was done the entire party assembled in the large room, spending
the whole of Sunday together. Reading was the chief amusement. The Bible and
some books of travels were the whole library of the fort; but they were all the
good folks required. Mrs Barnett generally read aloud, and her audience listened
with delight. The Bible and accounts of adventures received a fresh charm when
read out in her clear earnest voice; her gestures were so expressive that
imaginary persons seemed to live when she spoke of them, and all were glad
when she took up the book. She was, in fact, the life and soul of the little
community, eager alike to give and receive instruction; she combined the charm
and grace of a woman with the energy of a man, and she consequently became
the idol of the rough soldiers, who would have willingly laid down their lives in
her service. Mrs Bamett shared everything with her companions, never holding
herself aloof or remaining shut up in her cabin, but working zealously amongst
the others, drawing out the most reticent by her intelligent questions and warm
sympathy. Good humour and good health prevailed throughout the little
community, and neither bands nor tongues were idle.

The storm, however, showed no signs of abating. The party had now been
confined to the house for three days, and the snow-drifts were as wild and


furious as ever. Lieutenant Hobson began to get anxious. It was becoming
imperatively necessary to renew the air of the rooms, which was too much
charged with carbonic acid. The light of the lamps began to pale in the unhealthy
atmosphere, and the air-pumps would not act, the pipes being choked up with
ice; they were not, in fact, intended to be used when the house was buried in
snow. It was necessary to take counsel; the Lieutenant and Sergeant Long put
their heads together, and it was decided on November 23d that, as the wind beat
with rather less violence on the front of the house, one of the windows at the end
of the passage on that side should be opened.

This was no light matter. It was easy enough to open the window from
inside, but the shutter outside was encrusted over with thick lumps of ice, and
resisted every effort to move it. It had to be taken off its hinges, and the hard
mass of snow was then attacked with pickaxe and shovel; it was at least ten feet
thick, and it was not until a kind of channel bad been scooped out that the outer
air was admitted.

Hobson, the Sergeant, several soldiers, and Mrs Barnett herself ventured to
creep through this tunnel or channel, but not without considerable difficulty, for
the wind rushed in with fearful fury.

What a scene was presented by Cape Bathurst and the surrounding plain. It
was mid-day, and but a few faint twilight rays glimmered upon the southern
horizon. The cold was not so intense as one would have supposed, and the
thermometer marked only 15° Fahrenheit above zero; but the snow-drifts
whirled along with terrific force, and all would inevitably have been thrown to
the ground, had not the snow in which they were standing up to their waists
helped to sustain them against the gusts of wind. Everything around them was
white, the walls of the enceinte, and the whole of the house even to the roof were
completely covered over, and nothing but a few blue wreaths of smoke would
have betrayed the existence of a human habitation to a stranger.

Under the circumstances the " promenade " was soon over; but Mrs Barnett
bad made good use of her time, and would never forget the awful beauty of the
Polar regions in a snowstorm, a beauty upon which few women had been
privileged to look.

A few moments sufficed to renew the atmosphere of the house, and all
unhealthy vapours were quickly dispersed by the introduction of a pure and
refreshing current of air.

The Lieutenant and his companions hurried in, and the window was again
closed; but after that the snow before it was removed every day for the sake of
ventilation.

The entire week passed in a similar manner; fortunately the reindeer and


dogs had plenty of food, so that there was no need to visit them. The eight days
during which the occupants of the fort were imprisoned so closely, could not fail
to be somewhat irksome to strong men, soldiers and hunters, accustomed to
plenty of exercise in the open air; and we must own that listening to reading
aloud gradually lost its charm, and even cribbage became uninteresting. The last
thought at night was a hope that the tempest might have ceased in the morning, a
hope disappointed every day. Fresh snow constantly accumulated upon the
windows, the wind roared, the icebergs burst with a crash like thunder, the
smoke was forced back into the rooms, and there were no signs of a diminution
of the fury of the storm.

At last, however, on the 28th November the Aneroid barometer in the large
room gave notice of an approaching change in the state of the atmosphere. It
rose rapidly, whilst the thermometer outside fell almost suddenly to less than
four degrees below zero. These were symptoms which could not be mistaken,
and on the 29th November the silence all around the fort told that the tempest
had ceased.

Every one was eager to get out, tine confinement had lasted long enough.
The door could not be opened, and all had to get through the window, and clear
away the fresh accumulation of snow; this time, however, it was no soft mass
they had to remove, but compact blocks of ice, which required pickaxes to break
them up.

It took about half-an-hour to clear a passage, and then every one in the fort,
except Mrs Mac-Nab, who was not yet up, hastened into the interior court, glad
once more to be able to walk about.

The cold was still intense, but the wind having gone down it was possible to
endure it, although great care was necessary to escape serious consequences on
leaving the heated rooms for the open air, the difference between the temperature
inside and outside being some fifty-four degrees.

It was eight o’clock in the moming. Myriads of brilliant constellations
studded the sky, and at the zenith shone the Pole star. Although in both
hemispheres there are in reality but 5000 fixed stars visible to the naked eye,
their number appeared to the observers incalculable. Exclamations of admiration
burst involuntarily from the lips of the delighted astronomer as he gazed into the
cloudless heavens, once more undimmed by mists or vapours. Never had a more
beautiful sky been spread out before the eyes of an astronomer.

Whilst Thomas Black was raving in ecstasy, dead to all terrestrial matters,
his companions had wandered as far as the enceinte. The snow was as bard as a
rock, And so slippery that there were a good many tumbles, but no serious
injuries.


It is needless to state that the court of the fort was completely filled up. The
roof of the house alone appeared above the white mass, the surface of which had
been worn smooth by the action of the wind; of the palisade nothing was visible
but the top of the stakes, and the least nimble of the wild animals they dreaded
could easily have climbed over them. But what was to be done? It was no use to
think of clearing away a mass of frozen snow ten feet thick, extending over so
large an extent of ground. All they could attempt would be to dig away the ice
inside the enceinte, so as to form a kind of moat, the counterscarp of which
would protect the palisade. But alas the winter was only beginning, and a fresh
tempest might at any time fill in the ditch a few hours.

Whilst the Lieutenant was examining the works, which could no more
protect his fort than a single sunbeam could melt the solid layer of snow,-Mrs
Joliffe suddenly exclaimed:

"And our dogs! our reindeer!"

It was indeed time to think about the poor animals. The dog house and stable
being lower than the house were probably entirely covered, and the supply of air
had perhaps been completely cut off. Some hurried to the doghouse, others to the
reindeer stable, and all fears were quickly dispelled. The wall of ice, which
connected the northern corner of the house with the cliff, had partly protected the
two buildings, and the snow round them was not more than four feet thick, so
that the apertures left in the walls had not been closed up. The animals were all
well, and when the door was opened, the dogs rushed out barking with delight.

The cold was so intense, that after an hour’s walk every one began to think
of the glowing stove in the large room at home. There was nothing left to be
done outside, the traps buried beneath ten feet of snow could not be visited, so
all returned to the house, the window, was closed, and the party sat down to the
dinner awaiting them with sharpened appetites.

W e can readily imagine that the conversation turned on the intensity of the
cold, which had so rapidly converted the soft snow into a solid mass. It was no
light matter, and might to a certain extent compromise the safety of the little
colony.

"But, Lieutenant," said Mrs Barnett, "can we not count upon a few days’
thaw-will not all this snow be rapidly converted into water?"

"Oh no, madam," replied Hobson, "a thaw at this time of year is not at all
likely. Indeed I expect the thermometer will fall still lower, and it is very much
to be regretted that we were unable to remove the snow when it was soft."

What, you think the temperature likely to become much colder?"

"I do most certainly, madam, 4° below zero-what is that at this latitude?"

"What would it be if we were at the Pole itself?"


"The Pole, madam, is probably not the coldest point of the globe, for most
navigators agree that the sea is there open. From certain peculiarities of its
geographical position it would appear that a certain spot on the shores of North
Georgia, 95° longitude and 78° latitude, has the coldest mean temperature in the
world: 2° below zero all the year round. It is, therefore, called the ‘pole of cold.’

"But," said Mrs Barnett, "we are more than 8° further south than that famous
point."

"Well, I don’t suppose we shall suffer as much at Cape Bathurst as we might
have done in North Georgia. I only tell you of the ‘pole of cold,’ that you may
not confound it with the Pole properly so-called when the lowness of the
temperature is discussed. Great cold has besides been experienced on other
points of the globe. The difference is, that the low temperature is not there
maintained."

"To what places do you allude?" inquired Mrs Barnett; "I assure you I take
the greatest interest in this matter of degrees of cold."

"As far as I can remember, madam," replied the Lieutenant, Arctic explorers
state that at Melville Island the temperature fell to 61° below zero, and at Port
Felix to 65°."

"But Melville Island and Port Felix are some degrees farther north latitude
than Cape Bathurst, are they not?"

"Yes, madam, but in a certain sense we may say that their latitude proves
nothing. A combination of different atmospheric conditions is requisite to
produce intense cold. Local and other causes largely modify climate. If I
remember rightly in 1845 .. . Sergeant Long, you were at Fort Reliance at that
date?

"Yes, sir," replied Long.

"Well, was it not in January of that year that the cold was so excessive?"

"Yes it was, I remember only too well that the thermometer marked 70°
below zero."

"What!" exclaimed Mrs Barnett, "at Fort Reliance, on the Great Slave
Lake?"

"Yes, madam," replied the Lieutenant, "and that was at 65° north latitude
only, which is the same parallel as that of Christiania and St Petersburg."

"Then we must be prepared for everything."

"Yes, indeed, we must when we winter in Arctic countries."

During the 29th and 30th November, the cold did not decrease, and it was
necessary to keep up huge fires to prevent the freezing in all the comers of the
house of the moisture in the atmosphere. Fortunately there was plenty of fuel,


'


and it was not spared. A mean temperature of 52° Fahrenheit was maintained
indoors in spite of the intensity of the cold without.

Thomas Black was so anxious to take stellar observations, now that the sky
was so Clear, that he braved the rigour of the outside temperature, hoping to be
able to examine some of the magnificent constellations twinkling on the zenith.
But he was compelled to desist-his instruments "burnt" his hands!"Burnt " is the
only word to express the sensation produced by touching a metallic body
subjected to the influence of intense cold. Exactly similar results are produced
by the sudden introduction of heat into an animate body, and the sudden
withdrawal of the same from it, as the astronomer found to his cost when he left
the skin of his fingers on his instruments. He had to give up taking observations.

However, the heavens made him the best amends in their power by
displaying the most beautiful and indescribable phenomena of a lunar halo and
an Aurora Borealis.

The lunar halo was a white corona with a pale red edge encircling the moon.
This luminous meteor was about forty-five degrees in diameter, and was the
result of the diffraction of the lunar rays through the small prismatic ice-crystals
floating in the atmosphere. The queen of the night shone with renewed splendour
and heightened beauty from the centre of the luminous ring, the colour and
consistency of which resembled the milky transparent lunar rainbows which
have been so often described by astronomers.

Fifteen hours later the heavens were lit up by a magnificent Aurora Borealis,
the arch of which extended over more than a hundred geographical degrees. The
vertex of this arch was situated in the magnetic meridian, and, as is often the
case, the rays darted by the luminous meteor were of all the colours of the
rainbow, red predominating. Here and there. the stars seemed to be floating in
blood Glowing lines of throbbing colour spread from the dark segment on the
horizon, some of them passing the zenith and quenching the light of the moon in
their electric waves, which oscillated and trembled as if swept by a current of air.

No description could give an adequate idea of the glory which flushed the
northern sky, converting it into a vast dome of fire, but after the magnificent
spectacle had been enjoyed for about half an hour, it suddenly disappeared-not
fading gradually away after concentration of its rays, or a diminution of its
splendour, but dying abruptly, as if an invisible hand had cut off the supply of
electricity which gave it life.

It was time it was over, for the sake of Thomas Black, for in another five
minutes he would have been frozen where he stood !

CHAPTER XIX.

A NEIGHBOURLY VISIT.


On the 2nd December; the intensity of the cold decreased. The phenomena of
the lunar halo and Aurora Borealis were symptoms which a meteorologist would
have been at no loss to interpret. They implied the existence of a certain quantity
of watery vapour in the atmosphere, and the barometer fell slightly, whilst the
thermometer rose to 15° above zero.

Although this temperature would have seemed very cold to the inhabitants of
a temperate zone, it was easily endured by the colonists. The absence of wind
made a great difference, and Hobson having noticed that the upper layers of
snow were becoming softer, ordered his men to clear it away from the outer
approaches of the enceinte. Mac-Nab and his subordinates set to work zealously,
and completed their task in a few days. The traps were now uncovered and re-
set. A good many footprints showed that there were plenty of furred animals
about the cape, and as they could not get any other food, it was probable that the
bait in the snares would soon attract them. In accordance with the advice of
Marbre the hunter, a reindeer trap was constructed iii the Esquimaux style. A
trench was dug twelve feet deep, and of a uniform width of ten feet. A see-saw
plank, which would rebound when lowered, was laid across it. A bait of herbs
was placed at one end of the plank, and any animal venturing to take them, was
inevitably flung to the bottom of the pit, and the plank immediately returning to
its former position, would allow of the trapping of another animal in the same
manner. Once in, there was no getting out. The only difficulty Marbre had to
contend with in making his trap, was the extreme hardness of the ground to be
dug out, but both he and the Lieutenant were not a little surprised at finding
beneath some five feet of earth and sand a bed of snow, as hard as a rock, which
appeared to be very thick.

After closely examining the geological structure of the ground, Hobson
observed:

"This part of the coast must have been subjected to intense cold for a
considerable length of time a great many years ago. Probably the ice rests on a
bed of granite, and the earth and sand upon it have accumulated gradually."

"Well, sir, our trap won’t be any the worse for that, the reindeer will find a
slippery wall, which it will be impossible for them to climb."

Marbre was right, as the event proved.

On the 5th September, he and Sabine were on their way to the trench, when
they heard loud growls. They stood still and listened.

"It’s no reindeer making that noise, "said Marbre, "I know well enough what
creature has fallen into our pit."

"A bear?" replied Sabine.

"Yes," said Marbre, whose eyes glistened with delight.


"Well," remarked Sabine, "we won’t grumble at that, bears’ steaks are as
good as reindeers’, and we get the fur in! Come along."

The two hunters were armed. They quickly slipped balls into their guns,
which were already loaded with lead, and hurried to the trap. The see-saw plank
had swung back into its place, but the bait had disappeared, having probably
been dragged down, into the trench. The growls became louder and fiercer, and
looking down the hunters saw that it was indeed a bear they had taken. A huge
mass was huddled together in one corner of the pit, looking in the gloom like a
pile of white fur with two glittering eyes. The sides of the trench had been
ploughed up by the creature’s sharp claws, and had they been made of earth
instead of ice, it would certainly have managed to scramble out, but it could get
no hold on the slippery surface, and it had only managed to enlarge its prison,
not to escape from it.

Under the circumstances the capture was easy. Two balls carefully aimed put
an end to the bear’s life, and the next thing to do was to get it out of the pit. The
two hunters returned to the fort for reinforcements, and ten of the soldiers,
provided with ropes, returned with them. It was not without considerable
difficulty that the body was hauled up. It was a huge creature, six feet long,
weighing six hundred pounds, and must have possessed immense strength. It
belonged to the suborder of white bears, and had the flattened head, long neck,
short and slightly curved claws, narrow muzzle, and smooth white fur
characteristic of the species. The edible portions of this valuable animal were
confided to Mrs Joliffe, and b her carefully prepared for the table.

The next week the traps were in full activity. Some twenty martens were
taken, in all the beauty of their winter clothing, but only two or three foxes.
These cunning creatures divined the snare laid for them, and scratching up the
ground near the trap, they often managed to run off with the bait without being
caught. This made Sabine beside himself with rage for," he said, "such a
subterfuge was unworthy of a respectable fox."

About the 10th December, the wind having veered round to the south-west,
the snow again began to fall, but not in thick flakes, or in large quantities. The
wind being high, however, the cold was severely felt, and it was necessary to
settle indoors again, and resume domestic occupations. Hobson distributed lime
lozenges and lime juice to every one as a precaution against the scorbutic
affections, which damp cold produces. No symptoms of scurvy had fortunately
as yet appeared amongst the occupants of the fort, thanks to the sanitary
precautions taken.

The winter solstice was now approaching, when the darkness of the Polar
night would be most profound, as the sun would be at the lowest maximum point


below the horizon of the northern hemisphere. At midnight the southern edges of
the long white plains were touched with a faint glimmer of twilight, that was all,
and it would be impossible to imagine anything more melancholy than the
gloomy stillness and darkness of the vast expanse.

Hobson felt more secure from the attacks of wild beasts, now that the
approaches to the enceinte had been cleared of snow, which was a fortunate
circumstance, as ominous growlings were heard, the nature of which no one
could mistake.

There was no fear of visits from Indian hunters or Canadians at this time of
year, but an incident occurred proving that these districts were not altogether
depopulated even in the winter, and which was quite an episode in the long
dreary dark months. Some human beings still lingered on the coast hunting
morses and camping under the snow. They belonged to the race of Esquimaux, °°
or eaters of raw flesh," which is scattered over the continent of North America,
from Baffin’s Bay to Behring Strait, seldom, however, advancing farther south
than the Great Slave Lake.

On the morning of the 14th December, or rather nine hours before midday,
Sergeant Long, on his return from an excursion along the coast, ended his report
to the Lieutenant by saying, that if his eyes had not deceived him, a tribe of
nomads were encamped about four miles from the fort, near a little cape jutting
out from the coast.

"What do you suppose these nomads are?" inquired Hobson.

"Either men or morses," replied the Sergeant. "There’s no medium!"

The brave Sergeant would have been considerably surprised if any one had
told him that some naturalists admit the existence of the " medium," the idea of
which he scouted; and certain savants have with some humour classed the
Esquimaux as an " intermediate species " between roan and the sea-cow.

Lieutenant Hobson, Mrs Barnett, Madge, and a few others at once went to
ascertain the truth of the report. Well wrapt up, and on their guard against a
sudden chill, their feet cased in furred boots, and guns and hatchets in their
hands, they issued from the postern, and made their way over the frozen snow
along the coast, strewn with masses of ice.

The moon, already in the last quarter, shed a few faint rays through the mists
which shrouded the ice-fields. After marching for about an hour, the Lieutenant
began to think that the Sergeant had been mistaken, and that what he had seen
were morses, who had returned to their native element through the holes in the
ice which they always keep open.

But Long, pointing to a grey wreath of smoke curling out of a conical
protuberance on the ice-field some hundred steps off, contented himself with


observing quietly—

"The morses are smoking, then !"

As he spoke some living creatures came out of the but dragging themselves
along the snow. They were Esquimaux, but whether male or female none but a
native could have said, for their costumes were all exactly alike.

Indeed, without in the least sharing the opinion of the naturalist quoted
above, any one might have taken the rough shaggy figures for seals or some
other amphibious animals. There were six of them-four full-grown, and two
children. Although very short, they were broad-chested and muscular. They had
the flat noses, long eye-lashes, large mouths, thick lips, long black coarse hair,
and beardless chins of their race. Their costume consisted of a round coat made
of the skin of the walrus, a hood, boots, trousers, and mittens of the same
material. They gazed at the Europeans in silence.

"Does any one understand Esquimaux?" inquired the Lieutenant.

No one was acquainted with that idiom, and every one started when a voice
immediately exclaimed in English, "Welcome! welcome !"

It was an Esquimaux, and, as they learned later, a woman, who, approaching
Mrs Barnett, held out her hand.

The lady, much surprised, replied in a few words, which the native girl
readily understood, and the whole family was invited to follow the Europeans to
the fort.

The Esquimaux looked searchingly at the strangers, and after a few
moments’ hesitation they accompanied the Lieutenant, keeping close together,
however:


Arrived at the enceinte, the native woman, seeing the house, of the existence
of which she had had no idea, exclaimed—

"House! snow-house!"

She asked if it were made of snow, which was a natural question enough, for
the house was all but hidden beneath the white mass which covered the ground.
She was made to understand that it was built of wood; she then turned and said a
few words to her companions, who made signs of acquiescence, and they all
passed through the postern, and were taken to the large room in the chief
building.

They removed their hoods, and it became possible to distinguish sexes.
There were two men, about forty or fifty years old, with yellowish-red
complexions, sharp teeth, and projecting cheek-bones, which gave them
something of the appearance of carnivorous animals; two women, still young
whose matted hair was adorned with the teeth and claws of Polar bears; and two
children, about five or six years old, poor little creatures with intelligent faces,
who looked about them with wide wondering eyes.

"I believe the Esquimaux are always hungry," said Hobson, "so I don’t
suppose our guests would object to a slice of venison."

In obedience to the Lieutenant’s order, Joliffe brought some reindeer-
venison, which the poor creatures devoured with greedy avidity; but the young
woman who had answered in English behaved with greater refinement, and
watched Mrs Barnett and the women of the fort without once removing her eyes
from them. Presently noticing the baby in Mrs Mac-Nabs arms; she rose and ran
up to it, speaking to it in a soft voice, and caressing it tenderly.

Indeed if not exactly superior, the young girl was certainly more civilised
than her companions, which was especially noticeable when, being attacked by a
slight fit of coughing, she put her hand before her mouth in the manner enjoined
by the first rules of civilised society.

This significant gesture did not escape any one, and Mrs Barnett, who
chatted for some time with the Esquimaux woman, learned from her in a few
short sentences that she had been for a year in the service of the Danish governor
of Upper Navik, whose wife was English, and that she had left Greenland to
follow her family to the hunting grounds. The two men were her brothers; the
other woman was her sister-in-law, married to one of the men, and mother of the
two children. They were all returning from Melbourne Island, on the eastern
coast of English America, and were making for Point Barrow, on the western
coast of Russian America, the home of their tribe, and-were considerably
astonished to find a factory established on Cape Bathurst. Indeed the two men
shook their heads when they spoke of it. Did they disapprove of the construction


of a fort at this particular point of the coast? Did they think the situation ill-
chosen? In spite of all his endeavours, Hobson could get no satisfactory reply to
these questions, or rather he could not understand the answers he received.

The name of the young girl was Kalumah, and she seemed to have taken a
great fancy to Mrs Barnett. But sociable as she was, she appeared to feel no
regret at having left the governor of Upper Navik, and to be sincerely attached to
her relations.

After refreshing themselves with the reindeer-venison, and drinking half-a-
pint of rum, in which the children had their share, the Esquimaux took leave of
their hosts; but before saying goodbye, the young girl invited Mrs Barnett to visit
their snow-hut, and the lady promised to do so the next day, weather permitting.

The next day was fine, and accompanied by Madge, Lieutenant Hobson, and
a few soldiers, well armed in case any bears should be prowling about, Mrs
Barnett set out for " Cape Esquimaux," as they had named the spot where the
little colony had encamped.

Kalumah hastened forward to meet her friend of yesterday, and pointed to the
but with an, air of pride. It was a large cone of snow, with an opening in the
summit, through which the smoke from the fire inside made its way. These
snow-houses, called igloos in the language of the Esquimaux, are constructed
with great rapidity, and are admirably suited to the climate. In them their owners
can endure a temperature 40° below zero, without fires, and without suffering
much. In the summer the Esquimaux encamp in tents made of seal and reindeer
skins, which are called tupics.

It was no easy matter to get into this hut. The only opening was a hole close
to the ground, and it was necessary to creep through a kind of passage three or
four feet long, which is about the thickness of the walls of these snow-houses.
But a traveller by profession, a laureate of the Royal Society, could not hesitate,
and Mrs Paulina Barnett did not hesitate! Followed by Madge, she bravely
entered the narrow tunnel in imitation of her guide. Lieutenant Hobson and his
men dispensed with paying their respects inside.

And Mrs Barnett soon discovered that the chief difficulty was not getting
into the but, but remaining in it when there. The room was heated by a fire, on
which the bones of morses were burning; and the air was full of the smell of the
fetid oil of a lamp, of greasy garments, and the flesh of the amphibious animals
which form the chief article of an Esquimaux’s diet. It was suffocating and
sickening! Madge could not stand it, and hurried out at once, but Mrs Barnett,
rather than hurt the feelings of the young native, showed superhuman courage,
and extended her visit over five long minutes!-five centuries! The two children
and their mother were at home, but the men had gone to hunt morses four or five


miles from their camp.

Once out of the hut, Mrs Barnett drew a long sigh of relief, and the colour
returned to her blanched cheeks.

"Well, madam," inquired the Lieutenant, "what do you think of Esquimaux
houses?"

"The ventilation leaves something to be desired !" she replied simply.

The interesting native family remained encamped near Cape Esquimaux for
eight days. The men passed twelve hours out of every twenty-four hunting
morses. With a patience which none but sportsmen could understand, they would
watch for the amphibious animals near the holes through which they come up to
the surface of the ice-field to breathe. When the morse appears, a rope with a
running noose is flung round its body a little below the head, and it is dragged on
to the ice-field, often with considerable difficulty, and killed with hatchets. It is
really more like fishing than bunting. It is considered a great treat to drink the
warm blood of the walrus, and the Esquimaux often indulge in it to excess.

Kalumah came to the fort every day in spite of the severity of the weather.
She was never tired of going through the different rooms, and watching Mrs
Joliffe at her cooking or sewing. She asked the English name of everything, and
talked for hours together with Mrs Barnett, if the term "talking" can be applied to
an exchange of words after long deliberation on both sides. When Mrs Barnett
read aloud, Kalumah listened with great attention, although she probably
understood nothing of what she heard.

The young native girl had a sweet voice, and sometimes sang some strange
melancholy rhythmical songs with a peculiar metre, and, if we may so express it,
a frosty ring about them, peculiarly characteristic of their origin.

Mrs Barnett had the patience to translate one of these Greenland sagas,
which was sung to a Sad air, interspersed with long pauses, and filled with
strange intervals, which produced an indescribable effect. We give an English
rendering of Mrs Bamett’s translation, which may give a faint idea of this
strange hyperborean poetry.


GREENLAND SONG

Dark Is the sky,

The sun sinks wearily;

My trembling heart, with sorrow filled,
Aches drearily !

My sweet child at my songs is smiling still,
While at his tender heart the icicles lie chill.


Child of my dreams I

Thy love doth cheer me;

The cruel biting frost I brave

But to be near thee!

Ah me, Ah me, could these hot tears of mine
But melt the icicles around that heart of thine!


Could we once more

Meet heart to heart,

Thy little hands close clasped in mine,

No more to part.

Then on thy chill heart rays from heaven above

Should fall, and softly melt it with the warmth of love!

On the 20th December the Esquimaux family came to take leave of the
occupants of the fort. Kalumah was sorry to part with Mrs Bamett, who would
gladly have retained her in her service, but the young native could not be
persuaded to leave her own people; she promised, however, to return to Fort
Hope in the summer.

Her farewell was touching. She presented Mrs Barnett with a copper ring,
and received in exchange a necklace of black beads, which she immediately put
on. Hobson gave the poor people a good stock of provisions, which they packed
in their sledge; and after a few words of grateful acknowledgment from
Kalumah, the whole party set out towards the west, quickly disappearing in the
thick fogs on the shore.

CHAPTER XX.

MERCURY FREEZES.

A few days of dry calm weather favoured the operations of the hunters, but
they did not venture far from the fort; the abundance of game rendered it
unnecessary to do so, and Lieutenant Hobson could justly congratulate himself
on having chosen so favourable a situation for the new settlement. A great
number of furred animals of all kinds were taken in the traps, and Sabine and
Marbre killed a good many Polar hares. Some twenty starving wolves were shot.
Hunger rendered the latter animals aggressive, and bands of them gathered about
the fort, filling the air with hoarse howls, and amongst the " hummocks " on the
ice-fields sometimes prowled huge bears, whose movements were watched with
great interest.

On the 25th December all excursions had again to be given up. The wind
veered suddenly to the north, and the cold became exceedingly severe. It was
impossible to remain out of doors without being frost-bitten. The Fahrenheit
thermometer fell to 18° below zero, and the gale roared like a volley of
musketry. Hobson took care to provide the animals with food enough to last
several weeks.

Christmas Day, the day of home-gatherings so dear to the heart of all
Englishmen, was kept with due solemnity. The colonists returned thanks to God
for preserving them through so many perils; and the workmen, who had a
holiday in honour of the day, afterwards assembled with their masters and the


ladies round a well-filled board, on which figured two huge Christmas puddings.

In the evening a huge bowl of punch flamed in the centre of the table; the
lamps were put out, and for a time the room was lighted only by the livid flames
of the spirit, the familiar objects assuming strange fantastic forms. The spirits of
the soldiers rose as they watched the flickering illumination, and _ their
excitement was not lessened after imbibing some of the burning liquid.

But now the flames began to pale; bluish tongues still fitfully licked the
plump sides of the national pudding for a few minutes, and then died away.

Strange to say, although the lamps had not been relit, the room did not
become dark on the extinction of the flames. A bright red light was streaming
through the window, which had passed unnoticed in the previous illumination.

The revellers started to their feet, and looked at each other in astonishment.

"A fire !" cried several.

But unless the house itself were burning, there could not be a fire anywhere
near Cape Bathurst.

The Lieutenant rushed to the window, and at once understood the cause of
the phenomenon. It was an eruption.

Indeed, above the western cliffs beyond Walruses’ Bay the horizon was on
fire. The summits of the igneous hills, some miles from Cape Bathurst, could not
be seen; but the sheaf of flame shot up to a considerable height, lighting up the
whole country in a weird, unearthly manner.

"It is more beautiful than the Aurora Borealis!" exclaimed Mrs Barnett.

Thomas Black indignantly protested against this assertion. A terrestrial
phenomenon more beautiful than a meteor! But no one was disposed to argue
with him about it, for all hurried out, in spite of the bitter gale and biting cold, to
watch the glorious spectacle of the flashing sheaf of flames standing out against
the black background of the night sky.

Had not the mouths and ears of the party been cased in furs, they would have
been able to hear the rumbling noise of the eruption, and to tell each other of the
impressions made upon them by this magnificent sight; but, as it was, they could
neither speak nor hear. They might well be content, however, with gazing upon
such a glorious scene-a scene which once looked upon could never be forgotten.
The glowing sheets of flames contrasted alike with the gloomy darkness of the
heavens and the dazzling whiteness of the far-stretching carpet of snow, and
produced effects of light and shade which no pen or pencil could adequately
portray. The throbbing reverberations spread beyond the zenith, gradually
quenching the light of all the stars. The white ground became dashed with
golden tints, the hummocks on the ice-field and the huge icebergs in the
background reflecting the glimmering colours like so many glowing mirrors.


The rays of light, striking on the edges or surfaces of the ice, became bent and
diffracted; the angles and varying inclinations on which they fell fretting them
into fringes of colour, and reflecting them back with changed and heightened
beauty. It was like a fairy scene in which ice and snow combined to add éclat to
a mélee of rays in which luminous s waves rushed upon each other, breaking into
coloured ripples.

But the excessive cold soon drove the admiring spectators back to their warm
dwelling, and many a nose paid dearly for the feast enjoyed by the eyes.

During the following .days the cold became doubly severe. The mercurial
thermometer was of course no longer of any use for marking degrees, and an
alcohol thermometer had to be used. On the night of the 28th to the 29th
December the column fell to 32° below zero.

The stoves were piled up with fuel, but the temperature in the house could
not be maintained above 20° degrees. The bedrooms were exceedingly cold, and
ten feet from the stove, in the large room, its heat could not be felt at all. The
little baby had tine warmest corner, and its cradle was rocked in turn by those
who came to the fire. Opening doors or windows was strictly forbidden, as the
vapour in the rooms would immediately have been converted into snow, and in
the passage the breathing of the inmates already produced that result. Every now
and then dull reports were heard, which startled those unaccustomed to living in
such high latitudes. They were caused by the cracking of the trunks of trees, of
which the walls were composed under the influence of the intense cold. The
stock of rum and gin stowed away in n the garret had to be brought down into
the sitting-room, as the alcohol was freezing and sinking to the bottom of the
bottles. The spruce-beer made from a decoction of young fir-branchlets burst the
barrels in which it was kept as it froze, whilst all solid bodies resisted the
introduction of heat as if they were petrified. Wood burnt very slowly, and
Hobson was obliged to sacrifice some of the walrus-oil to quicken its
combustion. Fortunately the chimneys drew well, so that there was no
disagreeable smell inside, although for a long distance outside the air was
impregnated with the fetid odour of the smoke from Fort Hope, which a casual
observer might therefore have pronounced an unhealthy building.

One symptom we must notice was the great thirst from which every one
suffered. To relieve it, different liquids had to be melted at the fire, for it-would
have been dangerous to eat ice. Another effect of the cold was intense
drowsiness, which Hobson earnestly entreated his companions to resist. Some
appeared unable to do so; but Mrs Barnett was invaluable in setting an example
of constant activity: always brave, she kept herself awake, and encouraged
others by her kindness, brightness, and sympathy. Sometimes she read aloud


accounts of travels, or sang some old familiar English song, in the chorus of
which all joined. These joyous strains roused up the sleepers whether they would
or no, and their voices soon swelled the chorus. The long days of imprisonment
passed wearily by, and the Lieutenant, consulting the outside thermometer
through the windows, announced that the cold was still on the increase. On the
31st December, the mercury was all frozen hard , in the cistern of the instrument,
so that the temperature was 44° below freezing point.

The next day, 1st January 1860, Lieutenant Hobson wished Mrs Barnett a
happy new year, and complimented her on the courage and good temper with
which she endured the miseries of this northern winter. The astronomer was not
forgotten in the universal interchange of good wishes amongst the members of
the little colony; but his only thought on entering another year was, that it was
the beginning of that in which the great eclipse was to take place. Fortunately the
general health still remained good, and any symptoms of scurvy were promptly
checked by the use of lime-juice and lime-lozenges.

It would not do, however, to rejoice too soon. The winter had still to last
three months. The sun would doubtless reappear above the horizon in due time;
but there was no reason to think that the cold had reached its maximum intensity,
especially as in most northern countries February is the month during which the
temperature falls lowest. However that might be, there was no decrease in the
severity of the weather during the first days of the new year, and on the 8th
January the alcohol thermometer placed outside the window of the passage
marked 66° below zero. A few degrees more and the minimum temperature at
Fort Reliance in 1835 would be reached!

Jaspar Hobson grew more and more uneasy at the continued severity of the
cold. He began to fear that the furred animals would have to seek a less rigorous
climate further south, which would of course thwart all his plans for hunting in
the early spring. Moreover, he sometimes heard subterranean rumblings, which
were evidently connected with the volcanic eruption. The western horizon still
glowed with the reflection of the burning lava, and it was evident that some great
convulsion was going on in the bowels of the earth. Might not the close vicinity
of an active volcano be dangerous to the new fort f Such was the question which
the subterranean rumblings forced upon the mind of the Lieutenant, but he kept
his vague apprehensions to himself

Of course under these circumstances no one dreamt of leaving the house.
The animals were well provided for, and being accustomed to long fasts in the
winter, required no attention from their masters, so that there really was no
necessity for any exposure out of doors. It was difficult enough to endure the
inside temperature, even with the help of a plentiful combustion of wood and oil;


for, in spite of every precaution, damp crept into the ill-ventilated rooms, and
layers of ice, increasing in thickness every day, were formed upon the beams.
The condensers were choked up, and one of them burst from the pressure of the
ice.

Lieutenant Hobson did not spare his fuel; he was, in fact, rather lavish of it in
his anxiety to raise the temperature, which, when the fires got low-as of course
sometimes happened-fell to 15° Fahrenheit. The men on guard, who relieved
each other every hour, had strict orders to keep up the fires, and great was the
dismay of the Lieutenant when Sergeant Long said to him one day—

"We shall be out of wood soon !"

"Out of wood !" exclaimed Hobson.

"IT mean our stock is getting low, and we must lay in fresh stores soon. Of
course I know, though, that it will be at the risk of his life that any one goes out
in this cold !"

"Yes," replied Hobson. "It was a mistake not to build the wooden shed close
to the house, and to make no direct communication with it. I see that now it is
too late. I ought not to have forgotten that we were going to winter beyond the
seventieth parallel. But what’s done can’t be undone. How long will the wood
last?"

"There is enough to feed the furnace and stove for another two or three
days," replied the Sergeant.

"Let us hope by that time that the severity of the cold may have decreased,
and that we may venture across the court of the fort without danger."

"I doubt it, sir," replied Long, shaking his head. "The atmosphere is very
clear, the wind is still in the north, and I shall not be surprised if this temperature
is maintained. for another fifteen days-until the new moon, in fact."

"Well, my brave fellow," said the Lieutenant, "we won’t die of cold if we can
help it, and the day we have to brave the outside air "

"We will brave it, sir," said Long.

Hobson pressed his subordinate’s hand, well knowing the poor fellow’s
devotion.

We might fancy that Hobson and the Sergeant were exaggerating when they
alluded to fatal results from sudden exposure to the open air, but they spoke from
experience, gained from long residence in the rigorous Polar regions. They had
seen strong men fall fainting on the ice under similar circumstances; their breath
failed them, and they were taken up in a state of suffocation. Incredible as such
facts may appear, they have been of frequent occurrence amongst those who
have wintered in the extreme north. In their journey along the shores of
Hudson’s Bay in 1746, Moor and Smith saw many incidents of this kind,-some


of their companions were killed, struck down by the cold, and there can be no
doubt that sudden death may result from braving a temperature in which
mercury freezes.

Such was the distressing state of things at Fort Hope, when a new danger
arose to aggravate the sufferings of the colonists.

CHAPTER XXI.

THE LARGE POLAR BEARS.

The only one of the four windows through which it was possible to look into
the court of the fort was that opening at the end of the entrance passage. The
outside shutters had not been closed; but before it could be seen through it had to
be washed with boiling water, as the panes were covered with a thick coating of
ice. This was done several times a day by the Lieutenant’s orders, when the
districts surrounding the fort were carefully examined, and the state of the sky,
and of the alcohol thermometer placed outside, were accurately noted.

On the 6th January, towards eleven o’clock in the morning, Kellet, whose
turn it was to look out, suddenly called the Sergeant, and pointed to some
moving masses indistinctly visible in the gloom. Long, approaching the window
observed quietly—

"They are bears!"

In fact half-a-dozen of these formidable animals had succeeded in getting
over the palisades, and, attracted by the smoke from the chimneys, were
advancing upon the house.

On hearing of the approach of the bears, Hobson at once ordered the window
of the passage to be barricaded inside; it was the only unprotected opening in the
house, and when it was secured it appeared impossible for the bears to effect an
entrance. The window was, therefore, quickly closed up with bars, which the
carpenter Mac-Nab wedged firmly in, leaving a narrow slit through which to
watch the movements of the unwelcome visitors.

"Now," observed the head carpenter, "these gentlemen can’t get in without
our permission, and we have time to hold a council of war."

"Well, Lieutenant,” exclaimed Mrs Barnett, "nothing has been wanting to our
northern winter! After the cold come the bears."

"Not after," replied the Lieutenant, "but, which is a serious matter, with the
cold, and a cold ago intense that we cannot venture outside! I really don’t know
how we shall get rid .of these tiresome brutes."

"I suppose they will soon get tired of prowling about," said the lady, "and
return as they came."

Hobson shook his head as if he had his doubts.

"You don’t know these animals, madam. They are famished with hunger, and


will not go until we make them!"

"Are you anxious, then?"

"Yes and no," replied the Lieutenant. "I don’t think the bears will get in; but
neither do I see how we can get out, should it become necessary for us to do so."

With these words Hobson tured to the window, and Mrs Barnett joined the
other women, who had gathered round the Sergeant, and were listening to what
he had to say about the bears. He spoke like a man well up in his subject, for he
had had-many an encounter with these formidable carnivorous creatures, which
are often met with even towards the south, where, however, they can be safely
attacked, whilst here the siege would be a regular blockade, for the cold would
quite prevent any attempt at a sortie.

Throughout the whole day the movements of the bears were attentively
watched. Every now and then one of them would lay his great head against the
window-pane and an ominous growl was heard.

The Lieutenant and the Sergeant took counsel together, and it was agreed
that if their enemies showed no sign of beating a retreat, they would drill a few
loopholes in the walls of the house, and fire at them. But it was decided to put
off this desperate measure for a day or two, as it was desirable to avoid giving
access to the outer air; the inside temperature being already far too low. The
walrus oil to be burnt was frozen so hard that it had to be broken up with
hatchets.

The day passed without any incident. The bears went and came, prowling
round the house, but attempting no direct attack. Watch was kept all night, and at
four o’clock in the morning they seemed to have left the court-at any rate, they
were nowhere to be seen.

But about seven o’clock Marbre went up to the loft to fetch some provisions,
and on his return announced that the bears were walking about on the roof.

Hobson, the Sergeant, Mac-Nab, and two or three soldiers seized their arms,
and rushed to the ladder in the passage, which. communicated with the loft by a
trap-door. The cold was, however, so intense in the loft that the men could not
hold the barrels of their guns, and their breath froze as it left their lips and
floated about them as snow.

Marbre was right; the bears were all on the roof, and the sound of their feet
and their growls could be distinctly heard. Their great claws caught in the laths
of the roof beneath the ice, and there was some danger that they might have
sufficient strength to tear away the woodwork.

The Lieutenant and his men, becoming giddy and faint from the intense cold,
were soon obliged to go down, and Hobson announced the state of affairs in as
hopeful a tone as he could assume.


"The bears," he said, "are now upon the roof. We ourselves have nothing to
fear, as they can’t get into our rooms; but they may force an entrance to the loft,
and devour the furs stowed away there. Now these furs belong to the Company,
and it is our duty to preserve them from injury I ask you then, my friends, to aid
me in removing them to a place of safety."

All eagerly volunteered, and relieving each other in parties of two or three,
for none could have supported the intense severity of the cold for long at a time,
they managed to carry all the furs into the large room in about an hour.

Whilst the work was proceeding, the bears continued their efforts to get in,
and tried to lift up the rafters of .the roof. In some places the laths became
broken by their weight, and poor Mac-Nab was in despair; he had not reckoned
upon such a contingency when he constructed the roof, and expected to see it
give way every moment.

The day passed, however, without any change in the situation. The bears did
not get in; but a no less formidable enemy, the cold, gradually penetrated into
every room. The fires in the stoves burnt low; the fuel in reserve was almost
exhausted; and before twelve o’clock, the last piece of wood would be burnt, and
the genial warmth of the stove would no longer cheer the unhappy colonists.

Death would then await them-death in its most fearful form, from cold. The
poor creatures, huddled together round the stove, felt that their own vital heat
must soon become exhausted, but not a word of complaint passed their lips. The
women bore their sufferings with the greatest heroism, and Mrs Mac-Nab
pressed her baby convulsively to her ice-cold breast. Some of the soldiers slept,
or rather were wrapped in a heavy torpor, which could scarcely be called sleep.

At three o’clock in the morning Hobson consulted the thermometer hanging
in the large room, about ten feet from the stove.

It marked 4° Fahrenheit below zero.

The Lieutenant pressed his hand to his forehead, and looked mournfully at
his silent companions without a word. His half-condensed breath shrouded his
face in a white cloud, and he was standing rooted to the spot when a hand was
laid upon his shoulder. He started, and looked round to see Mrs Barnett beside
him.

"Something must be done, Lieutenant Hobson !" exclaimed the energetic
woman; "we cannot die like this without an effort to save ourselves !"

"Yes," replied the Lieutenant, feeling revived by the moral courage of his
companion-" yes, something must be done !" and he called together Long, Mac-
Nab, and Rae the blacksmith, as the bravest men in his party. All, together with
Mrs Barnett, hastened to the window, and having washed the panes with boiling
water, they consulted the thermometer outside.


"Seventy-two degrees !" cried Hobson. "My friends, two courses only are
open to us, we can risk our lives to get a fresh supply of fuel, or we can burn the
benches, beds, partition walls, and everything in the house to feed our stoves for
a few days longer. A desperate alternative, for the cold may last for some time
yet; there is no sign of a change in the weather."

"Let us risk our lives to get fuel !" said Sergeant Long.

All agreed that it would be the best course, and without another word each
one set to work to prepare for the emergency.

The following were the precautions taken to save the lives of those who were
about to risk themselves for the sake of the general good :—

The shed in which the wood was stored was about fifty steps on the left,
behind, the principal house. It was decided that one of the men should try and
run to the shed. He was to take one rope wound round his body, and to carry
another in his hand, one end of which was to be held by one of his comrades.
Once at the shed, he was to load one of the sledges there with fuel, and tie one
rope to the front, and the other to the back of the vehicle, so that it could be
dragged backwards and forwards between the house and the shed without much
danger. A tug violently shaking one or the other cord would be the signal that the
sledge was filled with fuel at the shed, or unloaded at the house.

A very clever plan, certainly; but two things might defeat it. The door of the
shed might be so blocked up with ice that it would be very difficult to open it, or
the bears might come down from the roof and prowl about the court. Two risks
to be run!

Long, Mac-Nab, and Rae, all three volunteered for the perilous service; but
the Sergeant reminded the other two that they were married, and insisted upon
being the first to venture.

When the Lieutenant expressed a wish to go himself, Mrs Barnett said
earnestly, "You are our chief; you Jnave no right to expose yourself. Let Sergeant
Long go."

Hobson could not but realise that his office imposed caution, and being
called upon to decide which of his companions should go, be chose the Sergeant.
Mrs Barnett pressed the brave man’s hand with ill-concealed emotion; and the
rest of the colonists, asleep or stupefied, knew nothing of the attempt about to be
made to save their lives.

Two long ropes were got ready. The Sergeant wound one round his body
above the warm furs, worth some thousand pounds sterling, in which he was
encased, and tied the other to his belt, on which he hung a tinder-box and a
loaded revolver. Just before starting he swallowed down half a glass of rum, as
he said, "to insure a good load of wood."


Hobson, Rae, and Mac-Nab accompanied the brave fellow through the
kitchen, where the fire had just gone out, and into the passage. Rae climbed up to
the trap-door of the loft, and peeping through it, made sure that the bears were
still on the roof. The moment for action had arrived.

One door of the passage was open, and in spite of the thick furs in which
they were wrapped, all felt chilled to the very marrow of their bones; and when
the second door was pushed open, they recoiled for an instant, panting for
breath, whilst the moisture held in suspension in the air of the passage covered
the walls and the floor with fine snow.

The weather outside was extremely dry, and the stars shone with
extraordinary brilliancy. Sergeant Long rushed out without a moment’s
hesitation, dragging the cord behind him, one end of which was held by his
companions; the outer door was pushed to, and Hobson, Mae-Nab, and Rae went
back to the passage and closed the second door, behind which they waited. If
Long did not return in a few minutes, they might conclude that his enterprise had
succeeded, and that, safe in the shed, he was loading the first train with fuel. Ten
minutes at the most ought to suffice for this operation, if he had been able to get
the door open.

When the Sergeant was fairly off, Hobson and Mac-Nab walked together
towards the end of the passage.

Meanwhile Rae had been watching the bears and the loft. It was so dark that
all hoped Long’s movements would escape the notice of the hungry animals.

Ten minutes elapsed, and the three watchers went back to the narrow space
between the two doors, waiting for the signal to be given to drag in the sledge.

Five minutes more. The cord remained motionless in their hands! Their
anxiety can be imagined. It was a quarter of an hour since the Sergeant had
started, plenty of time for all he had to do, and he had given no signal.

Hobson waited a few minutes longer, and then tightening his hold of the end
of the rope, he made a sign to his companions to pull with him. If the load of
wood were not quite ready, the Sergeant could easily stop it from being dragged
away.

The rope was pulled vigorously. A heavy object seemed to slide along the
snow. In a few moments it reached the outer door.

It was the body of the Sergeant, with the rope round his waist. Poor Long had
never reached the shed. He had fallen fainting to the ground, and after twenty
minutes’ exposure to such a temperature there was little hope that he would
revive.

A cry of grief and despair burst from the lips of Mac-Nab and Rae. They
lifted their unhappy comrade from the ground, and carried him into the passage;


but as the Lieutenant was closing the outer door, something pushed violently
against it, and a horrible growl was heard.

"Help!" cried Hobson.

Mac-Nab and Rae rushed to their officer’s assistance; but Mrs Barnett had
been beforehand with them and was struggling with all her strength to help
Hobson to close the door. In vain; the monstrous brute, throwing the whole
weight of its body against it, would force its way into the passage in another
moment.

Mrs Barnett, whose presence of mind did not forsake her now, seized one of
the pistols in the Lieutenant’s belt, and waiting quietly until the animal shoved
its head between the door and the wall, discharged the contents into its open
mouth.

The bear fell backwards, mortally wounded no doubt, and the door was shut
and securely fastened.

The body of the Sergeant was then carried into the large room. But, alas! the
fire was dying out. How was it possible to restore the vital heat with no means of
obtaining warmth?

"T will go—I will go and fetch some wood !" cried the blacksmith Rae.

"Yes, Rae, we will go together!" exclaimed Mrs Barnett, whose courage was
unabated.

"No, my friends, no!" cried Hobson; "you would fall victims to the cold, or
the bears, or both. Let us burn all there is to burn in the house, and leave the rest
to God !"

And the poor half-frozen settlers rose and laid about them with their hatchets
like madmen. Benches, tables, and partition walls were thrown down, broken up,
crushed to pieces, and piled up in the stove of the large room and kitchen
furnace. Very soon good fires were burning, on which a few drops of walrus-oil
were poured, so that the temperature of the rooms quickly rose a dozen degrees.

Every effort was made to restore the Sergeant. He was rubbed with warm
rum, and gradually the circulation of his blood was restored. The white blotches
with which parts of his body were covered began to disappear; but he had
suffered dreadfully, and several hours elapsed before he could articulate a word.
He was laid in a warm bed, and Mrs Barnett and Madge watched by him until
the next morning.

Meanwhile Hobson, Mac-Nab, and Rae consulted bow best to escape from
their terrible situation. It was impossible to shut their eyes to the fact that in two
days this fresh supply of fuel would be exhausted, and then, if the cold
continued, what would become of them all? The new moon had risen forty-eight
hours ago, and there was no sign of a change in the weather! The north wind still


swept the face of the country with its icy breath; the barometer remained at " fine
dry weather; "and there was not a vapour to be seen above the endless succession
of ice-fields. There was reason to fear that the intense cold would last a long
time yet, but what was to be done? Would it do to try once more to get to the
wood-shed, when the bears had been roused by the shot, and rendered doubly
dangerous? Would it be possible to attack these dreadful creatures in the open air
I No, it would be madness, and certain death for all!

Fortunately the temperature of the rooms had now become more bearable,
and in the morning Mrs Joliffe served up a breakfast of hot meat and tea. Hot
grog was served out, and the brave Sergeant was able to take his share. The heat
from the stoves warmed the bodies and reanimated the drooping courage of the
poor colonists, who were now ready to attack the bears at a word from Hobson.
But the Lieutenant, thinking the forces unequally matched, would not risk the
attempt; and it appeared likely that the day would pass without any incident
worthy of note, when at about three o’clock in the afternoon a great noise was
heard on the top of the house.

"There they are!" cried two or three soldiers, hastily arming themselves with
hatchets and pistols.

It was evident that the bears had torn away one of the rafters of the roof, and
got into the loft.

"Let every one remain where he is!" cried the Lieutenant. "Rae, the trap !"

The blacksmith rushed into the passage, scaled the ladder, and shut and
securely fastened the trap-door.

A dreadful noise was now heard-growling, stamping of feet, and tearing of
claws. It was doubtful whether the danger of the anxious listeners was increased,
or the reverse. Some were of opinion that if all the bears were in the loft, it
would be easier to attack them. They would be less formidable in a narrow
space, and there would not be the same risk of suffocation from cold. Of course a
conflict with such fierce creatures must still. be very perilous, but it no longer
appeared so desperate as before.

It was now debated whether it would be better to go and attack the besiegers,
or to remain on the defensive. Only one soldier could get through the narrow
trap-door at a time, and this mace Hobson hesitate, and finally resolve to wait.
The Sergeant and others, whose bravery none could doubt, agreed that he was in
the right, and it might be possible that some new incident would occur to modify
the situation. It was almost impossible for the bears to break through the beams
of the ceiling, as they had the rafters of the roof, so that there was little fear that
they would get on to the ground-floor.

The day passed by in anxious expectation, and at night no one could sleep


for the uproar made by the furious beasts.

The next day, about nine o’clock, a fresh complication compelled Hobson to
take active steps.

He knew that the pipes of the stove and kitchen furnace ran all along the loft,
and being made of lime-bricks but imperfectly cemented together, they could not
resist great pressure for any length of time. Now some of the bears scratched at
the masonry, whilst others leant against the pipes for the sake of the warmth
from the stove; so that the bricks began to give way, and soon the stoves and
furnace ceased to draw.

This really was an irreparable misfortune, which would have disheartened
less energetic men. But things were not yet at their worst. Whilst the fire became
lower and lower, a thick, nauseous, acrid smoke filled the house; the pipes were
broken, and the smoke soon became so thick that the lamps went out. Hobson
now saw that he must leave the house if he wished to escape suffocation, but to
leave the house would be to perish with cold. At this fresh misfortune some of
the women screamed; and Hobson, seizing a hatchet, shouted in a loud voice

"To the bears! to the bears, my friends !"

It was the forlorn-hope. These terrible creatures must be destroyed. All
rushed into the passage and made for the ladder, Hobson leading the way. The
trap-door was opened, and a few shots were fired into the black whirlpool of
smoke. Mingled howls and screams were heard, and blood began to flow on both
sides; but the fearful conflict was waged in profound darkness.

In the midst of the mélée a terrible rumbling sound suddenly drowned the
tumult, the ground became violently agitated, and the house rocked as if it were
being torn up from its foundations. The beams of the walls separated, and
through the openings Hobson and his companions saw the terrified bears rushing
away into the darkness, howling with rage and fright.

CHAPTER XXII.

FIVE MONTHS MORE.

A violent earthquake had shaken Cape Bathurst. Such convulsions were
probably frequent in this volcanic region, and the connection between them and
eruptions was once more demonstrated.

Hobson well understood the significance of what had occurred, and waited in
anxious suspense. He knew that the earth might open and swallow up the little
colony; but only one shock was felt, and that was rather a rebound than a vertical
upheaval, which made the house lean over towards the lake, and burst open its
walls. Immediately after this one shock, the ground again became firm and
motionless.

The house, although damaged, was still habitable; the breaches in the walls


were quickly repaired, and the pipes of the chimneys were patched together
again somehow

Fortunately the wounds the soldiers had received in their struggle with the
bears were slight, and merely required dressing.

Two miserable days ensued, during which the woodwork of the beds and the
planks of the partition walls were burnt, and the most pressing repairs executed
by Mac-Nab and his men. The piles, well driven into the earth, had not yielded;
but it was evident that the earthquake had caused a sinking of the level of the
coast on which the fort was built, which might seriously compromise the safety
of the building. Hobson was most anxious to ascertain the extent of the alteration
of elevation, but the pitiless cold prevented him from venturing outside.

But at last there were symptoms of an approaching change in the weather.
The stars shone with rather less brilliancy, and on the 11th January the barometer
fell slightly; hazy vapours floated in the air, the condensation of which would
raise the temperature; and on the 12th January the wind veered to the south-west,
and snow fell at irregular intervals.

The thermometer outside suddenly rose to 15° above zero, and to the frozen
colonists it was like the beginning of spring.

At eleven o’clock the same morning all were out of doors. They were like a
band of captives unexpectedly set free. They were, however, absolutely
forbidden to go beyond the enceinte of the fort, in case of awkward meetings.

The sun had not yet reappeared above the horizon, but it approached it nearly
enough to produce a long twilight, during which objects could be distinctly seen
to a distance of two miles; and Hobson’s first thought was to ascertain what
difference the earthquake had produced in the appearance of the surrounding
districts.

Certain changes had been effected. The crest of the promontory of Cape
Bathurst had been broken off, and large pieces of the cliff had been flung upon
the beach. The whole mass of the cape seemed to have been bent towards the
lake, altering the elevation of the plateau on which the fort was built. The soil on
the west appeared to have been depressed, whilst that on the east had been
elevated. One of the results of this change of level would unfortunately be, that
when the thaw set in, the waters of the lake and of Paulina river, in obedience to
the law, requiring liquids to maintain their level, would inundate a portion of the
western coast. The stream would probably scoop out another bed, and the natural
harbour at its mouth would be destroyed. The hills on the eastern bank seemed to
be considerably depressed, but the cliffs on the west were too far off for any
accurate observations to be made. The important alteration produced by the
earthquake may, in fact, be summed up in a very few words : the horizontal


character of the ground was replaced by a slope from east to west.

"Well, Lieutenant," said Mrs Barnett, laughing, "you were good enough to
give my name to the port and river, and now there will be neither Paulina river
nor Port Barnett. I must say I have been hardly used."

"Well, madam," replied Hobson, "although the river is gone, the lake
remains, and we will call it Lake Barnett. I hope that it at least will remain true
to you."

Mr and Mrs Joliffe, on leaving the house, had hurried, one to the doghouse,
the other to the reindeer-stable. The dogs had not suffered much from their lone,
confinement, and rushed into the court barking with delight. One reindeer had
died, but the others, though thin, appeared to be in good health.

"Well, madam," said the Lieutenant, "we have got through our troubles better
than we could have expected."

"I never despaired," replied the lady. "The miseries of an Arctic -winter
would not conquer men like you and your companions."

"To own the truth, madam," replied Hobson, "I never experienced such
intense cold before, in all the years I have spent in the north; and if it had lasted
many days longer we should all have been lost."

"The earthquake came in the nick of time then, not only to drive away the
bears, but also to modify the extremity of the cold?"

"Perhaps so, madam. All natural phenomena influence each other to a certain
extent. But the volcanic structure of the soil makes me rather uneasy. I cannot
but regret the close vicinity of this active volcano. If the lava from it cannot
reach us, the earthquakes connected with it can. Just look at our house now!"

"Oh, all that can be put right when the fine weather comes, and you will
make it all the stronger for the painful experience you have gained."

"Of course we shall, but meanwhile I am afraid you won’t find it very
comfortable."

"Are you speaking to me, Lieutenant? to an old traveller like me? I shall
imagine myself one of the crew of a small vessel, and now that it does not pitch
and toss, I shall have no fear of being sea-sick."

"What you say does not surprise me," replied Hobson; "we all know your
grandeur of character, your moral courage and imperturbable good temper. You
have done much to help us all to bear our troubles, and I thank you in my own
name and that of my men."

"You flatter me, Lieutenant; you flatter me."

"No, no; I only say what every one thinks. But may I ask you one question.
You know that next June, Captain Craventy is to send us a convoy with
provisions, which will take back our furs to Fort Reliance. I suppose our friend


Thomas Black, after having seen his eclipse, will return with the Captain’s men.
Do you mean to accompany him?"

"Do you mean to send me back?" asked the lady with a smile.

"O madam !"—

"Well, my superior officer," replied Mrs Barnett, extending her hand to the
Lieutenant, "I shall ask you to allow me to spend another winter at Fort Hope.
Next year one of the Company’s ships will probably anchor off Cape Bathurst,
and I shall return in it. Having come overland, I should like to go back by
Behring Strait."

The Lieutenant was delighted with his companion’s decision. The two had
become sincerely attached to each other, and had many tastes and qualities in
common. The hour of separation could not fail to be painful to both; and who
could tell what further trials awaited “the colonists, in which their combine,
influence might sustain the courage of the rest?

On the 20th January the sun at last reappeared, and the Polar night was at an
end. It only remained above the horizon for a few minutes, and was greeted with
joyous hurrahs by the settlers. From this date the days gradually increased in
length.

Throughout the month of February, and until the 15th March, there were
abrupt transitions from fine to bad weather. The fine days were so cold that the
hunters could not go out; and in the bad weather snowstorms kept them in. It was
only between whiles that any outdoor work could be done; and long excursions
were out of the question. There was no necessity for them, however, as the traps
were in full activity. In the latter end of the winter, martens, foxes, ermines,
wolverines, and other valuable animals were taken in large numbers, and the
trappers had plenty to do.

In March an excursion was ventured on as far as Walruses’ Bay and it was
noticed that the earthquake had considerably altered the form of the cliffs, which
were much depressed; whilst the igneous hills beyond, with their summits
wrapped in mist, seemed to look larger and more threatening than ever.

About the 20th March the hunters sighted the first swans migrating from the
south, and uttering shrill cries as they flew. A few snow buntings and winter
hawks were also seen. But the ground was still covered with thick layers of
frozen snow, and the sun was powerless to melt the hard surface of the lake and
Sea.

The breaking up of the frost did not commence until early in April. The ice
burst with a noise like the discharge of artillery.

Sudden changes took place in the appearance of the icebergs broken by
collisions, undermined by the action of the water once more set free, huge


masses rolled over with an awful crash, in consequence of the displacement of
their centre of gravity, causing fractures and fissures in the ice-fields which
greatly accelerated their breaking up.

At this time the mean temperature was 32° above zero, so that the upper
layer of ice on the beach rapidly dissolved, whilst the chain of icebergs, drifted
along by the currents of the Polar Sea, gradually drew back and became lost in
the fogs on the horizon. On the 15th April the sea was open, and a vessel from
the Pacific Ocean coming through Behring Strait, could certainly have skirted
along the American coast, and have anchored off Cape Bathurst.

Whilst the ice was disappearing from the ocean, Lake Barnett was also
laying aside its slippery armour, much to the delight of the thousands of ducks
and other water-fowl which began to teem upon its banks. As Hobson had
foreseen, however, the level of the lake was affected by the slope of the soil.
That part of the beach which stretched away from the enceinte of the fort, and
was bounded on the east by wooded hills, had increased considerably in extent;
and Hobson estimated that the waters of the lake had receded five hundred paces
on the eastern bank. As a natural consequence, the water on the western side had
risen, and if not held back by some natural barrier, would inundate the country.

On the whole, it was fortunate that the slope was from east to west; for had it
been from west to east, the factory must have been submerged.

The little river dried up as soon as the thaw set free its waters. It might
almost be said to have run back to its source, so abrupt was the slope of its bed
from north to south.

"We have now to erase a river from the map of the Arctic regions," observed
Hobson to his Sergeant. "It would have been embarrassing if we had been
dependent on the truant for drinkable water. Fortunately we have still Lake
Barnett, and I don’t suppose our thirsty men will drain it quite dry."

"Yes, we’ve got the lake,” replied the Sergeant; "but do you think its waters
have remained sweet?"

Hobson started and looked at his subordinate with knitted brows. It had not
occurred to him that a fissure in the ground might have established a
communication between the lake and the sea! Should it be so, ruin must ensue,
and the factory would inevitably have to be abandoned after all.

The Lieutenant and Hobson rushed to the lake and found their fears
groundless. Its waters were still sweet.

Early in May the snow had disappeared in several places, and a scanty
vegetation clothed the soil. Tiny mosses and slender grasses timidly pushed up
their stems above the ground, and the sorrel and cochlearia seeds which Mrs
Joliffe had planted began to sprout. The carpet of snow had protected them


through the bitter winter; but they had still to be saved from the beaks of birds
and the teeth of rodents. This arduous and important task was confided to the
worthy Corporal, who acquitted himself of it with the zeal and devotion of a
scarecrow in a kitchen garden.

The long days had now returned, and hunting was resumed.

Hobson was anxious to have a good stock of furs for the agents from Fort
Reliance to take charge of when they arrived, as they would do in a few weeks.
Marbre, Sabine, and the others, therefore, commenced the campaign. Their
excursions were neither long nor fatiguing : they never went further than two
miles from Cape Bathurst, for they had never before been in a district so well
stocked with game; and they were both surprised and delighted. :Martens,
reindeer, hares, caribous, foxes, and ermines passed close to their guns.

One thing, however, excited some regret in the minds of the colonists, not a
trace was to be seen of their old enemies the bears; and it seemed as if they had
taken all their relations with them. Perhaps the earthquake had frightened them
away, for they have a very delicate nervous organisation, if such an expression
can be applied to a mere quadruped. It was a pity they were gone, for vengeance
could not be wreaked upon them.

The month of May was very wet. Rain and snow succeeded each other. The
mean temperature was only 41° above zero. Fogs were of frequent occurrence,
and so thick that it would often have been imprudent to go any distance from the
fort. Petersen and Kellet once caused their companions grave anxiety by
disappearing for forty-eight hours. They had lost their way, and turned to the
south when they thought they were near to Walruses’ Bay. They came back
exhausted and half dead with hunger.

June came at last, and with it really fine warm weather. The colonists were
able to leave off their winter clothing. They worked zealously at repairing the
house, the foundations of which had to be propped up; and Hobson also ordered
the construction of a large magazine at the southern corner of the court. The
quantity of game justified the expenditure of time and labour involved : the
number of furs collected was already considerable, and it was necessary to have
some place set aside in which to keep them.

The Lieutenant now expected every day the arrival of the detachment to be
sent by Captain Craventy. A good many things were still required for the new
settlement. The stores were getting low; and if the party had left the fort in the
beginning of May, they ought to reach Cape Bathurst towards the middle of
June. It will be remembered that the Captain and his Lieutenant had fixed upon
the cape as the spot of rendezvous, and Hobson having constructed his fort on it,
there was no fear of the reinforcements failing to find him.


From the 15th June the districts surrounding the cape were carefully
watched. The British flag waved from the summit of the cliff, and could be seen
at a considerable distance. It was probable that the convoy would follow the
Lieutenant’s example, and skirt along the coast from Coronation Gulf. If not
exactly the shortest, it was the surest route, at a time when, the sea being free
from ice, the coast-line could be easily followed.

When the month of June passed without the arrival of the expected party,
Hobson began to feel rather uneasy, especially as the country again became
wrapped in fogs. He began to fear that the agents might lose their way, and often
talked the matter over with Mrs Barnett, Mac-Nab, and Rae.

Thomas Black made no attempt to conceal his uneasiness, for he was
anxious to return with the party from Fort Reliance as soon as he had seen his
eclipse; and should anything keep them back from coming, he would have to
resign himself to another winter, a prospect which did not please him at all; and
in reply to his eager questions, Hobson could say little to reassure him.

The 4th July dawned. No news! Some men sent to the southeast to
reconnoitre, returned, bringing no tidings.

Either the agents had never started, or they had lost their way. The latter
hypothesis was unfortunately the more probable. Hobson knew Captain
Craventy, and felt confident that he had sent off the convoy at the time named.

His increasing anxiety will therefore be readily understood. The fine season
was rapidly passing away. Another two months and the Arctic winter, with its
bitter winds, its whirlpools of snow, and its long nights, would again set in.

Hobson, as we well know, was not a man to yield to misfortune without a
struggle. Something must be done, and with the ready concurrence of the
astronomer the following plan was decided on.

It was now the 5th July. In another fortnight-July 18th-the solar eclipse was
to take place, and after that Thomas Black would be free to leave Fort Hope. It
was therefore agreed that if by that time the agents had not arrived, a convoy of a
few men and four or five sledges should leave the factory, and make for the
Great Slave Lake, taking with them some of the most valuable furs; and if no
accident befell them, they might hope to arrive at Fort Reliance in six weeks at
the latest-that is to say, towards the end of August.

This matter settled, Thomas Black shrank back into his shell, and became
once more the man of one idea, awaiting the moment when the moon, passing
between the orb of day and "himself," should totally eclipse the disc of the sun.

CHAPTER XXIII.

THE ECLIPSE OF THE 18TH JULY 1860.

The mists did not disperse. The sun shone feebly through thick curtains of


fog, and the astronomer began to have a great dread lest the eclipse should not be
visible after all. Sometimes the fog was so dense that the summit of the cape
could not be seen from the court of the fort.

Hobson got more and more uneasy. He had no longer any doubt that the
convoy had gone astray in the strange land; moreover, vague apprehensions and
sad forebodings increased his depression. He could not look into the future with
any confidence—why, he would have found it impossible to explain. Everything
apparently combined to reassure him. In spite of the great rigour of the winter,
his little colony was in excellent health. No quarrels had arisen amongst the
colonists, and their zeal and enthusiasm was still unabated. The surrounding
districts were well stocked with game, the harvest of furs had surpassed his
expectations, and the Company might well be satisfied with the result of the
enterprise. Even if no fresh supply of provisions arrived, the resources of the
country were such that the prospect of a second winter need awake no
misgivings. Why, then, was Lieutenant Hobson losing hope and confidence?

He and Mrs Bamett had many a talk on the subject; and the latter did all she
could to raise the drooping spirits of the commanding officer, urging upon him
all the considerations enumerated above; and one day walking with him along
the beach, she pleaded the cause of Cape Bathurst and the factory, built at the
cost of-so much suffering, with more than usual eloquence.

"Yes, yes, madam, you are right," replied Hobson; "but we can’t help our
presentiments. I am no visionary. Twenty times in my soldier’s life I have been
in critical circumstances, and have never lost presence of mind for one instant;
and now for the first time in my life I am uneasy about the future. If I had to face
a positive danger, I should have no fear; but a vague uncertain peril of which I
have only a presentiment "

"What danger do you mean?" inquired Mrs Barnett; "a danger from men,
from animals, or the elements?"

"Of animals I have no dread whatever, madam; it is for them to tremble
before the hunters of Cape Bathurst, nor do I fear men; these districts are
frequented by none but Esquimaux, and the Indians seldom venture so far
north."

"Besides, Lieutenant," said Mrs Barnett, "the Canadians, whose arrival you
so much feared in the fine season, have never appeared."

"I am very sorry for it, madam."

"What! you regret the absence of the rivals who are so evidently hostile to
your Company?"

"Madam, I am both glad and sorry that they have not come; that will of
course puzzle you. But observe that the expected convoy from Fort Reliance has


not arrived. It is the same with. the agents of the St Louis Fur Company; they
might have come, and they have not done so. Not a single Esquimaux has visited
this part of the coast during the summer either"—

"And what do you conclude from all this?" inquired Mrs Barnett.

"I conclude that it is not so easy to get to Cape Bathurst or to Fort Hope as
we could wish."

The lady looked into the Lieutenant’s anxious face, struck with the
melancholy and significant intonation of the word easy.

"Lieutenant Hobson," she said earnestly, "if you fear neither men nor
animals, I must conclude that your anxiety has reference to the elements."

"Madam," he replied, "I do not know if my spirit be broken, or if my
presentiments blind me, but there seems to me to be something uncanny about
this district. If I had known it better I should not have settled down in it. I have
already called your attention to certain peculiarities, which to me appear
inexplicable; the total absence of stones everywhere, and the clear-cut line of the
coast. I can’t make out about the primitive formation of this end of the continent.
I know that the vicinity of a volcano may cause some phenomena; but you
remember what I said to you on the subject of the tides?"

"Oh yes, perfectly."

"Where the sea ought according to the observations of explorers in these
latitudes, to have risen fifteen or twenty feet, it has scarcely risen one !"

"Yes; but that you accounted for by the irregular distribution of land and the
narrowness of the straits."

"IT tried to account for it, that is all," replied Hobson; "but the day before
yesterday I noticed a still more extraordinary phenomenon, which I cannot even
try to explain, and I doubt if the greatest savants could do so either."

Mrs Barnett looked inquiringly at Hobson.

"What has happened?" she exclaimed.

"Well, the day before yesterday, madam, when the moon was full, and
according to the almanac the tide ought to have been very high, the sea did not
even rise one foot, as it did before-it did not rise at all."

"Perhaps you may be mistaken observed Mrs Barnett.

"IT am not mistaken. I saw it with my own eyes. The day before yesterday,
July 4th, there was positively no tide on the coast of Cape Bathurst."

"And what do you conclude from that?" inquired Mrs Barnett.

"I conclude madam," replied the Lieutenant, "either that the laws of nature
are changed, or that this district is very peculiarly situated ... or rather... I
conclude nothing . . . I explain nothing . . . I am puzzled. . . I do not understand
it; and therefore . . . therefore I am anxious."


Mrs Barnett asked no more questions. Evidently the total absence of tides
was as unnatural and inexplicable as would be the absence of the sun from the
meridian at noon. Unless the earthquake had so modified the conformation of the
coast of the Arctic regions as to account for it-but no, such an idea could not be
entertained by any one accustomed to note terrestrial phenomena.

As for supposing that the Lieutenant could be mistaken in his observations,
that was impossible; and that very day he and Mrs Barnett, by means of beach-
marks made on the beach, ascertained beyond all doubt that whereas a year
before the sea rose a foot, there was now no tide whatever.

The matter was kept a profound secret, as Hobson was unwilling to render
his companions anxious. But he might often be seen standing motionless and
silent upon the summit of the cape, gazing across the sea, which was now open,
and stretched away as far as the eye could reach.

During the month of July hunting the furred animals was discontinued, as the
martens, foxes, and others had already lost their winter beauty. No game was
brought down but that required for food, such as caribous, Polar hares, &c.,
which, strange to say, instead of being scared away by the guns, continued to
multiply near the fort. Mrs Barnett did not fail to note this peculiar, and, as the
event proved, significant fact.

No change had taken place in the situation on the 15th July. No news from
Fort Reliance. The expected convoy did not arrive, and Hobson resolved to
execute his project of sending to Captain Craventy, as Captain Craventy did not
come to him.

Of course none but Sergeant Long could be appointed to the command of the
little troop, although the faithful fellow would rather not have been separated
from his Lieutenant. A considerable time must necessarily elapse before he could
get back to Fort Hope. He would have to pass the winter at Fort Reliance, and
return the next summer. Eight months at least! It is true either Mac-Nab or Rae
could have taken the Sergeant’s place; but then they were married, and the one
being a master carpenter, and the other the only blacksmith, the colonists could
not well have dispensed with their services.

Such were the grounds on which the Lieutenant chose Long, and the
Sergeant submitted with military obedience. The four soldiers elected to
accompany him were Belcher, Pond, Petersen, and Kellet, who declared their
readiness to start.

Four sledges and their teams of dogs were told off for the service. They were
to take a good stock of provisions, and the most valuable of the furs. Foxes,
ermines, martens, swans, lynxes, musk-rats, gluttons, &c., all contributed to the
precious convoy. The start was fixed for the morning of the 19th July, the day


after the eclipse. Of course Thomas Black was to accompany the Sergeant, and
one sledge was to convoy his precious person and instruments.

The worthy savant endured agonies of suspense in the few days preceding
the phenomenon which he awaited with so much impatience. He might well be
anxious; for one day it was fine and another wet, now mists obscured the sun, or
thick fogs hid it all together; and the wind veered to every point of the horizon
with provoking fickleness and uncertainty. What if during the few moments of
the eclipse the queen of the night and the great orb of day should be wrapped in
an opaque cloud at the critical moment, so that he, the astronomer, Thomas
Black, come so far to watch the phenomenon, should be unable to see the
luminous corona or the red prominences! How terrible would be the
disappointment! How many dangers, how much suffering, how much fatigue,
would have been gone through in vain !

"To have come so far to see the moon, and not to see it!" he cried in a
comically piteous tone.

No, he could not face the thought and early of an evening he would climb to
the summit of the cape and gaze into the heavens. The fair Phoebe was nowhere
to be seen; for it being three days before new moon, she was accompanying the
sun in his daily course, and her light was quenched in his beams.

Many a time did Thomas Black relieve his over-burdened heart by pouring
out his troubles to Mrs Barnett. The good lady felt sincerely sorry for him, and
one day, anxious to reassure him, she told him that the barometer showed a
certain tendency to rise, and reminded him that they were in the fine season.

The fine season !" cried the poor astronomer" shrugging his shoulders. "Who
can speak of a fine season in such a country as this?"

"Well, but, Mr Black," said Mrs Barnett, "suppose, for the sake of argument,
that you miss this eclipse by any unlucky chance, I suppose there will be another
some day. The eclipse of July 18th will not be the last of this century."

"No, madam, no," returned Black; "there will be five more total eclipses of
the sun before 1900. One on the 31st December 1861, which will be total for the
Atlantic Ocean, the Mediterranean, and the Sahara Desert; a second on the 22d
December 1870, total for the Azores, the south of Spain, Algeria, Sicily, and
Turkey; a third on the 19th August 1887, total for the north-east of Germany, the
south of Russia, and Central Asia; a fourth on the 9th April 1896, visible in
Greenland, Lapland, and Siberia; and lastly, a fifth on the 28th May 1900, which
will be total for the United States, Spain, Algeria, and

Egypt.”

"Well, Mr Black," resumed Mrs Barnett, "if you lose the eclipse of the 18th
July 1860, you can console yourself by looking forward to that of the 31st


December 1861. It will only be seventeen months !"

"I can console myself, madam," said the astronomer gravely, "by looking
forward to that of 1896. I shall have to wait not seventeen months but thirty-six
years |"

"May I ask why?"

"Because of all the eclipses, it alone-that of 9th August 1896-will be total for
places in high latitudes, such as Lapland, Siberia, or Greenland."

"But what is the special interest of an observation taken in these elevated
latitudes?"

"What special interest?" cried Thomas Black; why, a scientific interest of the
highest importance. Eclipses have very rarely been watched near the Pole, where
the sun, being very little above the horizon, is considerably increased in size.
The disc of the moon which is to intervene between us and the sun is subject to a
similar apparent extension, and therefore it may be that the red prominences and
the luminous corona can be more thoroughly examined This, madam, is why I
have travelled all this distance to watch the eclipse above the seventieth parallel.
A similar opportunity will not occur until 1896, and who can tell if I shall be
alive then?"

To this burst of enthusiasm there was no reply to be made; and the
astronomer’s anxiety and depression increased, for the inconstant weather
seemed more and more disposed to play him some ill-natured trick.

It was very fine on the 16th July, but the next day it was cloudy and misty
and Thomas Black became really ill. The feverish state he had been in for so
long seemed likely to result in a serious illness. Mrs Barnett and Hobson tried in
vain to soothe him, and Sergeant Long and the others could not understand how
it was possible to be so unhappy for love of the moon."

At last the great day-the 18th July-dawned. According to the calculations of
astronomers, the total eclipse was to last four minutes thirty-seven seconds-that
is to say, from forty-three minutes fifteen seconds past eleven to forty-seven
minutes fifty-seven seconds past eleven A.M.

"What do I ask? what do I ask?" moaned the astronomer, tearing his hair.
"Only one little corner of the sky free from clouds! only the small space in which
the eclipse is to take place I And for how long? For four short minutes! After
that, let it snow, let it thunder, let the elements break loose in fury, I should care
no more for it all than a snail for a chronometer."

It is not to be denied that Thomas Black had some grounds for his fears. It
really seemed likely that observations would be impossible. At daybreak the
horizon was shrouded in mists Heavy clouds were coming up from the south,
and covering the very portion of the sky in which the eclipse was to take place.


But doubtless the patron saint of astronomers had pity on poor Black, for
towards eight o’clock a slight wind arose and swept tire mists and clouds from
the sky, leaving it bright and clear!

A cry of gratitude burst from the lips of the astronomer, and his heart beat
high with newly-awakened hope. The sun shone brightly, and the moon, so soon
to darken it, was as yet invisible in its glorious beams.

Thomas Black’s instruments were already carefully placed on the
promontory, and having pointed them towards the southern horizon, he awaited
the event with calmness restored, and the coolness necessary for taking his
observation. What was there left to fear?

Nothing, unless it was that the sky might fall upon his head! At nine o’clock
there was not a cloud, not a vapour left upon the sky from the zenith to the
horizon. Never were circumstances more favourable to an astronomical
observation.

The whole party were anxious to take part in the observation, and all
gathered round the astronomer on Cape Bathurst. Gradually the sun rose above
the horizon, describing an extended arc above the vast plain stretching away to
the south. No one spoke, but awaited the eclipse in solemn silence.
