Author's Note: "Ladyfingers" are small, thin, white clouds with ragged
edges.

But what were mere winds to this Nautilus, which no storms could
intimidate!

So I was marveling at this delightful sunrise, so life-giving and cheerful,
when I heard someone climbing onto the platform.

I was prepared to greet Captain Nemo, but it was his chief officer who
appeared--whom I had already met during our first visit with the captain. He
advanced over the platform, not seeming to notice my presence. A powerful
spyglass to his eye, he scrutinized every point of the horizon with the utmost
care. Then, his examination over, he approached the hatch and pronounced a
phrase whose exact wording follows below. I remember it because, every
morning, it was repeated under the same circumstances. It ran like this:


"Nautron respoc lorni virch."

What it meant I was unable to say.

These words pronounced, the chief officer went below again. I thought the
Nautilus was about to resume its underwater navigating. So I went down the
hatch and back through the gangways to my stateroom.

Five days passed in this way with no change in our situation. Every morning
I climbed onto the platform. The same phrase was pronounced by the same
individual. Captain Nemo did not appear.

I was pursuing the policy that we had seen the last of him, when on
November 16, while reentering my stateroom with Ned and Conseil, I found a
note addressed to me on the table.

I opened it impatiently. It was written in a script that was clear and neat but a
bit "Old English" in style, its characters reminding me of German calligraphy.

The note was worded as follows:

Professor Aronnax

Aboard the Nautilus

November 16, 1867


Captain Nemo invites Professor Aronnax on a hunting trip that will take
place tomorrow morning in his Crespo Island forests. He hopes nothing will
prevent the professor from attending, and he looks forward with pleasure to the
professor's companions joining him.


CAPTAIN NEMO,
Commander of the Nautilus.


"A hunting trip!" Ned exclaimed.

"And in his forests on Crespo Island!" Conseil added.

"But does this mean the old boy goes ashore?" Ned Land went on.

"That seems to be the gist of it," I said, rereading the letter.

"Well, we've got to accept!" the Canadian answered. "Once we're on solid
ground, we'll figure out a course of action. Besides, it wouldn't pain me to eat a
couple slices of fresh venison!"

Without trying to reconcile the contradictions between Captain Nemo's
professed horror of continents or islands and his invitation to go hunting in a
forest, I was content to reply:


"First let's look into this Crespo Island."

I consulted the world map; and in latitude 32 degrees 40' north and longitude
167 degrees 50' west, I found an islet that had been discovered in 1801 by
Captain Crespo, which old Spanish charts called Rocca de la Plata, in other
words, "Silver Rock." So we were about 1,800 miles from our starting point, and
by a slight change of heading, the Nautilus was bringing us back toward the
southeast.

I showed my companions this small, stray rock in the middle of the north
Pacific.

"If Captain Nemo does sometimes go ashore," I told them, "at least he only
picks desert islands!"

Ned Land shook his head without replying; then he and Conseil left me.
After supper was served me by the mute and emotionless steward, I fell asleep;
but not without some anxieties.

When I woke up the next day, November 17, I sensed that the Nautilus was
completely motionless. I dressed hurriedly and entered the main lounge.

Captain Nemo was there waiting for me. He stood up, bowed, and asked if it
suited me to come along.

Since he made no allusion to his absence the past eight days, I also refrained
from mentioning it, and I simply answered that my companions and I were ready
to go with him.

"Only, sir," I added, "T'll take the liberty of addressing a question to you."

"Address away, Professor Aronnax, and if I'm able to answer, I will."

"Well then, captain, how is it that you've severed all ties with the shore, yet
you own forests on Crespo Island?"

"Professor," the captain answered me, "these forests of mine don't bask in the
heat and light of the sun. They aren't frequented by lions, tigers, panthers, or
other quadrupeds. They're known only to me. They grow only for me. These
forests aren't on land, they're actual underwater forests."

"Underwater forests!" I exclaimed.

"Yes, professor."

"And you're offering to take me to them?"

"Precisely."

"On foot?"

"Without getting your feet wet."

"While hunting?"

"While hunting."

"Rifles in hand?"

"Rifles in hand."


I stared at the Nautilus's commander with an air anything but flattering to the
man.
"Assuredly," I said to myself, "he's contracted some mental illness. He's had
a fit that's lasted eight days and isn't over even yet. What a shame! I liked him
better eccentric than insane!"

These thoughts were clearly readable on my face; but Captain Nemo
remained content with inviting me to follow him, and I did so like a man
resigned to the worst.

We arrived at the dining room, where we found breakfast served.

"Professor Aronnax," the captain told me, "I beg you to share my breakfast
without formality. We can chat while we eat. Because, although I promised you a
stroll in my forests, I made no pledge to arrange for your encountering a
restaurant there. Accordingly, eat your breakfast like a man who'll probably eat
dinner only when it's extremely late."

I did justice to this meal. It was made up of various fish and some slices of
sea cucumber, that praiseworthy zoophyte, all garnished with such highly
appetizing seaweed as the Porphyra laciniata and the Laurencia primafetida. Our
beverage consisted of clear water to which, following the captain's example, I
added some drops of a fermented liquor extracted by the Kamchatka process
from the seaweed known by name as Rhodymenia palmata.

At first Captain Nemo ate without pronouncing a single word. Then he told
me:

"Professor, when I proposed that you go hunting in my Crespo forests, you
thought I was contradicting myself. When I informed you that it was an issue of
underwater forests, you thought I'd gone insane. Professor, you must never make
snap judgments about your fellow man."

"But, captain, believe me--"

"Kindly listen to me, and you'll see if you have grounds for accusing me of
insanity or self-contradiction."

"T'm all attention."

"Professor, you know as well as I do that a man can live underwater so long
as he carries with him his own supply of breathable air. For underwater work
projects, the workman wears a waterproof suit with his head imprisoned in a
metal capsule, while he receives air from above by means of force pumps and
flow regulators."

"That's the standard equipment for a diving suit," I said.

"Correct, but under such conditions the man has no freedom. He's attached to
a pump that sends him air through an india-rubber hose; it's an actual chain that
fetters him to the shore, and if we were to be bound in this way to the Nautilus,


we couldn't go far either."

"Then how do you break free?" I asked.

"We use the Rouquayrol-Denayrouze device, invented by two of your fellow
countrymen but refined by me for my own special uses, thereby enabling you to
risk these new physiological conditions without suffering any organic disorders.
It consists of a tank built from heavy sheet iron in which I store air under a
pressure of fifty atmospheres. This tank is fastened to the back by means of
straps, like a soldier's knapsack. Its top part forms a box where the air is
regulated by a bellows mechanism and can be released only at its proper tension.
In the Rouquayrol device that has been in general use, two india-rubber hoses
leave this box and feed to a kind of tent that imprisons the operator's nose and
mouth; one hose is for the entrance of air to be inhaled, the other for the exit of
air to be exhaled, and the tongue closes off the former or the latter depending on
the breather's needs. But in my case, since I face considerable pressures at the
bottom of the sea, I needed to enclose my head in a copper sphere, like those
found on standard diving suits, and the two hoses for inhalation and exhalation
now feed to that sphere."

"That's perfect, Captain Nemo, but the air you carry must be quickly
depleted; and once it contains no more than 15% oxygen, it becomes unfit for
breathing."

"Surely, but as I told you, Professor Aronnax, the Nautilus's pumps enable
me to store air under considerable pressure, and given this circumstance, the tank
on my diving equipment can supply breathable air for nine or ten hours."

"T've no more objections to raise," I replied. "I'll only ask you, captain: how
can you light your way at the bottom of the ocean?"

"With the Ruhmkorff device, Professor Aronnax. If the first is carried on the
back, the second is fastened to the belt. It consists of a Bunsen battery that I
activate not with potassium dichromate but with sodium. An induction coil
gathers the electricity generated and directs it to a specially designed lantern. In
this lantern one finds a glass spiral that contains only a residue of carbon dioxide
gas. When the device is operating, this gas becomes luminous and gives off a
continuous whitish light. Thus provided for, I breathe and I see."

"Captain Nemo, to my every objection you give such crushing answers, I'm
afraid to entertain a single doubt. However, though I have no choice but to
accept both the Rouquayrol and Ruhmkorff devices, I'd like to register some
reservations about the rifle with which you'll equip me."

"But it isn't a rifle that uses gunpowder," the captain replied.

"Then it's an air gun?"

"Surely. How can I make gunpowder on my ship when I have no saltpeter,


sulfur, or charcoal?"

"Even so," I replied, "to fire underwater in a medium that's 855 times denser
than air, you'd have to overcome considerable resistance."

"That doesn't necessarily follow. There are certain Fulton-style guns
perfected by the Englishmen Philippe-Coles and Burley, the Frenchman Furcy,
and the Italian Landi; they're equipped with a special system of airtight
fastenings and can fire in underwater conditions. But I repeat: having no
gunpowder, I've replaced it with air at high pressure, which is abundantly
supplied me by the Nautilus's pumps."

"But this air must be swiftly depleted."

"Well, in a pinch can't my Rouquayrol tank supply me with more? All I have
to do is draw it from an ad hoc spigot.* Besides, Professor Aronnax, you'll see
for yourself that during these underwater hunting trips, we make no great
expenditure of either air or bullets."

*Latin: a spigot "just for that purpose." Ed.

"But it seems to me that in this semidarkness, amid this liquid that's so dense
in comparison to the atmosphere, a gunshot couldn't carry far and would prove
fatal only with difficulty!"

"On the contrary, sir, with this rifle every shot is fatal; and as soon as the
animal is hit, no matter how lightly, it falls as if struck by lightning."

"Why?"

"Because this rifle doesn't shoot ordinary bullets but little glass capsules
invented by the Austrian chemist Leniebroek, and I have a considerable supply
of them. These glass capsules are covered with a strip of steel and weighted with
a lead base; they're genuine little Leyden jars charged with high-voltage
electricity. They go off at the slightest impact, and the animal, no matter how
strong, drops dead. I might add that these capsules are no bigger than number 4
shot, and the chamber of any ordinary rifle could hold ten of them."

"T'll quit debating," I replied, getting up from the table. "And all that's left is
for me to shoulder my rifle. So where you go, I'll go."

Captain Nemo led me to the Nautilus's stern, and passing by Ned and
Conseil's cabin, I summoned my two companions, who instantly followed us.

Then we arrived at a cell located within easy access of the engine room; in
this cell we were to get dressed for our stroll.


CHAPTER 16


Strolling the Plains


THIS CELL, properly speaking, was the Nautilus's arsenal and wardrobe.
Hanging from its walls, a dozen diving outfits were waiting for anybody who
wanted to take a stroll.

After seeing these, Ned Land exhibited an obvious distaste for the idea of
putting one on.

"But my gallant Ned," I told him, "the forests of Crespo Island are simply
underwater forests!"

"Oh great!" put in the disappointed harpooner, watching his dreams of fresh
meat fade away. "And you, Professor Aronnax, are you going to stick yourself
inside these clothes?"

"Tt has to be, Mr. Ned."

"Have it your way, sir," the harpooner replied, shrugging his shoulders. "But
speaking for myself, I'll never get into those things unless they force me!"

"No one will force you, Mr. Land," Captain Nemo said.

"And is Conseil going to risk it?" Ned asked.

"Where master goes, I go," Conseil replied.

At the captain's summons, two crewmen came to help us put on these heavy,
waterproof clothes, made from seamless india rubber and expressly designed to
bear considerable pressures. They were like suits of armor that were both
yielding and resistant, you might say. These clothes consisted of jacket and
pants. The pants ended in bulky footwear adorned with heavy lead soles. The
fabric of the jacket was reinforced with copper mail that shielded the chest,
protected it from the water's pressure, and allowed the lungs to function freely;
the sleeves ended in supple gloves that didn't impede hand movements.

These perfected diving suits, it was easy to see, were a far cry from such
misshapen costumes as the cork breastplates, leather jumpers, seagoing tunics,
barrel helmets, etc., invented and acclaimed in the 18th century.

Conseil and I were soon dressed in these diving suits, as were Captain Nemo
and one of his companions--a herculean type who must have been prodigiously
strong. All that remained was to encase one's head in its metal sphere. But before


proceeding with this operation, I asked the captain for permission to examine the
rifles set aside for us.

One of the Nautilus's men presented me with a streamlined rifle whose butt
was boilerplate steel, hollow inside, and of fairly large dimensions. This served
as a tank for the compressed air, which a trigger-operated valve could release
into the metal chamber. In a groove where the butt was heaviest, a cartridge clip
held some twenty electric bullets that, by means of a spring, automatically took
their places in the barrel of the rifle. As soon as one shot had been fired, another
was ready to go off.


"Captain Nemo," I said, "this is an ideal, easy-to-use weapon. I ask only to
put it to the test. But how will we reach the bottom of the sea?"

"Right now, professor, the Nautilus is aground in ten meters of water, and
we've only to depart."

"But how will we set out?"

"You'll see."

Captain Nemo inserted his cranium into its spherical headgear. Conseil and I
did the same, but not without hearing the Canadian toss us a sarcastic "happy
hunting.” On top, the suit ended in a collar of threaded copper onto which the
metal helmet was screwed. Three holes, protected by heavy glass, allowed us to
see in any direction with simply a turn of the head inside the sphere. Placed on
our backs, the Rouquayrol device went into operation as soon as it was in
position, and for my part, I could breathe with ease.

The Ruhmkorff lamp hanging from my belt, my rifle in hand, I was ready to
go forth. But in all honesty, while imprisoned in these heavy clothes and nailed
to the deck by my lead soles, it was impossible for me to take a single step.

But this circumstance had been foreseen, because I felt myself propelled into
a little room adjoining the wardrobe. Towed in the same way, my companions
went with me. I heard a door with watertight seals close after us, and we were
surrounded by profound darkness.

After some minutes a sharp hissing reached my ears. I felt a distinct
sensation of cold rising from my feet to my chest. Apparently a stopcock inside
the boat was letting in water from outside, which overran us and soon filled up
the room. Contrived in the Nautilus's side, a second door then opened. We were
lit by a subdued light. An instant later our feet were treading the bottom of the
sea.

And now, how can I convey the impressions left on me by this stroll under
the waters. Words are powerless to describe such wonders! When even the


painter's brush can't depict the effects unique to the liquid element, how can the
writer's pen hope to reproduce them?

Captain Nemo walked in front, and his companion followed us a few steps to
the rear. Conseil and I stayed next to each other, as if daydreaming that through
our metal carapaces, a little polite conversation might still be possible! Already I
no longer felt the bulkiness of my clothes, footwear, and air tank, nor the weight
of the heavy sphere inside which my head was rattling like an almond in its
shell. Once immersed in water, all these objects lost a part of their weight equal
to the weight of the liquid they displaced, and thanks to this law of physics
discovered by Archimedes, I did just fine. I was no longer an inert mass, and I
had, comparatively speaking, great freedom of movement.

Lighting up the seafloor even thirty feet beneath the surface of the ocean, the
sun astonished me with its power. The solar rays easily crossed this aqueous
mass and dispersed its dark colors. I could easily distinguish objects 100 meters
away. Farther on, the bottom was tinted with fine shades of ultramarine; then, off
in the distance, it turned blue and faded in the midst of a hazy darkness. Truly,
this water surrounding me was just a kind of air, denser than the atmosphere on
land but almost as transparent. Above me I could see the calm surface of the
ocean.

We were walking on sand that was fine-grained and smooth, not wrinkled
like beach sand, which preserves the impressions left by the waves. This
dazzling carpet was a real mirror, throwing back the sun's rays with startling
intensity. The outcome: an immense vista of reflections that penetrated every
liquid molecule. Will anyone believe me if I assert that at this thirty-foot depth, I
could see as if it was broad daylight?

For a quarter of an hour, I trod this blazing sand, which was strewn with tiny
crumbs of seashell. Looming like a long reef, the Nautilus's hull disappeared
little by little, but when night fell in the midst of the waters, the ship's beacon
would surely facilitate our return on board, since its rays carried with perfect
distinctness. This effect is difficult to understand for anyone who has never seen
light beams so sharply defined on shore. There the dust that saturates the air
gives such rays the appearance of a luminous fog; but above water as well as
underwater, shafts of electric light are transmitted with incomparable clarity.

Meanwhile we went ever onward, and these vast plains of sand seemed
endless. My hands parted liquid curtains that closed again behind me, and my
footprints faded swiftly under the water's pressure.

Soon, scarcely blurred by their distance from us, the forms of some objects
took shape before my eyes. I recognized the lower slopes of some magnificent
rocks carpeted by the finest zoophyte specimens, and right off, I was struck by


an effect unique to this medium.

By then it was ten o'clock in the morning. The sun's rays hit the surface of
the waves at a fairly oblique angle, decomposing by refraction as though passing
through a prism; and when this light came in contact with flowers, rocks, buds,
seashells, and polyps, the edges of these objects were shaded with all seven hues
of the solar spectrum. This riot of rainbow tints was a wonder, a feast for the
eyes: a genuine kaleidoscope of red, green, yellow, orange, violet, indigo, and
blue; in short, the whole palette of a color-happy painter! If only I had been able
to share with Conseil the intense sensations rising in my brain, competing with
him in exclamations of wonderment! If only I had known, like Captain Nemo
and his companion, how to exchange thoughts by means of prearranged signals!
So, for lack of anything better, I talked to myself: I declaimed inside this copper
box that topped my head, spending more air on empty words than was perhaps
advisable.

Conseil, like me, had stopped before this splendid sight. Obviously, in the
presence of these zoophyte and mollusk specimens, the fine lad was classifying
his head off. Polyps and echinoderms abounded on the seafloor: various isis
coral, cornularian coral living in isolation, tufts of virginal genus Oculina
formerly known by the name "white coral," prickly fungus coral in the shape of
mushrooms, sea anemone holding on by their muscular disks, providing a literal
flowerbed adorned by jellyfish from the genus Porpita wearing collars of azure
tentacles, and starfish that spangled the sand, including veinlike feather stars
from the genus Asterophyton that were like fine lace embroidered by the hands
of water nymphs, their festoons swaying to the faint undulations caused by our
walking. It filled me with real chagrin to crush underfoot the gleaming mollusk
samples that littered the seafloor by the thousands: concentric comb shells,
hammer shells, coquina (seashells that actually hop around), top-shell snails, red
helmet shells, angel-wing conchs, sea hares, and so many other exhibits from
this inexhaustible ocean. But we had to keep walking, and we went forward
while overhead there scudded schools of Portuguese men-of-war that let their
ultramarine tentacles drift in their wakes, medusas whose milky white or dainty
pink parasols were festooned with azure tassels and shaded us from the sun's
rays, plus jellyfish of the species Pelagia panopyra that, in the dark, would have
strewn our path with phosphorescent glimmers!

All these wonders I glimpsed in the space of a quarter of a mile, barely
pausing, following Captain Nemo whose gestures kept beckoning me onward.
Soon the nature of the seafloor changed. The plains of sand were followed by a
bed of that viscous slime Americans call "ooze," which is composed exclusively
of seashells rich in limestone or silica. Then we crossed a prairie of algae, open-


sea plants that the waters hadn't yet torn loose, whose vegetation grew in wild
profusion. Soft to the foot, these densely textured lawns would have rivaled the
most luxuriant carpets woven by the hand of man. But while this greenery was
sprawling under our steps, it didn't neglect us overhead. The surface of the water
was crisscrossed by a floating arbor of marine plants belonging to that
superabundant algae family that numbers more than 2,000 known species. I saw
long ribbons of fucus drifting above me, some globular, others tubular:
Laurencia, Cladostephus with the slenderest foliage, Rhodymenia palmata
resembling the fan shapes of cactus. I observed that green-colored plants kept
closer to the surface of the sea, while reds occupied a medium depth, which left
blacks and browns in charge of designing gardens and flowerbeds in the ocean's
lower strata.

These algae are a genuine prodigy of creation, one of the wonders of world
flora. This family produces both the biggest and smallest vegetables in the
world. Because, just as 40,000 near-invisible buds have been counted in one
five-square-millimeter space, so also have fucus plants been gathered that were
over 500 meters long!

We had been gone from the Nautilus for about an hour and a half. It was
almost noon. I spotted this fact in the perpendicularity of the sun's rays, which
were no longer refracted. The magic of these solar colors disappeared little by
little, with emerald and sapphire shades vanishing from our surroundings
altogether. We walked with steady steps that rang on the seafloor with
astonishing intensity. The tiniest sounds were transmitted with a speed to which
the ear is unaccustomed on shore. In fact, water is a better conductor of sound
than air, and under the waves noises carry four times as fast.

Just then the seafloor began to slope sharply downward. The light took on a
uniform hue. We reached a depth of 100 meters, by which point we were
undergoing a pressure of ten atmospheres. But my diving clothes were built
along such lines that I never suffered from this pressure. I felt only a certain
tightness in the joints of my fingers, and even this discomfort soon disappeared.
As for the exhaustion bound to accompany a two-hour stroll in such unfamiliar
trappings--it was nil. Helped by the water, my movements were executed with
Startling ease.

Arriving at this 300-foot depth, I still detected the sun's rays, but just barely.
Their intense brilliance had been followed by a reddish twilight, a midpoint
between day and night. But we could see well enough to find our way, and it still
wasn't necessary to activate the Ruhmkorff device.

Just then Captain Nemo stopped. He waited until I joined him, then he
pointed a finger at some dark masses outlined in the shadows a short distance


away.
"It's the forest of Crespo Island," I thought; and I was not mistaken.


CHAPTER 17


An Underwater Forest


WE HAD FINALLY arrived on the outskirts of this forest, surely one of the
finest in Captain Nemo's immense domains. He regarded it as his own and had
laid the same claim to it that, in the first days of the world, the first men had to
their forests on land. Besides, who else could dispute his ownership of this
underwater property? What other, bolder pioneer would come, ax in hand, to
clear away its dark underbrush?

This forest was made up of big treelike plants, and when we entered beneath
their huge arches, my eyes were instantly struck by the unique arrangement of
their branches--an arrangement that I had never before encountered.

None of the weeds carpeting the seafloor, none of the branches bristling from
the shrubbery, crept, or leaned, or stretched on a horizontal plane. They all rose
right up toward the surface of the ocean. Every filament or ribbon, no matter
how thin, stood ramrod straight. Fucus plants and creepers were growing in stiff
perpendicular lines, governed by the density of the element that generated them.
After I parted them with my hands, these otherwise motionless plants would
shoot right back to their original positions. It was the regime of verticality.

I soon grew accustomed to this bizarre arrangement, likewise to the
comparative darkness surrounding us. The seafloor in this forest was strewn with
sharp chunks of stone that were hard to avoid. Here the range of underwater
flora seemed pretty comprehensive to me, as well as more abundant than it might
have been in the arctic or tropical zones, where such exhibits are less common.
But for a few minutes I kept accidentally confusing the two kingdoms, mistaking
zoophytes for water plants, animals for vegetables. And who hasn't made the
same blunder? Flora and fauna are so closely associated in the underwater
world!

I observed that all these exhibits from the vegetable kingdom were attached
to the seafloor by only the most makeshift methods. They had no roots and didn't
care which solid objects secured them, sand, shells, husks, or pebbles; they didn't
ask their hosts for sustenance, just a point of purchase. These plants are entirely
self-propagating, and the principle of their existence lies in the water that


sustains and nourishes them. In place of leaves, most of them sprouted blades of
unpredictable shape, which were confined to a narrow gamut of colors consisting
only of pink, crimson, green, olive, tan, and brown. There I saw again, but not
yet pressed and dried like the Nautilus's specimens, some peacock's tails spread
open like fans to stir up a cooling breeze, scarlet rosetangle, sea tangle stretching
out their young and edible shoots, twisting strings of kelp from the genus
Nereocystis that bloomed to a height of fifteen meters, bouquets of mermaid's
cups whose stems grew wider at the top, and a number of other open-sea plants,
all without flowers. "It's an odd anomaly in this bizarre element!" as one witty
naturalist puts it. "The animal kingdom blossoms, and the vegetable kingdom
doesn't!"

These various types of shrubbery were as big as trees in the temperate zones;
in the damp shade between them, there were clustered actual bushes of moving
flowers, hedges of zoophytes in which there grew stony coral striped with
twisting furrows, yellowish sea anemone from the genus Caryophylia with
translucent tentacles, plus anemone with grassy tufts from the genus Zoantharia;
and to complete the illusion, minnows flitted from branch to branch like a swarm
of hummingbirds, while there rose underfoot, like a covey of snipe, yellow fish
from the genus Lepisocanthus with bristling jaws and sharp scales, flying
gurnards, and pinecone fish.

Near one o'clock, Captain Nemo gave the signal to halt. Speaking for myself,
I was glad to oblige, and we stretched out beneath an arbor of winged kelp,
whose long thin tendrils stood up like arrows.

This short break was a delight. It lacked only the charm of conversation. But
it was impossible to speak, impossible to reply. I simply nudged my big copper
headpiece against Conseil's headpiece. I saw a happy gleam in the gallant lad's
eyes, and to communicate his pleasure, he jiggled around inside his carapace in
the world's silliest way.

After four hours of strolling, I was quite astonished not to feel any intense
hunger. What kept my stomach in such a good mood I'm unable to say. But, in
exchange, I experienced that irresistible desire for sleep that comes over every
diver. Accordingly, my eyes soon closed behind their heavy glass windows and I
fell into an uncontrollable doze, which until then I had been able to fight off only
through the movements of our walking. Captain Nemo and his muscular
companion were already stretched out in this clear crystal, setting us a fine
naptime example.

How long I was sunk in this torpor I cannot estimate; but when I awoke, it
seemed as if the sun were settling toward the horizon. Captain Nemo was
already up, and I had started to stretch my limbs, when an unexpected apparition


brought me sharply to my feet.

A few paces away, a monstrous, meter-high sea spider was staring at me with
beady eyes, poised to spring at me. Although my diving suit was heavy enough
to protect me from this animal's bites, I couldn't keep back a shudder of horror.
Just then Conseil woke up, together with the Nautilus's sailor. Captain Nemo
alerted his companion to this hideous crustacean, which a swing of the rifle butt
quickly brought down, and I watched the monster's horrible legs writhing in
dreadful convulsions.

This encounter reminded me that other, more daunting animals must be
lurking in these dark reaches, and my diving suit might not be adequate
protection against their attacks. Such thoughts hadn't previously crossed my
mind, and I was determined to keep on my guard. Meanwhile I had assumed this
rest period would be the turning point in our stroll, but I was mistaken; and
instead of heading back to the Nautilus, Captain Nemo continued his daring
excursion.

The seafloor kept sinking, and its significantly steeper slope took us to
greater depths. It must have been nearly three o'clock when we reached a narrow
valley gouged between high, vertical walls and located 150 meters down.
Thanks to the perfection of our equipment, we had thus gone ninety meters
below the limit that nature had, until then, set on man's underwater excursions.

I say 150 meters, although I had no instruments for estimating this distance.
But I knew that the sun's rays, even in the clearest seas, could reach no deeper.
So at precisely this point the darkness became profound. Not a single object was
visible past ten paces. Consequently, I had begun to grope my way when
suddenly I saw the glow of an intense white light. Captain Nemo had just
activated his electric device. His companion did likewise. Conseil and I followed
suit. By turning a switch, I established contact between the induction coil and the
glass spiral, and the sea, lit up by our four lanterns, was illuminated for a radius
of twenty-five meters.

Captain Nemo continued to plummet into the dark depths of this forest,
whose shrubbery grew ever more sparse. I observed that vegetable life was
disappearing more quickly than animal life. The open-sea plants had already left
behind the increasingly arid seafloor, where a prodigious number of animals
were still swarming: zoophytes, articulates, mollusks, and fish.

While we were walking, I thought the lights of our Ruhmkorff devices would
automatically attract some inhabitants of these dark strata. But if they did
approach us, at least they kept at a distance regrettable from the hunter's
standpoint. Several times I saw Captain Nemo stop and take aim with his rifle;
then, after sighting down its barrel for a few seconds, he would straighten up and


resume his walk.

Finally, at around four o'clock, this marvelous excursion came to an end. A
wall of superb rocks stood before us, imposing in its sheer mass: a pile of
gigantic stone blocks, an enormous granite cliffside pitted with dark caves but
not offering a single gradient we could climb up. This was the underpinning of
Crespo Island. This was land.

The captain stopped suddenly. A gesture from him brought us to a halt, and
however much I wanted to clear this wall, I had to stop. Here ended the domains
of Captain Nemo. He had no desire to pass beyond them. Farther on lay a part of
the globe he would no longer tread underfoot.

Our return journey began. Captain Nemo resumed the lead in our little band,
always heading forward without hesitation. I noted that we didn't follow the
same path in returning to the Nautilus. This new route, very steep and hence very
arduous, quickly took us close to the surface of the sea. But this return to the
upper strata wasn't so sudden that decompression took place too quickly, which
could have led to serious organic disorders and given us those internal injuries so
fatal to divers. With great promptness, the light reappeared and grew stronger;
and the refraction of the sun, already low on the horizon, again ringed the edges
of various objects with the entire color spectrum.

At a depth of ten meters, we walked amid a swarm of small fish from every
species, more numerous than birds in the air, more agile too; but no aquatic game
worthy of a gunshot had yet been offered to our eyes.

Just then I saw the captain's weapon spring to his shoulder and track a
moving object through the bushes. A shot went off, I heard a faint hissing, and
an animal dropped a few paces away, literally struck by lightning.

It was a magnificent sea otter from the genus Enhydra, the only exclusively
marine quadruped. One and a half meters long, this otter had to be worth a good
high price. Its coat, chestnut brown above and silver below, would have made
one of those wonderful fur pieces so much in demand in the Russian and
Chinese markets; the fineness and luster of its pelt guaranteed that it would go
for at least 2,000 francs. I was full of wonderment at this unusual mammal, with
its circular head adorned by short ears, its round eyes, its white whiskers like
those on a cat, its webbed and clawed feet, its bushy tail. Hunted and trapped by
fishermen, this valuable carnivore has become extremely rare, and it takes refuge
chiefly in the northernmost parts of the Pacific, where in all likelihood its species
will soon be facing extinction.

Captain Nemo's companion picked up the animal, loaded it on his shoulder,
and we took to the trail again.

For an hour plains of sand unrolled before our steps. Often the seafloor rose


to within two meters of the surface of the water. I could then see our images
clearly mirrored on the underside of the waves, but reflected upside down: above
us there appeared an identical band that duplicated our every movement and
gesture; in short, a perfect likeness of the quartet near which it walked, but with
heads down and feet in the air.

Another unusual effect. Heavy clouds passed above us, forming and fading
swiftly. But after thinking it over, I realized that these so-called clouds were
caused simply by the changing densities of the long ground swells, and I even
spotted the foaming "white caps" that their breaking crests were proliferating
over the surface of the water. Lastly, I couldn't help seeing the actual shadows of
large birds passing over our heads, swiftly skimming the surface of the sea.

On this occasion I witnessed one of the finest gunshots ever to thrill the
marrow of a hunter. A large bird with a wide wingspan, quite clearly visible,
approached and hovered over us. When it was just a few meters above the
waves, Captain Nemo's companion took aim and fired. The animal dropped,
electrocuted, and its descent brought it within reach of our adroit hunter, who
promptly took possession of it. It was an albatross of the finest species, a
wonderful specimen of these open-sea fowl.

This incident did not interrupt our walk. For two hours we were sometimes
led over plains of sand, sometimes over prairies of seaweed that were quite
arduous to cross. In all honesty, I was dead tired by the time I spotted a hazy
glow half a mile away, cutting through the darkness of the waters. It was the
Nautilus's beacon. Within twenty minutes we would be on board, and there I
could breathe easy again--because my tank's current air supply seemed to be
quite low in oxygen. But I was reckoning without an encounter that slightly
delayed our arrival.

I was lagging behind some twenty paces when I saw Captain Nemo suddenly
come back toward me. With his powerful hands he sent me buckling to the
ground, while his companion did the same to Conseil. At first I didn't know what
to make of this sudden assault, but I was reassured to observe the captain lying
motionless beside me.

I was stretched out on the seafloor directly beneath some bushes of algae,
when I raised my head and spied two enormous masses hurtling by, throwing off
phosphorescent glimmers.

My blood turned cold in my veins! I saw that we were under threat from a
fearsome pair of sharks. They were blue sharks, dreadful man-eaters with
enormous tails, dull, glassy stares, and phosphorescent matter oozing from holes
around their snouts. They were like monstrous fireflies that could thoroughly
pulverize a man in their iron jaws! I don't know if Conseil was busy with their


classification, but as for me, I looked at their silver bellies, their fearsome
mouths bristling with teeth, from a viewpoint less than scientific-- more as a
victim than as a professor of natural history.

Luckily these voracious animals have poor eyesight. They went by without
noticing us, grazing us with their brownish fins; and miraculously, we escaped a
danger greater than encountering a tiger deep in the jungle.

Half an hour later, guided by its electric trail, we reached the Nautilus. The
outside door had been left open, and Captain Nemo closed it after we reentered
the first cell. Then he pressed a button. I heard pumps operating within the ship,
I felt the water lowering around me, and in a few moments the cell was
completely empty. The inside door opened, and we passed into the wardrobe.

There our diving suits were removed, not without difficulty; and utterly
exhausted, faint from lack of food and rest, I repaired to my stateroom, full of
wonder at this startling excursion on the bottom of the sea.


CHAPTER 18


Four Thousand Leagues Under the Pacific


BY THE NEXT MORNING, November 18, I was fully recovered from my
exhaustion of the day before, and I climbed onto the platform just as the
Nautilus's chief officer was pronouncing his daily phrase. It then occurred to me
that these words either referred to the state of the sea, or that they meant:
"There's nothing in sight."

And in truth, the ocean was deserted. Not a sail on the horizon. The tips of
Crespo Island had disappeared during the night. The sea, absorbing every color
of the prism except its blue rays, reflected the latter in every direction and
sported a wonderful indigo tint. The undulating waves regularly took on the
appearance of watered silk with wide stripes.

I was marveling at this magnificent ocean view when Captain Nemo
appeared. He didn't seem to notice my presence and began a series of
astronomical observations. Then, his operations finished, he went and leaned his
elbows on the beacon housing, his eyes straying over the surface of the ocean.

Meanwhile some twenty of the Nautilus's sailors--all energetic, well-built
fellows--climbed onto the platform. They had come to pull up the nets left in our
wake during the night. These seamen obviously belonged to different
nationalities, although indications of European physical traits could be seen in
them all. If I'm not mistaken, I recognized some Irishmen, some Frenchmen, a
few Slavs, and a native of either Greece or Crete. Even so, these men were frugal
of speech and used among themselves only that bizarre dialect whose origin I
couldn't even guess. So I had to give up any notions of questioning them.

The nets were hauled on board. They were a breed of trawl resembling those
used off the Normandy coast, huge pouches held half open by a floating pole and
a chain laced through the lower meshes. Trailing in this way from these iron
glove makers, the resulting receptacles scoured the ocean floor and collected
every marine exhibit in their path. That day they gathered up some unusual
specimens from these fish-filled waterways: anglerfish whose comical
movements qualify them for the epithet "clowns," black Commerson anglers
equipped with their antennas, undulating triggerfish encircled by little red bands,


bloated puffers whose venom is extremely insidious, some olive-hued lampreys,
snipefish covered with silver scales, cutlass fish whose electrocuting power
equals that of the electric eel and the electric ray, scaly featherbacks with brown
crosswise bands, greenish codfish, several varieties of goby, etc.; finally, some
fish of larger proportions: a one-meter jack with a prominent head, several fine
bonito from the genus Scomber decked out in the colors blue and silver, and
three magnificent tuna whose high speeds couldn't save them from our trawl.

I estimate that this cast of the net brought in more than 1,000 pounds of fish.
It was a fine catch but not surprising. In essence, these nets stayed in our wake
for several hours, incarcerating an entire aquatic world in prisons made of
thread. So we were never lacking in provisions of the highest quality, which the
Nautilus's speed and the allure of its electric light could continually replenish.

These various exhibits from the sea were immediately lowered down the
hatch in the direction of the storage lockers, some to be eaten fresh, others to be
preserved.

After its fishing was finished and its air supply renewed, I thought the
Nautilus would resume its underwater excursion, and I was getting ready to
return to my stateroom, when Captain Nemo tured to me and said without
further preamble:

"Look at this ocean, professor! Doesn't it have the actual gift of life? Doesn't
it experience both anger and affection? Last evening it went to sleep just as we
did, and there it is, waking up after a peaceful night!"

No hellos or good mornings for this gent! You would have thought this
eccentric individual was simply continuing a conversation we'd already started!

"See!" he went on. "It's waking up under the sun's caresses! It's going to
relive its daily existence! What a fascinating field of study lies in watching the
play of its organism. It owns a pulse and arteries, it has spasms, and I side with
the scholarly Commander Maury, who discovered that it has a circulation as real
as the circulation of blood in animals."

I'm sure that Captain Nemo expected no replies from me, and it seemed
pointless to pitch in with "Ah yes," "Exactly," or "How right you are!" Rather, he
was simply talking to himself, with long pauses between sentences. He was
meditating out loud.

"Yes," he said, "the ocean owns a genuine circulation, and to start it going,
the Creator of All Things has only to increase its heat, salt, and microscopic
animal life. In essence, heat creates the different densities that lead to currents
and countercurrents. Evaporation, which is nil in the High Arctic regions and
very active in equatorial zones, brings about a constant interchange of tropical
and polar waters. What's more, I've detected those falling and rising currents that


make up the ocean's true breathing. I've seen a molecule of salt water heat up at
the surface, sink into the depths, reach maximum density at -2 degrees
centigrade, then cool off, grow lighter, and rise again. At the poles you'll see the
consequences of this phenomenon, and through this law of farseeing nature,
you'll understand why water can freeze only at the surface!"

As the captain was finishing his sentence, I said to myself: "The pole! Is this
brazen individual claiming he'll take us even to that location?"

Meanwhile the captain fell silent and stared at the element he had studied so
thoroughly and unceasingly. Then, going on:

"Salts," he said, "fill the sea in considerable quantities, professor, and if you
removed all its dissolved saline content, you'd create a mass measuring
4,500,000 cubic leagues, which if it were spread all over the globe, would form a
layer more than ten meters high. And don't think that the presence of these salts
is due merely to some whim of nature. No. They make ocean water less open to
evaporation and prevent winds from carrying off excessive amounts of steam,
which, when condensing, would submerge the temperate zones. Salts play a
leading role, the role of stabilizer for the general ecology of the globe!"

Captain Nemo stopped, straightened up, took a few steps along the platform,
and returned to me:

"As for those billions of tiny animals," he went on, "those infusoria that live
by the millions in one droplet of water, 800,000 of which are needed to weigh
one milligram, their role is no less important. They absorb the marine salts, they
assimilate the solid elements in the water, and since they create coral and
madrepores, they're the true builders of limestone continents! And so, after
they've finished depriving our water drop of its mineral nutrients, the droplet
gets lighter, rises to the surface, there absorbs more salts left behind through
evaporation, gets heavier, sinks again, and brings those tiny animals new
elements to absorb. The outcome: a double current, rising and falling, constant
movement, constant life! More intense than on land, more abundant, more
infinite, such life blooms in every part of this ocean, an element fatal to man,
they say, but vital to myriads of animals--and to me!"

When Captain Nemo spoke in this way, he was transfigured, and he filled me
with extraordinary excitement.

"There," he added, "out there lies true existence! And I can imagine the
founding of nautical towns, clusters of underwater households that, like the
Nautilus, would return to the surface of the sea to breathe each morning, free
towns if ever there were, independent cities! Then again, who knows whether
some tyrant..."

Captain Nemo finished his sentence with a vehement gesture. Then,


addressing me directly, as if to drive away an ugly thought:

"Professor Aronnax," he asked me, "do you know the depth of the ocean
floor?"

"At least, captain, I know what the major soundings tell us."

"Could you quote them to me, so I can double-check them as the need
arises?"

"Here," I replied, "are a few of them that stick in my memory. If I'm not
mistaken, an average depth of 8,200 meters was found in the north Atlantic, and
2,500 meters in the Mediterranean. The most remarkable soundings were taken
in the south Atlantic near the 35th parallel, and they gave 12,000 meters, 14,091
meters, and 15,149 meters. All in all, it's estimated that if the sea bottom were
made level, its average depth would be about seven kilometers."

"Well, professor," Captain Nemo replied, "we'll show you better than that, I
hope. As for the average depth of this part of the Pacific, I'll inform you that it's
a mere 4,000 meters."

This said, Captain Nemo headed to the hatch and disappeared down the
ladder. I followed him and went back to the main lounge. The propeller was
instantly set in motion, and the log gave our speed as twenty miles per hour.

Over the ensuing days and weeks, Captain Nemo was very frugal with his
visits. I saw him only at rare intervals. His chief officer regularly fixed the
positions I found reported on the chart, and in such a way that I could exactly
plot the Nautilus's course.

Conseil and Land spent the long hours with me. Conseil had told his friend
about the wonders of our undersea stroll, and the Canadian was sorry he hadn't
gone along. But I hoped an opportunity would arise for a visit to the forests of
Oceania.

Almost every day the panels in the lounge were open for some hours, and
our eyes never tired of probing the mysteries of the underwater world.

The Nautilus's general heading was southeast, and it stayed at a depth
between 100 and 150 meters. However, from lord-knows-what whim, one day it
did a diagonal dive by means of its slanting fins, reaching strata located 2,000
meters underwater. The thermometer indicated a temperature of 4.25 degrees
centigrade, which at this depth seemed to be a temperature common to all
latitudes.

On November 26, at three o'clock in the morning, the Nautilus cleared the
Tropic of Cancer at longitude 172 degrees. On the 27th it passed in sight of the
Hawaiian Islands, where the famous Captain Cook met his death on February 14,
1779. By then we had fared 4,860 leagues from our starting point. When I
arrived on the platform that morning, I saw the Island of Hawaii two miles to


leeward, the largest of the seven islands making up this group. I could clearly
distinguish the tilled soil on its outskirts, the various mountain chains running
parallel with its coastline, and its volcanoes, crowned by Mauna Kea, whose
elevation is 5,000 meters above sea level. Among other specimens from these
waterways, our nets brought up some peacock-tailed flabellarian coral, polyps
flattened into stylish shapes and unique to this part of the ocean.

The Nautilus kept to its southeasterly heading. On December 1 it cut the
equator at longitude 142 degrees, and on the 4th of the same month, after a quick
crossing marked by no incident, we raised the Marquesas Islands. Three miles
off, in latitude 8 degrees 57' south and longitude 139 degrees 32' west, I spotted
Martin Point on Nuku Hiva, chief member of this island group that belongs to
France. I could make out only its wooded mountains on the horizon, because
Captain Nemo hated to hug shore. There our nets brought up some fine fish
samples: dolphinfish with azure fins, gold tails, and flesh that's unrivaled in the
entire world, wrasse from the genus Hologymnosus that were nearly denuded of
scales but exquisite in flavor, knifejaws with bony beaks, yellowish albacore that
were as tasty as bonito, all fish worth classifying in the ship's pantry.

After leaving these delightful islands to the protection of the French flag, the
Nautilus covered about 2,000 miles from December 4 to the 11th. Its navigating
was marked by an encounter with an immense school of squid, unusual mollusks
that are near neighbors of the cuttlefish. French fishermen give them the name
"cuckoldfish," and they belong to the class Cephalopoda, family Dibranchiata,
consisting of themselves together with cuttlefish and argonauts. The naturalists
of antiquity made a special study of them, and these animals furnished many
ribald figures of speech for soapbox orators in the Greek marketplace, as well as
excellent dishes for the tables of rich citizens, if we're to believe Athenaeus, a
Greek physician predating Galen.

It was during the night of December 9-10 that the Nautilus encountered this
army of distinctly nocturnal mollusks. They numbered in the millions. They
were migrating from the temperate zones toward zones still warmer, following
the itineraries of herring and sardines. We stared at them through our thick glass
windows: they swam backward with tremendous speed, moving by means of
their locomotive tubes, chasing fish and mollusks, eating the little ones, eaten by
the big ones, and tossing in indescribable confusion the ten feet that nature has
rooted in their heads like a hairpiece of pneumatic snakes. Despite its speed, the
Nautilus navigated for several hours in the midst of this school of animals, and
its nets brought up an incalculable number, among which I recognized all nine
species that Professor Orbigny has classified as native to the Pacific Ocean.

During this crossing, the sea continually lavished us with the most marvelous


sights. Its variety was infinite. It changed its setting and decor for the mere
pleasure of our eyes, and we were called upon not simply to contemplate the
works of our Creator in the midst of the liquid element, but also to probe the
ocean's most daunting mysteries.

During the day of December 11, I was busy reading in the main lounge. Ned
Land and Conseil were observing the luminous waters through the gaping
panels. The Nautilus was motionless. Its ballast tanks full, it was sitting at a
depth of 1,000 meters in a comparatively unpopulated region of the ocean where
only larger fish put in occasional appearances.

Just then I was studying a delightful book by Jean Macé, The Servants of the
Stomach, and savoring its ingenious teachings, when Conseil interrupted my
reading.

"Would master kindly come here for an instant?" he said to me in an odd
voice.

"What is it, Conseil?"

"It's something that master should see."

I stood up, went, leaned on my elbows before the window, and I saw it.

In the broad electric daylight, an enormous black mass, quite motionless,
hung suspended in the midst of the waters. I observed it carefully, trying to find
out the nature of this gigantic cetacean. Then a sudden thought crossed my mind.

"A ship!" I exclaimed.

"Yes," the Canadian replied, "a disabled craft that's sinking straight down!"

Ned Land was not mistaken. We were in the presence of a ship whose
severed shrouds still hung from their clasps. Its hull looked in good condition,
and it must have gone under only a few hours before. The stumps of three masts,
chopped off two feet above the deck, indicated a flooding ship that had been
forced to sacrifice its masting. But it had heeled sideways, filling completely,
and it was listing to port even yet. A sorry sight, this carcass lost under the
waves, but sorrier still was the sight on its deck, where, lashed with ropes to
prevent their being washed overboard, some human corpses still lay! I counted
four of them--four men, one still standing at the helm-- then a woman, halfway
out of a skylight on the afterdeck, holding a child in her arms. This woman was
young. Under the brilliant lighting of the Nautilus's rays, I could make out her
features, which the water hadn't yet decomposed. With a supreme effort, she had
lifted her child above her head, and the poor little creature's arms were still
twined around its mother's neck! The postures of the four seamen seemed
ghastly to me, twisted from convulsive movements, as if making a last effort to
break loose from the ropes that bound them to their ship. And the helmsman,
standing alone, calmer, his face smooth and serious, his grizzled hair plastered to


his brow, his hands clutching the wheel, seemed even yet to be guiding his
wrecked three-master through the ocean depths!

What a scene! We stood dumbstruck, hearts pounding, before this shipwreck
caught in the act, as if it had been photographed in its final moments, so to
speak! And already I could see enormous sharks moving in, eyes ablaze, drawn
by the lure of human flesh!

Meanwhile, turning, the Nautilus made a circle around the sinking ship, and
for an instant I could read the board on its stern:


The Florida
Sunderland, England


CHAPTER 19


Vanikoro


THIS DREADFUL SIGHT was the first of a whole series of maritime
catastrophes that the Nautilus would encounter on its run. When it plied more
heavily traveled seas, we often saw wrecked hulls rotting in midwater, and
farther down, cannons, shells, anchors, chains, and a thousand other iron objects
rusting away.

Meanwhile, continuously swept along by the Nautilus, where we lived in
near isolation, we raised the Tuamotu Islands on December 11, that old
"dangerous group" associated with the French global navigator Commander
Bougainville; it stretches from Ducie Island to Lazareff Island over an area of
500 leagues from the east-southeast to the west-northwest, between latitude 13
degrees 30' and 23 degrees 50' south, and between longitude 125 degrees 30' and
151 degrees 30' west. This island group covers a surface area of 370 square
leagues, and it's made up of some sixty subgroups, among which we noted the
Gambier group, which is a French protectorate. These islands are coral
formations. Thanks to the work of polyps, a slow but steady upheaval will
someday connect these islands to each other. Later on, this new island will be
fused to its neighboring island groups, and a fifth continent will stretch from
New Zealand and New Caledonia as far as the Marquesas Islands.

The day I expounded this theory to Captain Nemo, he answered me coldly:

"The earth doesn't need new continents, but new men!"

Sailors’ luck led the Nautilus straight to Reao Island, one of the most unusual
in this group, which was discovered in 1822 by Captain Bell aboard the
Minerva. So I was able to study the madreporic process that has created the
islands in this ocean.

Madrepores, which one must guard against confusing with precious coral,
clothe their tissue in a limestone crust, and their variations in structure have led
my famous mentor Professor Milne-Edwards to classify them into five divisions.
The tiny microscopic animals that secrete this polypary live by the billions in the
depths of their cells. Their limestone deposits build up into rocks, reefs, islets,
islands. In some places, they form atolls, a circular ring surrounding a lagoon or


small inner lake that gaps place in contact with the sea. Elsewhere, they take the
shape of barrier reefs, such as those that exist along the coasts of New Caledonia
and several of the Tuamotu Islands. In still other localities, such as Réunion
Island and the island of Mauritius, they build fringing reefs, high, straight walls
next to which the ocean's depth is considerable.

While cruising along only a few cable lengths from the underpinning of Reao
Island, I marveled at the gigantic piece of work accomplished by these
microscopic laborers. These walls were the express achievements of madrepores
known by the names fire coral, finger coral, star coral, and stony coral. These
polyps grow exclusively in the agitated strata at the surface of the sea, and so it's
in the upper reaches that they begin these substructures, which sink little by little
together with the secreted rubble binding them. This, at least, is the theory of Mr.
Charles Darwin, who thus explains the formation of atolls--a theory superior, in
my view, to the one that says these madreporic edifices sit on the summits of
mountains or volcanoes submerged a few feet below sea level.

I could observe these strange walls quite closely: our sounding lines
indicated that they dropped perpendicularly for more than 300 meters, and our
electric beams made the bright limestone positively sparkle.

In reply to a question Conseil asked me about the growth rate of these
colossal barriers, I thoroughly amazed him by saying that scientists put it at an
eighth of an inch per biennium.

"Therefore," he said to me, "to build these walls, it took... ?'

"192,000 years, my gallant Conseil, which significantly extends the biblical
Days of Creation. What's more, the formation of coal-- in other words, the
petrification of forests swallowed by floods-- and the cooling of basaltic rocks
likewise call for a much longer period of time. I might add that those 'days' in the
Bible must represent whole epochs and not literally the lapse of time between
two sunrises, because according to the Bible itself, the sun doesn't date from the
first day of Creation."

When the Nautilus returned to the surface of the ocean, I could take in Reao
Island over its whole flat, wooded expanse. Obviously its madreporic rocks had
been made fertile by tornadoes and thunderstorms. One day, carried off by a
hurricane from neighboring shores, some seed fell onto these limestone beds,
mixing with decomposed particles of fish and marine plants to form vegetable
humus. Propelled by the waves, a coconut arrived on this new coast. Its germ
took root. Its tree grew tall, catching steam off the water. A brook was born.
Little by little, vegetation spread. Tiny animals--worms, insects--rode ashore on
tree trunks snatched from islands to windward. Turtles came to lay their eggs.
Birds nested in the young trees. In this way animal life developed, and drawn by


'


the greenery and fertile soil, man appeared. And that's how these islands were
formed, the immense achievement of microscopic animals.

Near evening Reao Island melted into the distance, and the Nautilus
noticeably changed course. After touching the Tropic of Capricorn at longitude
135 degrees, it headed west-northwest, going back up the whole intertropical
zone. Although the summer sun lavished its rays on us, we never suffered from
the heat, because thirty or forty meters underwater, the temperature didn't go
over 10 degrees to 12 degrees centigrade.

By December 15 we had left the alluring Society Islands in the west,
likewise elegant Tahiti, queen of the Pacific. In the moming I spotted this
island's lofty summits a few miles to leeward. Its waters supplied excellent fish
for the tables on board: mackerel, bonito, albacore, and a few varieties of that
sea serpent named the moray eel.

The Nautilus had cleared 8,100 miles. We logged 9,720 miles when we
passed between the Tonga Islands, where crews from the Argo, Port-au-Prince,
and Duke of Portland had perished, and the island group of Samoa, scene of the
slaying of Captain de Langle, friend of that long-lost navigator, the Count de La
Pérouse. Then we raised the Fiji Islands, where savages slaughtered sailors from
the Union, as well as Captain Bureau, commander of the Darling Josephine out
of Nantes, France.

Extending over an expanse of 100 leagues north to south, and over 90
leagues east to west, this island group lies between latitude 2 degrees and 6
degrees south, and between longitude 174 degrees and 179 degrees west. It
consists of a number of islands, islets, and reefs, among which we noted the
islands of Viti Levu, Vanua Levu, and Kadavu.

It was the Dutch navigator Tasman who discovered this group in 1643, the
same year the Italian physicist Torricelli invented the barometer and King Louis
XIV ascended the French throne. I'll let the reader decide which of these deeds
was more beneficial to humanity. Coming later, Captain Cook in 1774, Rear
Admiral d'Entrecasteaux in 1793, and finally Captain Dumont d'Urville in 1827,
untangled the whole chaotic geography of this island group. The Nautilus drew
near Wailea Bay, an unlucky place for England's Captain Dillon, who was the
first to shed light on the longstanding mystery surrounding the disappearance of
ships under the Count de La Pérouse.

This bay, repeatedly dredged, furnished a huge supply of excellent oysters.
As the Roman playwright Seneca recommended, we opened them right at our
table, then stuffed ourselves. These mollusks belonged to the species known by
name as Ostrea lamellosa, whose members are quite common off Corsica. This
Wailea oysterbank must have been extensive, and for certain, if they hadn't been


controlled by numerous natural checks, these clusters of shellfish would have
ended up jam-packing the bay, since as many as 2,000,000 eggs have been
counted in a single individual.

And if Mr. Ned Land did not repent of his gluttony at our oyster fest, it's
because oysters are the only dish that never causes indigestion. In fact, it takes
no less than sixteen dozen of these headless mollusks to supply the 315 grams
that satisfy one man's minimum daily requirement for nitrogen.

On December 25 the Nautilus navigated amid the island group of the New
Hebrides, which the Portuguese seafarer Queirds discovered in 1606, which
Commander Bougainville explored in 1768, and to which Captain Cook gave its
current name in 1773. This group is chiefly made up of nine large islands and
forms a 120-league strip from the north-northwest to the south-southeast, lying
between latitude 2 degrees and 15 degrees south, and between longitude 164
degrees and 168 degrees. At the moment of our noon sights, we passed fairly
close to the island of Aurou, which looked to me like a mass of green woods
crowned by a peak of great height.

That day it was yuletide, and it struck me that Ned Land badly missed
celebrating "Christmas," that genuine family holiday where Protestants are such
zealots.

I hadn't seen Captain Nemo for over a week, when, on the morning of the
27th, he entered the main lounge, as usual acting as if he'd been gone for just
five minutes. I was busy tracing the Nautilus's course on the world map. The
captain approached, placed a finger over a position on the chart, and pronounced
just one word:

"Vanikoro.”

This name was magic! It was the name of those islets where vessels under
the Count de La Pérouse had miscarried. I straightened suddenly.

"The Nautilus is bringing us to Vanikoro?" I asked.

"Yes, professor," the captain replied.

"And I'll be able to visit those famous islands where the Compass and the
Astrolabe came to grief?"

"If you like, professor."

"When will we reach Vanikoro?"

"We already have, professor."

Followed by Captain Nemo, I climbed onto the platform, and from there my
eyes eagerly scanned the horizon.

In the northeast there emerged two volcanic islands of unequal size,
surrounded by a coral reef whose circuit measured forty miles. We were facing
the island of Vanikoro proper, to which Captain Dumont d'Urville had given the


name "Island of the Search"; we lay right in front of the little harbor of Vana,
located in latitude 16 degrees 4' south and longitude 164 degrees 32' east. Its
shores seemed covered with greenery from its beaches to its summits inland,
crowned by Mt. Kapogo, which is 476 fathoms high.

After clearing the outer belt of rocks via a narrow passageway, the Nautilus
lay inside the breakers where the sea had a depth of thirty to forty fathoms.
Under the green shade of some tropical evergreens, I spotted a few savages who
looked extremely startled at our approach. In this long, blackish object
advancing flush with the water, didn't they see some fearsome cetacean that they
were obliged to view with distrust?

Just then Captain Nemo asked me what I knew about the shipwreck of the
Count de La Pérouse.

"What everybody knows, captain," I answered him.

"And could you kindly tell me what everybody knows?" he asked me in a
gently ironic tone.

"Very easily."

I related to him what the final deeds of Captain Dumont d'Urville had
brought to light, deeds described here in this heavily condensed summary of the
whole matter.

In 1785 the Count de La Pérouse and his subordinate, Captain de Langle,
were sent by King Louis XVI of France on a voyage to circumnavigate the
globe. They boarded two sloops of war, the Compass and the Astrolabe, which
were never seen again.

In 1791, justly concerned about the fate of these two sloops of war, the
French government fitted out two large cargo boats, the Search and the Hope,
which left Brest on September 28 under orders from Rear Admiral Bruni
d'Entrecasteaux. Two months later, testimony from a certain Commander
Bowen, aboard the Albemarle, alleged that rubble from shipwrecked vessels had
been seen on the coast of New Georgia. But d'Entrecasteaux was unaware of this
news--which seemed a bit dubious anyhow--and headed toward the Admiralty
Islands, which had been named in a report by one Captain Hunter as the site of
the Count de La Pérouse's shipwreck.

They looked in vain. The Hope and the Search passed right by Vanikoro
without stopping there; and overall, this voyage was plagued by misfortune,
ultimately costing the lives of Rear Admiral d'Entrecasteaux, two of his
subordinate officers, and several seamen from his crew.

It was an old hand at the Pacific, the English adventurer Captain Peter
Dillon, who was the first to pick up the trail left by castaways from the wrecked
vessels. On May 15, 1824, his ship, the St. Patrick, passed by Tikopia Island, one


of the New Hebrides. There a native boatman pulled alongside in a dugout canoe
and sold Dillon a silver sword hilt bearing the imprint of characters engraved
with a cutting tool known as a burin. Furthermore, this native boatman claimed
that during a stay in Vanikoro six years earlier, he had seen two Europeans
belonging to ships that had run aground on the island's reefs many years before.


Dillon guessed that the ships at issue were those under the Count de La
Pérouse, ships whose disappearance had shaken the entire world. He tried to
reach Vanikoro, where, according to the native boatman, a good deal of rubble
from the shipwreck could still be found, but winds and currents prevented his
doing so.

Dillon returned to Calcutta. There he was able to interest the Asiatic Society
and the East India Company in his discovery. A ship named after the Search was
placed at his disposal, and he departed on January 23, 1827, accompanied by a
French deputy.

This new Search, after putting in at several stops over the Pacific, dropped
anchor before Vanikoro on July 7, 1827, in the same harbor of Vana where the
Nautilus was currently floating.

There Dillon collected many relics of the shipwreck: iron utensils, anchors,
eyelets from pulleys, swivel guns, an eighteen-pound shell, the remains of some
astronomical instruments, a piece of sternrail, and a bronze bell bearing the
inscription "Made by Bazin," the foundry mark at Brest Arsenal around 1785.
There could no longer be any doubt.

Finishing his investigations, Dillon stayed at the site of the casualty until the
month of October. Then he left Vanikoro, headed toward New Zealand, dropped
anchor at Calcutta on April 7, 1828, and returned to France, where he received a
very cordial welcome from King Charles X.

But just then the renowned French explorer Captain Dumont d'Urville,
unaware of Dillon's activities, had already set sail to search elsewhere for the site
of the shipwreck. In essence, a whaling vessel had reported that some medals
and a Cross of St. Louis had been found in the hands of savages in the Louisiade
Islands and New Caledonia.

So Captain Dumont d'Urville had put to sea in command of a vessel named
after the Astrolabe, and just two months after Dillon had left Vanikoro, Dumont
d'Urville dropped anchor before Hobart. There he heard about Dillon's findings,
and he further learned that a certain James Hobbs, chief officer on the Union out
of Calcutta, had put to shore on an island located in latitude 8 degrees 18' south
and longitude 156 degrees 30' east, and had noted the natives of those waterways


making use of iron bars and red fabrics.

Pretty perplexed, Dumont d'Urville didn't know if he should give credence to
these reports, which had been carried in some of the less reliable newspapers;
nevertheless, he decided to start on Dillon's trail.

On February 10, 1828, the new Astrolabe hove before Tikopia Island, took
on a guide and interpreter in the person of a deserter who had settled there, plied
a course toward Vanikoro, raised it on February 12, sailed along its reefs until
the 14th, and only on the 20th dropped anchor inside its barrier in the harbor of
Vana.

On the 23rd, several officers circled the island and brought back some rubble
of little importance. The natives, adopting a system of denial and evasion,
refused to guide them to the site of the casualty. This rather shady conduct
aroused the suspicion that the natives had mistreated the castaways; and in truth,
the natives seemed afraid that Dumont d'Urville had come to avenge the Count
de La Pérouse and his unfortunate companions.

But on the 26th, appeased with gifts and seeing that they didn't need to fear
any reprisals, the natives led the chief officer, Mr. Jacquinot, to the site of the
shipwreck.

At this location, in three or four fathoms of water between the Paeu and Vana
reefs, there lay some anchors, cannons, and ingots of iron and lead, all caked
with limestone concretions. A launch and whaleboat from the new Astrolabe
were steered to this locality, and after going to exhausting lengths, their crews
managed to dredge up an anchor weighing 1,800 pounds, a cast-iron eight-
pounder cannon, a lead ingot, and two copper swivel guns.

Questioning the natives, Captain Dumont d'Urville also learned that after La
Pérouse's two ships had miscarried on the island's reefs, the count had built a
smaller craft, only to go off and miscarry a second time. Where? Nobody knew.

The commander of the new Astrolabe then had a monument erected under a
tuft of mangrove, in memory of the famous navigator and his companions. It was
a simple quadrangular pyramid, set on a coral base, with no ironwork to tempt
the natives' avarice.

Then Dumont d'Urville tried to depart; but his crews were run down from the
fevers raging on these unsanitary shores, and quite ill himself, he was unable to
weigh anchor until March 17.

Meanwhile, fearing that Dumont d'Urville wasn't abreast of Dillon's
activities, the French government sent a sloop of war to Vanikoro, the
Bayonnaise under Commander Legoarant de Tromelin, who had been stationed
on the American west coast. Dropping anchor before Vanikoro a few months
after the new Astrolabe's departure, the Bayonnaise didn't find any additional


evidence but verified that the savages hadn't disturbed the memorial honoring
the Count de La Pérouse.

This is the substance of the account I gave Captain Nemo.

"So," he said to me, "the castaways built a third ship on Vanikoro Island, and
to this day, nobody knows where it went and perished?"

"Nobody knows."

Captain Nemo didn't reply but signaled me to follow him to the main lounge.
The Nautilus sank a few meters beneath the waves, and the panels opened.

I rushed to the window and saw crusts of coral: fungus coral, siphonula
coral, alcyon coral, sea anemone from the genus Caryophylia, plus myriads of
charming fish including greenfish, damselfish, sweepers, snappers, and
squirrelfish; underneath this coral covering I detected some rubble the old
dredges hadn't been able to tear free-- iron stirrups, anchors, cannons, shells,
tackle from a capstan, a stempost, all objects hailing from the wrecked ships and
now carpeted in moving flowers.

And as I stared at this desolate wreckage, Captain Nemo told me in a solemn
voice:

"Commander La Pérouse set out on December 7, 1785, with his ships, the
Compass and the Astrolabe. He dropped anchor first at Botany Bay, visited the
Tonga Islands and New Caledonia, headed toward the Santa Cruz Islands, and
put in at Nomuka, one of the islands in the Ha'apai group. Then his ships arrived
at the unknown reefs of Vanikoro. Traveling in the lead, the Compass ran afoul
of breakers on the southerly coast. The Astrolabe went to its rescue and also ran
aground. The first ship was destroyed almost immediately. The second, stranded
to leeward, held up for some days. The natives gave the castaways a fair enough
welcome. The latter took up residence on the island and built a smaller craft with
rubble from the two large ones. A few seamen stayed voluntarily in Vanikoro.
The others, weak and ailing, set sail with the Count de La Pérouse. They headed
to the Solomon Islands, and they perished with all hands on the westerly coast of
the chief island in that group, between Cape Deception and Cape Satisfaction!"

"And how do you know all this?" I exclaimed.

"Here's what I found at the very site of that final shipwreck!"

Captain Nemo showed me a tin box, stamped with the coat of arms of France
and all corroded by salt water. He opened it and I saw a bundle of papers,
yellowed but still legible.

They were the actual military orders given by France's Minister of the Navy
to Commander La Pérouse, with notes along the margin in the handwriting of
King Louis XVI!

"Ah, what a splendid death for a seaman!" Captain Nemo then said. "A coral


grave is a tranquil grave, and may Heaven grant that my companions and I rest
in no other!"


CHAPTER 20


The Torres Strait


DURING THE NIGHT of December 27-28, the Nautilus left the waterways
of Vanikoro behind with extraordinary speed. Its heading was southwesterly, and
in three days it had cleared the 750 leagues that separated La Pérouse's islands
from the southeastern tip of Papua.

On January 1, 1868, bright and early, Conseil joined me on the platform.

"Will master," the gallant lad said to me, "allow me to wish him a happy new
year?"

"Good heavens, Conseil, it's just like old times in my office at the Botanical
Gardens in Paris! I accept your kind wishes and I thank you for them. Only, I'd
like to know what you mean by a ‘happy year’ under the circumstances in which
we're placed. Is it a year that will bring our imprisonment to an end, or a year
that will see this strange voyage continue?"

"Ye gods," Conseil replied, "I hardly know what to tell master. We're
certainly seeing some unusual things, and for two months we've had no time for
boredom. The latest wonder is always the most astonishing, and if this
progression keeps up, I can't imagine what its climax will be. In my opinion,
we'll never again have such an opportunity."

"Never, Conseil."

"Besides, Mr. Nemo really lives up to his Latin name, since he couldn't be
less in the way if he didn't exist."

"True enough, Conseil."

"Therefore, with all due respect to master, I think a 'happy year' would be a
year that lets us see everything--"

"Everything, Conseil? No year could be that long. But what does Ned Land
think about all this?"

"Ned Land's thoughts are exactly the opposite of mine," Conseil replied. "He
has a practical mind and a demanding stomach. He's tired of staring at fish and
eating them day in and day out. This shortage of wine, bread, and meat isn't
suitable for an upstanding Anglo-Saxon, a man accustomed to beefsteak and
unfazed by regular doses of brandy or gin!"


"For my part, Conseil, that doesn't bother me in the least, and I've adjusted
very nicely to the diet on board."

"So have I," Conseil replied. "Accordingly, I think as much about staying as
Mr. Land about making his escape. Thus, if this new year isn't a happy one for
me, it will be for him, and vice versa. No matter what happens, one of us will be
pleased. So, in conclusion, I wish master to have whatever his heart desires."

"Thank you, Conseil. Only I must ask you to postpone the question of new
year's gifts, and temporarily accept a hearty handshake in their place. That's all I
have on me."

"Master has never been more generous," Conseil replied.

And with that, the gallant lad went away.

By January 2 we had fared 11,340 miles, hence 5,250 leagues, from our
starting point in the seas of Japan. Before the Nautilus's spur there stretched the
dangerous waterways of the Coral Sea, off the northeast coast of Australia. Our
boat cruised along a few miles away from that daunting shoal where Captain
Cook's ships wellnigh miscarried on June 10, 1770. The craft that Cook was
aboard charged into some coral rock, and if his vessel didn't go down, it was
thanks to the circumstance that a piece of coral broke off in the collision and
plugged the very hole it had made in the hull.

I would have been deeply interested in visiting this long, 360-league reef,
against which the ever-surging sea broke with the fearsome intensity of
thunderclaps. But just then the Nautilus's slanting fins took us to great depths,
and I could see nothing of those high coral walls. I had to rest content with the
various specimens of fish brought up by our nets. Among others I noted some
long-finned albacore, a species in the genus Scomber, as big as tuna, bluish on
the flanks, and streaked with crosswise stripes that disappear when the animal
dies. These fish followed us in schools and supplied our table with very dainty
flesh. We also caught a large number of yellow-green gilthead, half a decimeter
long and tasting like dorado, plus some flying gumards, authentic underwater
swallows that, on dark nights, alternately streak air and water with their
phosphorescent glimmers. Among mollusks and zoophytes, I found in our trawl's
meshes various species of alcyonarian coral, sea urchins, hammer shells,
spurred-star shells, wentletrap snails, horn shells, glass snails. The local flora
was represented by fine floating algae: sea tangle, and kelp from the genus
Macrocystis, saturated with the mucilage their pores perspire, from which I
selected a wonderful Nemastoma geliniaroidea, classifying it with the natural
curiosities in the museum.

On January 4, two days after crossing the Coral Sea, we raised the coast of
Papua. On this occasion Captain Nemo told me that he intended to reach the


Indian Ocean via the Torres Strait. This was the extent of his remarks. Ned saw
with pleasure that this course would bring us, once again, closer to European
seas.

The Torres Strait is regarded as no less dangerous for its bristling reefs than
for the savage inhabitants of its coasts. It separates Queensland from the huge
island of Papua, also called New Guinea.

Papua is 400 leagues long by 130 leagues wide, with a surface area of 40,000
geographic leagues. It's located between latitude 0 degrees 19' and 10 degrees 2'
south, and between longitude 128 degrees 23' and 146 degrees 15'. At noon,
while the chief officer was taking the sun's altitude, I spotted the summits of the
Arfak Mountains, rising in terraces and ending in sharp peaks.

Discovered in 1511 by the Portuguese Francisco Serrano, these shores were
successively visited by Don Jorge de Meneses in 1526, by Juan de Grijalva in
1527, by the Spanish general Alvaro de Saavedra in 1528, by Inigo Ortiz in
1545, by the Dutchman Schouten in 1616, by Nicolas Sruick in 1753, by
Tasman, Dampier, Fumel, Carteret, Edwards, Bougainville, Cook, McClure, and
Thomas Forrest, by Rear Admiral d'Entrecasteaux in 1792, by Louis-Isidore
Duperrey in 1823, and by Captain Dumont d'Urville in 1827. "It's the heartland
of the blacks who occupy all Malaysia," Mr. de Rienzi has said; and I hadn't the
foggiest inkling that sailors' luck was about to bring me face to face with these
daunting Andaman aborigines.

So the Nautilus hove before the entrance to the world's most dangerous strait,
a passageway that even the boldest navigators hesitated to clear: the strait that
Luis Vaez de Torres faced on returning from the South Seas in Melanesia, the
strait in which sloops of war under Captain Dumont d'Urville ran aground in
1840 and nearly miscarried with all hands. And even the Nautilus, rising
superior to every danger in the sea, was about to become intimate with its coral
reefs.

The Torres Strait is about thirty-four leagues wide, but it's obstructed by an
incalculable number of islands, islets, breakers, and rocks that make it nearly
impossible to navigate. Consequently, Captain Nemo took every desired
precaution in crossing it. Floating flush with the water, the Nautilus moved
ahead at a moderate pace. Like a cetacean's tail, its propeller churned the waves
slowly.

Taking advantage of this situation, my two companions and I found seats on
the ever-deserted platform. In front of us stood the pilothouse, and unless I'm
extremely mistaken, Captain Nemo must have been inside, steering his Nautilus
himself.

Under my eyes I had the excellent charts of the Torres Strait that had been


surveyed and drawn up by the hydrographic engineer Vincendon Dumoulin and
Sublieutenant (now Admiral) Coupvent-Desbois, who were part of Dumont
d'Urville's general staff during his final voyage to circumnavigate the globe.
These, along with the efforts of Captain King, are the best charts for untangling
the snarl of this narrow passageway, and I consulted them with scrupulous care.

Around the Nautilus the sea was boiling furiously. A stream of waves,
bearing from southeast to northwest at a speed of two and a half miles per hour,
broke over heads of coral emerging here and there.

"That's one rough sea!" Ned Land told me.

"Abominable indeed," I replied, "and hardly suitable for a craft like the
Nautilus."

"That damned captain," the Canadian went on, "must really be sure of his
course, because if these clumps of coral so much as brush us, they'll rip our hull
into a thousand pieces!"

The situation was indeed dangerous, but as if by magic, the Nautilus seemed
to glide right down the middle of these rampaging reefs. It didn't follow the
exact course of the Zealous and the new Astrolabe, which had proved so illfated
for Captain Dumont d'Urville. It went more to the north, hugged the Murray
Islands, and returned to the southwest near Cumberland Passage. I thought it was
about to charge wholeheartedly into this opening, but it went up to the northwest,
through a large number of little-known islands and islets, and steered toward
Tound Island and the Bad Channel.

I was already wondering if Captain Nemo, rash to the point of sheer insanity,
wanted his ship to tackle the narrows where Dumont d'Urville's two sloops of
war had gone aground, when he changed direction a second time and cut straight
to the west, heading toward Gueboroa Island.

By then it was three o'clock in the afternoon. The current was slacking off, it
was almost full tide. The Nautilus drew near this island, which I can see to this
day with its remarkable fringe of screw pines. We hugged it from less than two
miles out.

A sudden jolt threw me down. The Nautilus had just struck a reef, and it
remained motionless, listing slightly to port.

When I stood up, I saw Captain Nemo and his chief officer on the platform.
They were examining the ship's circumstances, exchanging a few words in their
incomprehensible dialect.

Here is what those circumstances entailed. Two miles to starboard lay
Gueboroa Island, its coastline curving north to west like an immense arm. To the
south and east, heads of coral were already on display, left uncovered by the
ebbing waters. We had run aground at full tide and in one of those seas whose


tides are moderate, an inconvenient state of affairs for floating the Nautilus off.
However, the ship hadn't suffered in any way, so solidly joined was its hull. But
although it could neither sink nor split open, it was in serious danger of being
permanently attached to these reefs, and that would have been the finish of
Captain Nemo's submersible.

I was mulling this over when the captain approached, cool and calm, forever
in control of himself, looking neither alarmed nor annoyed.

"An accident?" I said to him.

"No, an incident," he answered me.

"But an incident," I replied, "that may oblige you to become a resident again
of these shores you avoid!"

Captain Nemo gave me an odd look and gestured no. Which told me pretty
clearly that nothing would ever force him to set foot on a land mass again. Then
he said:

"No, Professor Aronnax, the Nautilus isn't consigned to perdition. It will still
carry you through the midst of the ocean's wonders. Our voyage is just
beginning, and I've no desire to deprive myself so soon of the pleasure of your
company."

"Even so, Captain Nemo," I went on, ignoring his ironic turn of phrase, "the
Nautilus has run aground at a moment when the sea is full. Now then, the tides
aren't strong in the Pacific, and if you can't unballast the Nautilus, which seems
impossible to me, I don't see how it will float off."

"You're right, professor, the Pacific tides aren't strong," Captain Nemo
replied. "But in the Torres Strait, one still finds a meter-and-a-half difference in
level between high and low seas. Today is January 4, and in five days the moon
will be full. Now then, I'll be quite astonished if that good-natured satellite
doesn't sufficiently raise these masses of water and do me a favor for which I'll
be forever grateful."

This said, Captain Nemo went below again to the Nautilus's interior,
followed by his chief officer. As for our craft, it no longer stirred, staying as
motionless as if these coral polyps had already walled it in with their
indestructible cement.

"Well, sir?" Ned Land said to me, coming up after the captain's departure.

"Well, Ned my friend, we'll serenely wait for the tide on the 9th, because it
seems the moon will have the good nature to float us away!"

"As simple as that?"

"As simple as that."

"So our captain isn't going to drop his anchors, put his engines on the chains,
and do anything to haul us off?"


"Since the tide will be sufficient," Conseil replied simply.

The Canadian stared at Conseil, then he shrugged his shoulders. The seaman
in him was talking now.

"Sir," he answered, "you can trust me when I say this hunk of iron will never
navigate again, on the seas or under them. It's only fit to be sold for its weight.
So I think it's time we gave Captain Nemo the slip."

"Ned my friend," I replied, "unlike you, I haven't given up on our valiant
Nautilus, and in four days we'll know where we stand on these Pacific tides.
Besides, an escape attempt might be timely if we were in sight of the coasts of
England or Provence, but in the waterways of Papua it's another story. And we'll
always have that as a last resort if the Nautilus doesn't right itself, which I'd
regard as a real calamity."

"But couldn't we at least get the lay of the land?" Ned went on. "Here's an
island. On this island there are trees. Under those trees land animals loaded with
cutlets and roast beef, which I'd be happy to sink my teeth into."

"In this instance our friend Ned is right," Conseil said, "and I side with his
views. Couldn't master persuade his friend Captain Nemo to send the three of us
ashore, if only so our feet don't lose the knack of treading on the solid parts of
our planet?"

"I can ask him," I replied, "but he'll refuse."

"Let master take the risk," Conseil said, "and we'll know where we stand on
the captain's affability."

Much to my surprise, Captain Nemo gave me the permission I asked for, and
he did so with grace and alacrity, not even exacting my promise to return on
board. But fleeing across the New Guinea territories would be extremely
dangerous, and I wouldn't have advised Ned Land to try it. Better to be prisoners
aboard the Nautilus than to fall into the hands of Papuan natives.

The skiff was put at our disposal for the next morning. I hardly needed to ask
whether Captain Nemo would be coming along. I likewise assumed that no
crewmen would be assigned to us, that Ned Land would be in sole charge of
piloting the longboat. Besides, the shore lay no more than two miles off, and it
would be child's play for the Canadian to guide that nimble skiff through those
rows of reefs so illfated for big ships.

The next day, January 5, after its deck paneling was opened, the skiff was
wrenched from its socket and launched to sea from the top of the platform. Two
men were sufficient for this operation. The oars were inside the longboat and we
had only to take our seats.

At eight o'clock, armed with rifles and axes, we pulled clear of the Nautilus.
The sea was fairly calm. A mild breeze blew from shore. In place by the oars,


Conseil and I rowed vigorously, and Ned steered us into the narrow lanes
between the breakers. The skiff handled easily and sped swiftly.

Ned Land couldn't conceal his glee. He was a prisoner escaping from prison
and never dreaming he would need to reenter it.

"Meat!" he kept repeating. "Now we'll eat red meat! Actual game! A real
mess call, by thunder! I'm not saying fish aren't good for you, but we mustn't
overdo 'em, and a Slice of fresh venison grilled over live coals will be a nice
change from our standard fare."

"You glutton,” Conseil replied, "you're making my mouth water!"


"Tt remains to be seen," I said, "whether these forests do contain game, and if
the types of game aren't of such size that they can hunt the hunter."

"Fine, Professor Aronnax!" replied the Canadian, whose teeth seemed to be
as honed as the edge of an ax. "But if there's no other quadruped on this island,
I'll eat tiger--tiger sirloin."

"Our friend Ned grows disturbing," Conseil replied.

"Whatever it is," Ned Land went on, "any animal having four feet without
feathers, or two feet with feathers, will be greeted by my very own one-gun
salute."

"Oh good!" I replied. "The reckless Mr. Land is at it again!"

"Don't worry, Professor Aronnax, just keep rowing!" the Canadian replied. "I
only need twenty-five minutes to serve you one of my own special creations."

By 8:30 the Nautilus's skiff had just run gently aground on a sandy strand,
after successfully clearing the ring of coral that surrounds Gueboroa Island.


CHAPTER 21


Some Days Ashore


STEPPING ASHORE had an exhilarating effect on me. Ned Land tested the
soil with his foot, as if he were laying claim to it. Yet it had been only two
months since we had become, as Captain Nemo expressed it, "passengers on the
Nautilus," in other words, the literal prisoners of its commander.

In a few minutes we were a gunshot away from the coast. The soil was
almost entirely madreporic, but certain dry stream beds were strewn with granite
rubble, proving that this island was of primordial origin. The entire horizon was
hidden behind a curtain of wonderful forests. Enormous trees, sometimes as high
as 200 feet, were linked to each other by garlands of tropical creepers, genuine
natural hammocks that swayed in a mild breeze. There were mimosas, banyan
trees, beefwood, teakwood, hibiscus, screw pines, palm trees, all mingling in
wild profusion; and beneath the shade of their green canopies, at the feet of their
gigantic trunks, there grew orchids, leguminous plants, and ferns.

Meanwhile, ignoring all these fine specimens of Papuan flora, the Canadian
passed up the decorative in favor of the functional. He spotted a coconut palm,
beat down some of its fruit, broke them open, and we drank their milk and ate
their meat with a pleasure that was a protest against our standard fare on the
Nautilus.

"Excellent!" Ned Land said.


"Exquisite!" Conseil replied.

"And I don't think," the Canadian said, "that your Nemo would object to us
stashing a cargo of coconuts aboard his vessel?"

"T imagine not," I replied, "but he won't want to sample them."

"Too bad for him!" Conseil said.

"And plenty good for us!" Ned Land shot back. "There'll be more left over!"

"A word of caution, Mr. Land," I told the harpooner, who was about to
ravage another coconut palm. "Coconuts are admirable things, but before we
stuff the skiff with them, it would be wise to find out whether this island offers


other substances just as useful. Some fresh vegetables would be well received in
the Nautilus's pantry."

"Master is right," Conseil replied, "and I propose that we set aside three
places in our longboat: one for fruit, another for vegetables, and a third for
venison, of which I still haven't glimpsed the tiniest specimen."

"Don't give up so easily, Conseil," the Canadian replied.

"So let's continue our excursion," I went on, "but keep a sharp lookout. This
island seems uninhabited, but it still might harbor certain individuals who aren't
so finicky about the sort of game they eat!"

"Hee hee!" Ned put in, with a meaningful movement of his jaws.

"Ned! Oh horrors!" Conseil exclaimed.

"Ye gods," the Canadian shot back, "I'm starting to appreciate the charms of
cannibalism!"

"Ned, Ned! Don't say that!" Conseil answered. "You a cannibal? Why, I'll no
longer be safe next to you, I who share your cabin! Does this mean I'll wake up
half devoured one fine day?"

"I'm awfully fond of you, Conseil my friend, but not enough to eat you when
there's better food around."

"Then I daren't delay," Conseil replied. "The hunt is on! We absolutely must
bag some game to placate this man-eater, or one of these mornings master won't
find enough pieces of his manservant to serve him."

While exchanging this chitchat, we entered beneath the dark canopies of the
forest, and for two hours we explored it in every direction.

We couldn't have been luckier in our search for edible vegetation, and some
of the most useful produce in the tropical zones supplied us with a valuable
foodstuff missing on board.

I mean the breadfruit tree, which is quite abundant on Gueboroa Island, and
there I chiefly noted the seedless variety that in Malaysia is called "rima."

This tree is distinguished from other trees by a straight trunk forty feet high.
To the naturalist's eye, its gracefully rounded crown, formed of big multilobed
leaves, was enough to denote the artocarpus that has been so successfully
transplanted to the Mascarene Islands east of

Madagascar. From its mass of greenery, huge globular fruit stood out, a
decimeter wide and furnished on the outside with creases that assumed a
hexangular pattern. It's a handy plant that nature gives to regions lacking in
wheat; without needing to be cultivated, it bears fruit eight months out of the
year.

Ned Land was on familiar terms with this fruit. He had already eaten it on his
many voyages and knew how to cook its edible substance. So the very sight of it


aroused his appetite, and he couldn't control himself.

"Sir," he told me, "I'll die if I don't sample a little breadfruit pasta!"

"Sample some, Ned my friend, sample all you like. We're here to conduct
experiments, let's conduct them."

"Tt won't take a minute," the Canadian replied.

Equipped with a magnifying glass, he lit a fire of deadwood that was soon
crackling merrily. Meanwhile Conseil and I selected the finest artocarpus fruit.
Some still weren't ripe enough, and their thick skins covered white, slightly
fibrous pulps. But a great many others were yellowish and gelatinous, just
begging to be picked.

This fruit contained no pits. Conseil brought a dozen of them to Ned Land,
who cut them into thick slices and placed them over a fire of live coals, all the
while repeating:

"You'll see, sir, how tasty this bread is!"

"Especially since we've gone without baked goods for so long," Conseil said.

"It's more than just bread," the Canadian added. "It's a dainty pastry. You've
never eaten any, sir?"

"No, Ned."

"All right, get ready for something downright delectable! If you don't come
back for seconds, I'm no longer the King of Harpooners!"

After a few minutes, the parts of the fruit exposed to the fire were completely
toasted. On the inside there appeared some white pasta, a sort of soft bread
center whose flavor reminded me of artichoke.

This bread was excellent, I must admit, and I ate it with great pleasure.

"Unfortunately," I said, "this pasta won't stay fresh, so it seems pointless to
make a supply for on board."

"By thunder, sir!" Ned Land exclaimed. "There you go, talking like a
naturalist, but meantime I'll be acting like a baker! Conseil, harvest some of this
fruit to take with us when we go back."

"And how will you prepare it?" I asked the Canadian.

"T'll make a fermented batter from its pulp that'll keep indefinitely without
spoiling. When I want some, I'll just cook it in the galley on board--it'll have a
slightly tart flavor, but you'll find it excellent."


"So, Mr. Ned, I see that this bread is all we need--"

"Not quite, professor,” the Canadian replied. "We need some fruit to go with
it, or at least some vegetables."

"Then let's look for fruit and vegetables."


When our breadfruit harvesting was done, we took to the trail to complete
this "dry-land dinner."

We didn't search in vain, and near noontime we had an ample supply of
bananas. This delicious produce from the Torrid Zones ripens all year round, and
Malaysians, who give them the name "pisang,” eat them without bothering to
cook them. In addition to bananas, we gathered some enormous jackfruit with a
very tangy flavor, some tasty mangoes, and some pineapples of unbelievable
size. But this foraging took up a good deal of our time, which, even so, we had
no cause to regret.

Conseil kept Ned under observation. The harpooner walked in the lead, and
during his stroll through this forest, he gathered with sure hands some excellent
fruit that should have completed his provisions.

"So," Conseil asked, "you have everything you need, Ned my friend?"

"Humph!" the Canadian put in.

"What! You're complaining?"

"All this vegetation doesn't make a meal," Ned replied. "Just side dishes,
dessert. But where's the soup course? Where's the roast?"

"Right," I said. "Ned promised us cutlets, which seems highly questionable
to me."

"Sir," the Canadian replied, "our hunting not only isn't over, it hasn't even
started. Patience! We're sure to end up bumping into some animal with either
feathers or fur, if not in this locality, then in another."

"And if not today, then tomorrow, because we mustn't wander too far off,"
Conseil added. "That's why I propose that we return to the skiff."

"What! Already!" Ned exclaimed.

"We ought to be back before nightfall," I said.

"But what hour is it, then?" the Canadian asked.

"Two o'clock at least," Conseil replied.

"How time flies on solid ground!" exclaimed Mr. Ned Land with a sigh of
regret.

"Off we go!" Conseil replied.

So we returned through the forest, and we completed our harvest by making
a clean sweep of some palm cabbages that had to be picked from the crowns of
their trees, some small beans that I recognized as the "abrou" of the Malaysians,
and some high-quality yams.

We were overloaded when we arrived at the skiff. However, Ned Land still
found these provisions inadequate. But fortune smiled on him. Just as we were
boarding, he spotted several trees twenty-five to thirty feet high, belonging to the
palm species. As valuable as the artocarpus, these trees are justly ranked among


the most useful produce in Malaysia.

They were sago palms, vegetation that grows without being cultivated; like
mulberry trees, they reproduce by means of shoots and seeds.

Ned Land knew how to handle these trees. Taking his ax and wielding it with
great vigor, he soon stretched out on the ground two or three sago palms, whose
maturity was revealed by the white dust sprinkled over their palm fronds.

I watched him more as a naturalist than as a man in hunger. He began by
removing from each trunk an inch-thick strip of bark that covered a network of
long, hopelessly tangled fibers that were puttied with a sort of gummy flour. This
flour was the starch-like sago, an edible substance chiefly consumed by the
Melanesian peoples.

For the time being, Ned Land was content to chop these trunks into pieces, as
if he were making firewood; later he would extract the flour by sifting it through
cloth to separate it from its fibrous ligaments, let it dry out in the sun, and leave
it to harden inside molds.

Finally, at five o'clock in the afternoon, laden with all our treasures, we left
the island beach and half an hour later pulled alongside the Nautilus. Nobody
appeared on our arrival. The enormous sheet-iron cylinder seemed deserted. Our
provisions loaded on board, I went below to my stateroom. There I found my
supper ready. I ate and then fell asleep.

The next day, January 6: nothing new on board. Not a sound inside, not a
sign of life. The skiff stayed alongside in the same place we had left it. We
decided to return to Gueboroa Island. Ned Land hoped for better luck in his
hunting than on the day before, and he wanted to visit a different part of the
forest.

By sunrise we were off. Carried by an inbound current, the longboat reached
the island in a matter of moments.

We disembarked, and thinking it best to abide by the Canadian's instincts, we
followed Ned Land, whose long legs threatened to outpace us.

Ned Land went westward up the coast; then, fording some stream beds, he
reached open plains that were bordered by wonderful forests. Some kingfishers
lurked along the watercourses, but they didn't let us approach. Their cautious
behavior proved to me that these winged creatures knew where they stood on
bipeds of our species, and I concluded that if this island wasn't inhabited, at least
human beings paid it frequent visits.

After crossing a pretty lush prairie, we arrived on the outskirts of a small
wood, enlivened by the singing and soaring of a large number of birds.

"Still, they're merely birds," Conseil said.

"But some are edible," the harpooner replied.


"Wrong, Ned my friend," Conseil answered, "because I see only ordinary
parrots here."


"Conseil my friend," Ned replied in all seriousness, "parrots are like pheasant
to people with nothing else on their plates."

"And I might add," I said, "that when these birds are properly cooked, they're
at least worth a stab of the fork."

Indeed, under the dense foliage of this wood, a whole host of parrots
fluttered from branch to branch, needing only the proper upbringing to speak
human dialects. At present they were cackling in chorus with parakeets of every
color, with solemn cockatoos that seemed to be pondering some philosophical
problem, while bright red lories passed by like pieces of bunting borne on the
breeze, in the midst of kalao parrots raucously on the wing, Papuan lories
painted the subtlest shades of azure, and a whole variety of delightful winged
creatures, none terribly edible.

However, one bird unique to these shores, which never passes beyond the
boundaries of the Aru and Papuan Islands, was missing from this collection. But
I was given a chance to marvel at it soon enough.

After crossing through a moderately dense thicket, we again found some
plains obstructed by bushes. There I saw some magnificent birds soaring aloft,
the arrangement of their long feathers causing them to head into the wind. Their
undulating flight, the grace of their aerial curves, and the play of their colors
allured and delighted the eye. I had no trouble identifying them.

"Birds of paradise!" I exclaimed.

"Order Passeriforma, division Clystomora," Conseil replied.

"Partridge family?" Ned Land asked.

"I doubt it, Mr. Land. Nevertheless, I'm counting on your dexterity to catch
me one of these delightful representatives of tropical nature!"

"T'll give it a try, professor, though I'm handier with a harpoon than a rifle."

Malaysians, who do a booming business in these birds with the Chinese,
have various methods for catching them that we couldn't use. Sometimes they set
snares on the tops of the tall trees that the bird of paradise prefers to inhabit. At
other times they capture it with a tenacious glue that paralyzes its movements.
They will even go so far as to poison the springs where these fowl habitually
drink. But in our case, all we could do was fire at them on the wing, which left
us little chance of getting one. And in truth, we used up a good part of our
ammunition in vain.

Near eleven o'clock in the morning, we cleared the lower slopes of the


mountains that form the island's center, and we still hadn't bagged a thing.
Hunger spurred us on. The hunters had counted on consuming the proceeds of
their hunting, and they had miscalculated. Luckily, and much to his surprise,
Conseil pulled off a right-and-left shot and insured our breakfast. He brought
down a white pigeon and a ringdove, which were briskly plucked, hung from a
spit, and roasted over a blazing fire of deadwood. While these fascinating
animals were cooking, Ned prepared some bread from the artocarpus. Then the
pigeon and ringdove were devoured to the bones and declared excellent.
Nutmeg, on which these birds habitually gorge themselves, sweetens their flesh
and makes it delicious eating.

"They taste like chicken stuffed with truffles," Conseil said.

"All right, Ned," I asked the Canadian, "now what do you need?"

"Game with four paws, Professor Aronnax," Ned Land replied. "All these
pigeons are only appetizers, snacks. So till I've bagged an animal with cutlets, I
won't be happy!"

"Nor I, Ned, until I've caught a bird of paradise."

"Then let's keep hunting," Conseil replied, "but while heading back to the
sea. We've arrived at the foothills of these mountains, and I think we'll do better
if we return to the forest regions."

It was good advice and we took it. After an hour's walk we reached a genuine
sago palm forest. A few harmless snakes fled underfoot. Birds of paradise stole
off at our approach, and I was in real despair of catching one when Conseil,
walking in the lead, stooped suddenly, gave a triumphant shout, and came back
to me, carrying a magnificent bird of paradise.

"Oh bravo, Conseil!" I exclaimed.

"Master is too kind," Conseil replied.

"Not at all, my boy. That was a stroke of genius, catching one of these live
birds with your bare hands!"

"If master will examine it closely, he'll see that I deserve no great praise."

"And why not, Conseil?"

"Because this bird is as drunk as a lord."

"Drunk?"

"Yes, master, drunk from the nutmegs it was devouring under that nutmeg
tree where I caught it. See, Ned my friend, see the monstrous results of
intemperance!"

"Damnation!" the Canadian shot back. "Considering the amount of gin I've
had these past two months, you've got nothing to complain about!"

Meanwhile I was examining this unusual bird. Conseil was not mistaken.
Tipsy from that potent juice, our bird of paradise had been reduced to


helplessness. It was unable to fly. It was barely able to walk. But this didn't
alarm me, and I just let it sleep off its nutmeg.

This bird belonged to the finest of the eight species credited to Papua and its
neighboring islands. It was a "great emerald," one of the rarest birds of paradise.
It measured three decimeters long. Its head was comparatively small, and its
eyes, placed near the opening of its beak, were also small. But it offered a
wonderful mixture of hues: a yellow beak, brown feet and claws, hazel wings
with purple tips, pale yellow head and scruff of the neck, emerald throat, the
belly and chest maroon to brown. Two strands, made of a horn substance
covered with down, rose over its tail, which was lengthened by long, very light
feathers of wonderful fineness, and they completed the costume of this
marvelous bird that the islanders have poetically named "the sun bird."


How I wished I could take this superb bird of paradise back to Paris, to make
a gift of it to the zoo at the Botanical Gardens, which doesn't own a single live
specimen.

"So it must be a rarity or something?" the Canadian asked, in the tone of a
hunter who, from the viewpoint of his art, gives the game a pretty low rating.

"A great rarity, my gallant comrade, and above all very hard to capture alive.
And even after they're dead, there's still a major market for these birds. So the
natives have figured out how to create fake ones, like people create fake pearls
or diamonds."

"What!" Conseil exclaimed. "They make counterfeit birds of paradise?"

"Yes, Conseil."

"And is master familiar with how the islanders go about it?"

"Perfectly familiar. During the easterly monsoon season, birds of paradise
lose the magnificent feathers around their tails that naturalists call 'below-the-
wing’ feathers. These feathers are gathered by the fowl forgers and skillfully
fitted onto some poor previously mutilated parakeet. Then they paint over the
suture, varnish the bird, and ship the fruits of their unique labors to museums and
collectors in Europe."

"Good enough!" Ned Land put in. "If it isn't the right bird, it's still the right
feathers, and so long as the merchandise isn't meant to be eaten, I see no great
harm!"

But if my desires were fulfilled by the capture of this bird of paradise, those
of our Canadian huntsman remained unsatisfied. Luckily, near two o'clock Ned
Land brought down a magnificent wild pig of the type the natives call "bari-
outang." This animal came in the nick of time for us to bag some real quadruped


meat, and it was warmly welcomed. Ned Land proved himself quite gloriously
with his gunshot. Hit by an electric bullet, the pig dropped dead on the spot.

The Canadian properly skinned and cleaned it, after removing half a dozen
cutlets destined to serve as the grilled meat course of our evening meal. Then the
hunt was on again, and once more would be marked by the exploits of Ned and
Conseil.

In essence, beating the bushes, the two friends flushed a herd of kangaroos
that fled by bounding away on their elastic paws. But these animals didn't flee so
swiftly that our electric capsules couldn't catch up with them.

"Oh, professor!" shouted Ned Land, whose hunting fever had gone to his
brain. "What excellent game, especially in a stew! What a supply for the
Nautilus! Two, three, five down! And just think how we'll devour all this meat
ourselves, while those numbskulls on board won't get a shred!"

In his uncontrollable glee, I think the Canadian might have slaughtered the
whole horde, if he hadn't been so busy talking! But he was content with a dozen
of these fascinating marsupials, which make up the first order of aplacental
mammals, as Conseil just had to tell us.

These animals were small in stature. They were a species of those "rabbit
kangaroos" that usually dwell in the hollows of trees and are tremendously fast;
but although of moderate dimensions, they at least furnish a meat that's highly
prized.

We were thoroughly satisfied with the results of our hunting. A gleeful Ned
proposed that we return the next day to this magic island, which he planned to
depopulate of its every edible quadruped. But he was reckoning without events.

By six o'clock in the evening, we were back on the beach. The skiff was
aground in its usual place. The Nautilus, looking like a long reef, emerged from
the waves two miles offshore.

Without further ado, Ned Land got down to the important business of dinner.
He came wonderfully to terms with its entire cooking. Grilling over the coals,
those cutlets from the "bari-outang" soon gave off a succulent aroma that
perfumed the air.

But I catch myself following in the Canadian's footsteps. Look at me--in
ecstasy over freshly grilled pork! Please grant me a pardon as I've already
granted one to Mr. Land, and on the same grounds!

In short, dinner was excellent. Two ringdoves rounded out this extraordinary
menu. Sago pasta, bread from the artocarpus, mangoes, half a dozen pineapples,
and the fermented liquor from certain coconuts heightened our glee. I suspect
that my two fine companions weren't quite as clearheaded as one could wish.

"What if we don't return to the Nautilus this evening?" Conseil said.


"What if we never return to it?" Ned Land added.
Just then a stone whizzed toward us, landed at our feet, and cut short the
harpooner's proposition.


CHAPTER 22


The Lightning Bolts of Captain Nemo


WITHOUT STANDING UP, we stared in the direction of the forest, my hand
stopping halfway to my mouth, Ned Land's completing its assignment.

"Stones don't fall from the sky," Conseil said, "or else they deserve to be
called meteorites."

A second well-polished stone removed a tasty ringdove leg from Conseil's
hand, giving still greater relevance to his observation.

We all three stood up, rifles to our shoulders, ready to answer any attack.

"Apes maybe?" Ned Land exclaimed.

"Nearly," Conseil replied. "Savages."

"Head for the skiff!" I said, moving toward the sea.

Indeed, it was essential to beat a retreat because some twenty natives, armed
with bows and slings, appeared barely a hundred paces off, on the outskirts of a
thicket that masked the horizon to our right.

The skiff was aground ten fathoms away from us.

The savages approached without running, but they favored us with a show of
the greatest hostility. It was raining stones and arrows.

Ned Land was unwilling to leave his provisions behind, and despite the
impending danger, he clutched his pig on one side, his kangaroos on the other,
and scampered off with respectable speed.

In two minutes we were on the strand. Loading provisions and weapons into
the skiff, pushing it to sea, and positioning its two oars were the work of an
instant. We hadn't gone two cable lengths when a hundred savages, howling and
gesticulating, entered the water up to their waists. I looked to see if their
appearance might draw some of the Nautilus's men onto the platform. But no.
Lying well out, that enormous machine still seemed completely deserted.

Twenty minutes later we boarded ship. The hatches were open. After
mooring the skiff, we reentered the Nautilus's interior.

I went below to the lounge, from which some chords were wafting. Captain
Nemo was there, leaning over the organ, deep in a musical trance.

"Captain!" I said to him.


He didn't hear me.

"Captain!" I went on, touching him with my hand.

He trembled, and turning around:

"Ah, it's you, professor!" he said to me. "Well, did you have a happy hunt?
Was your herb gathering a success?"

"Yes, captain," I replied, "but unfortunately we've brought back a horde of
bipeds whose proximity worries me."

"What sort of bipeds?"

"Savages."

"Savages!" Captain Nemo replied in an ironic tone. "You set foot on one of
the shores of this globe, professor, and you're surprised to find savages there?
Where aren't there savages? And besides, are they any worse than men
elsewhere, these people you call savages?"

"But captain--"

"Speaking for myself, sir, I've encountered them everywhere."

"Well then," I replied, "if you don't want to welcome them aboard the
Nautilus, you'd better take some precautions!"

"Easy, professor, no cause for alarm."

"But there are a large number of these natives."


"What's your count?"

"At least a hundred."

"Professor Aronnax," replied Captain Nemo, whose fingers took their places
again on the organ keys, "if every islander in Papua were to gather on that beach,
the Nautilus would still have nothing to fear from their attacks!"

The captain's fingers then ran over the instrument's keyboard, and I noticed
that he touched only its black keys, which gave his melodies a basically Scottish
color. Soon he had forgotten my presence and was lost in a reverie that I no
longer tried to dispel.

I climbed onto the platform. Night had already fallen, because in this low
latitude the sun sets quickly, without any twilight. I could see Gueboroa Island
only dimly. But numerous fires had been kindled on the beach, attesting that the
natives had no thoughts of leaving it.

For several hours I was left to myself, sometimes musing on the islanders--
but no longer fearing them because the captain's unflappable confidence had
won me over--and sometimes forgetting them to marvel at the splendors of this
tropical night. My memories took wing toward France, in the wake of those
zodiacal stars due to twinkle over it in a few hours. The moon shone in the midst


of the constellations at their zenith. I then remembered that this loyal, good-
natured satellite would return to this same place the day after tomorrow, to raise
the tide and tear the Nautilus from its coral bed. Near midnight, seeing that all
was quiet over the darkened waves as well as under the waterside trees, I
repaired to my cabin and fell into a peaceful sleep.

The night passed without mishap. No doubt the Papuans had been frightened
off by the mere sight of this monster aground in the bay, because our hatches
stayed open, offering easy access to the Nautilus's interior.

At six o'clock in the morning, January 8, I climbed onto the platform. The
moming shadows were lifting. The island was soon on view through the
dissolving mists, first its beaches, then its summits.

The islanders were still there, in greater numbers than on the day before,
perhaps 500 or 600 of them. Taking advantage of the low tide, some of them had
moved forward over the heads of coral to within two cable lengths of the
Nautilus. I could easily distinguish them. They obviously were true Papuans,
men of fine stock, athletic in build, forehead high and broad, nose large but not
flat, teeth white. Their woolly, red-tinted hair was in sharp contrast to their
bodies, which were black and glistening like those of Nubians. Beneath their
pierced, distended earlobes there dangled strings of beads made from bone.
Generally these savages were naked. I noted some women among them, dressed
from hip to knee in grass skirts held up by belts made of vegetation. Some of the
chieftains adorned their necks with crescents and with necklaces made from
beads of red and white glass. Armed with bows, arrows, and shields, nearly all of
them carried from their shoulders a sort of net, which held those polished stones
their slings hurl with such dexterity.


One of these chieftains came fairly close to the Nautilus, examining it with
care. He must have been a "mado" of high rank, because he paraded in a mat of
banana leaves that had ragged edges and was accented with bright colors.

I could easily have picked off this islander, he stood at such close range; but I
thought it best to wait for an actual show of hostility. Between Europeans and
savages, it's acceptable for Europeans to shoot back but not to attack first.

During this whole time of low tide, the islanders lurked near the Nautilus,
but they weren't boisterous. I often heard them repeat the word "assai," and from
their gestures I understood they were inviting me to go ashore, an invitation I felt
obliged to decline.

So the skiff didn't leave shipside that day, much to the displeasure of Mr.
Land who couldn't complete his provisions. The adroit Canadian spent his time


preparing the meat and flour products he had brought from Gueboroa Island. As
for the savages, they went back to shore near eleven o'clock in the morning,
when the heads of coral began to disappear under the waves of the rising tide.
But I saw their numbers swell considerably on the beach. It was likely that they
had come from neighboring islands or from the mainland of Papua proper.
However, I didn't see one local dugout canoe.

Having nothing better to do, I decided to dredge these beautiful, clear waters,
which exhibited a profusion of shells, zoophytes, and open-sea plants. Besides, it
was the last day the Nautilus would spend in these waterways, if, tomorrow, it
still floated off to the open sea as Captain Nemo had promised.

So I summoned Conseil, who brought me a small, light dragnet similar to
those used in oyster fishing.

"What about these savages?" Conseil asked me. "With all due respect to
master, they don't strike me as very wicked!"

"They're cannibals even so, my boy."

"A person can be both a cannibal and a decent man," Conseil replied, "just as
a person can be both gluttonous and honorable. The one doesn't exclude the
other."

"Fine, Conseil! And I agree that there are honorable cannibals who decently
devour their prisoners. However, I'm opposed to being devoured, even in all
decency, so I'll keep on my guard, especially since the Nautilus's commander
seems to be taking no precautions. And now let's get to work!"

For two hours our fishing proceeded energetically but without bringing up
any rarities. Our dragnet was filled with Midas abalone, harp shells, obelisk
snails, and especially the finest hammer shells I had seen to that day. We also
gathered in a few sea cucumbers, some pearl oysters, and a dozen small turtles
that we saved for the ship's pantry.

But just when I least expected it, I laid my hands on a wonder, a natural
deformity I'd have to call it, something very seldom encountered. Conseil had
just made a cast of the dragnet, and his gear had come back up loaded with a
variety of fairly ordinary seashells, when suddenly he saw me plunge my arms
swiftly into the net, pull out a shelled animal, and give a conchological yell, in
other words, the most piercing yell a human throat can produce.

"Eh? What happened to master?" Conseil asked, very startled. "Did master
get bitten?"

"No, my boy, but I'd gladly have sacrificed a finger for such a find!"

"What find?"

"This shell," I said, displaying the subject of my triumph.

"But that's simply an olive shell of the ‘tent olive’ species, genus Oliva, order


Pectinibranchia, class Gastropoda, branch Mollusca--"

"Yes, yes, Conseil! But instead of coiling from right to left, this olive shell
rolls from left to right!"

"Tt can't be!" Conseil exclaimed.

"Yes, my boy, it's a left-handed shell!"

"A left-handed shell!" Conseil repeated, his heart pounding.

"Look at its spiral!"

"Oh, master can trust me on this," Conseil said, taking the valuable shell in
trembling hands, "but never have I felt such excitement!"

And there was good reason to be excited! In fact, as naturalists have ventured
to observe, "dextrality" is a well-known law of nature. In their rotational and
orbital movements, stars and their satellites go from right to left. Man uses his
right hand more often than his left, and consequently his various instruments and
equipment (staircases, locks, watch springs, etc.) are designed to be used in a
right-to-left manner. Now then, nature has generally obeyed this law in coiling
her shells. They're right-handed with only rare exceptions, and when by chance a
Shell's spiral is left-handed, collectors will pay its weight in gold for it.

So Conseil and I were deep in the contemplation of our treasure, and I was
solemnly promising myself to enrich the Paris Museum with it, when an ill-
timed stone, hurled by one of the islanders, whizzed over and shattered the
valuable object in Conseil's hands.

I gave a yell of despair! Conseil pounced on his rifle and aimed at a savage
swinging a sling just ten meters away from him. I tried to stop him, but his shot
went off and shattered a bracelet of amulets dangling from the islander's arm.

"Conseil!" I shouted. "Conseil!"

"Eh? What? Didn't master see that this man-eater initiated the attack?"

"A shell isn't worth a human life!" I told him.

"Oh, the rascal!" Conseil exclaimed. "I'd rather he cracked my shoulder!"

Conseil was in dead earnest, but I didn't subscribe to his views. However, the
situation had changed in only a short time and we hadn't noticed. Now some
twenty dugout canoes were surrounding the Nautilus. Hollowed from tree trunks,
these dugouts were long, narrow, and well designed for speed, keeping their
balance by means of two bamboo poles that floated on the surface of the water.
They were maneuvered by skillful, half-naked paddlers, and I viewed their
advance with definite alarm.

It was obvious these Papuans had already entered into relations with
Europeans and knew their ships. But this long, iron cylinder lying in the bay,
with no masts or funnels--what were they to make of it? Nothing good, because
at first they kept it at a respectful distance. However, seeing that it stayed


motionless, they regained confidence little by little and tried to become more
familiar with it. Now then, it was precisely this familiarity that we needed to
prevent. Since our weapons made no sound when they went off, they would have
only a moderate effect on these islanders, who reputedly respect nothing but
noisy mechanisms. Without thunderclaps, lightning bolts would be much less
frightening, although the danger lies in the flash, not the noise.

Just then the dugout canoes drew nearer to the Nautilus, and a cloud of
arrows burst over us.

"Fire and brimstone, it's hailing!" Conseil said. "And poisoned hail perhaps!"

"We've got to alert Captain Nemo," I said, reentering the hatch.

I went below to the lounge. I found no one there. I ventured a knock at the
door opening into the captain's stateroom.

The word "Enter!" answered me. I did so and found Captain Nemo busy with
calculations in which there was no shortage of X and other algebraic signs.

"Am I disturbing you?" I said out of politeness.

"Correct, Professor Aronnax," the captain answered me. "But I imagine you
have pressing reasons for looking me up?"

"Very pressing. Native dugout canoes are surrounding us, and in a few
minutes we're sure to be assaulted by several hundred savages."

"Ah!" Captain Nemo put in serenely. "They've come in their dugouts?"

"Yes, sir."

"Well, sir, closing the hatches should do the trick."

"Precisely, and that's what I came to tell you--"

"Nothing easier," Captain Nemo said.

And he pressed an electric button, transmitting an order to the crew's
quarters.

"There, sir, all under control!" he told me after a few moments. "The skiff is
in place and the hatches are closed. I don't imagine you're worried that these
gentlemen will stave in walls that shells from your frigate couldn't breach?"

"No, captain, but one danger still remains."

"What's that, sir?"


"Tomorrow at about this time, we'll need to reopen the hatches to renew the
Nautilus's air."

"No argument, sir, since our craft breathes in the manner favored by
cetaceans."

"But if these Papuans are occupying the platform at that moment, I don't see
how you can prevent them from entering."


"Then, sir, you assume they'll board the ship?"

"T'm certain of it."

"Well, sir, let them come aboard. I see no reason to prevent them. Deep down
they're just poor devils, these Papuans, and I don't want my visit to Gueboroa
Island to cost the life of a single one of these unfortunate people!"

On this note I was about to withdraw; but Captain Nemo detained me and
invited me to take a seat next to him. He questioned me with interest on our
excursions ashore and on our hunting, but seemed not to understand the
Canadian's passionate craving for red meat. Then our conversation skimmed
various subjects, and without being more forthcoming, Captain Nemo proved
more affable.

Among other things, we came to talk of the Nautilus's circumstances,
aground in the same strait where Captain Dumont d'Urville had nearly
miscarried. Then, pertinent to this:

"He was one of your great seamen," the captain told me, "one of your
shrewdest navigators, that d'Urville! He was the Frenchman's Captain Cook. A
man wise but unlucky! Braving the ice banks of the South Pole, the coral of
Oceania, the cannibals of the Pacific, only to perish wretchedly in a train wreck!
If that energetic man was able to think about his life in its last seconds, imagine
what his final thoughts must have been!"

As he spoke, Captain Nemo seemed deeply moved, an emotion I felt was to
his credit.

Then, chart in hand, we returned to the deeds of the French navigator: his
voyages to circumnavigate the globe, his double attempt at the South Pole,
which led to his discovery of the Adélie Coast and the Louis-Philippe Peninsula,
finally his hydrographic surveys of the chief islands in Oceania.

"What your d'Urville did on the surface of the sea," Captain Nemo told me,
"I've done in the ocean's interior, but more easily, more completely than he.
Constantly tossed about by hurricanes, the Zealous and the new Astrolabe
couldn't compare with the Nautilus, a quiet work room truly at rest in the midst
of the waters!"

"Even so, captain," I said, "there is one major similarity between Dumont
d'Urville's sloops of war and the Nautilus."

"What's that, sir?"

"Like them, the Nautilus has run aground!"

"The Nautilus is not aground, sir," Captain Nemo replied icily. "The Nautilus
was built to rest on the ocean floor, and I don't need to undertake the arduous
labors, the maneuvers d'Urville had to attempt in order to float off his sloops of
war. The Zealous and the new Astrolabe wellnigh perished, but my Nautilus is in


no danger. Tomorrow, on the day stated and at the hour stated, the tide will
peacefully lift it off, and it will resume its navigating through the seas."

"Captain," I said, "I don't doubt--"

"Tomorrow," Captain Nemo added, standing up, "tomorrow at 2:40 in the
afternoon, the Nautilus will float off and exit the Torres Strait undamaged."

Pronouncing these words in an extremely sharp tone, Captain Nemo gave me
a curt bow. This was my dismissal, and I reentered my stateroom.

There I found Conseil, who wanted to know the upshot of my interview with
the captain.

"My boy," I replied, "when I expressed the belief that these Papuan natives
were a threat to his Nautilus, the captain answered me with great irony. So I've
just one thing to say to you: have faith in him and sleep in peace."

"Master has no need for my services?"

"No, my friend. What's Ned Land up to?"

"Begging master's indulgence," Conseil replied, "but our friend Ned is
concocting a kangaroo pie that will be the eighth wonder!"

I was left to myself; I went to bed but slept pretty poorly. I kept hearing
noises from the savages, who were stamping on the platform and letting out
deafening yells. The night passed in this way, without the crew ever emerging
from their usual inertia. They were no more disturbed by the presence of these
man-eaters than soldiers in an armored fortress are troubled by ants running over
the armor plate.

I got up at six o'clock in the morning. The hatches weren't open. So the air
inside hadn't been renewed; but the air tanks were kept full for any eventuality
and would function appropriately to shoot a few cubic meters of oxygen into the
Nautilus's thin atmosphere.

I worked in my stateroom until noon without seeing Captain Nemo even for
an instant. Nobody on board seemed to be making any preparations for
departure.

I still waited for a while, then I made my way to the main lounge. Its
timepiece marked 2:30. In ten minutes the tide would reach its maximum
elevation, and if Captain Nemo hadn't made a rash promise, the Nautilus would
immediately break free. If not, many months might pass before it could leave its
coral bed.

But some preliminary vibrations could soon be felt over the boat's hull. I
heard its plating grind against the limestone roughness of that coral base.

At 2:35 Captain Nemo appeared in the lounge.

"We're about to depart," he said.

"Ah!" T put in.


"T've given orders to open the hatches."


"What about the Papuans?"

"What about them?" Captain Nemo replied, with a light shrug of his
shoulders.

"Won't they come inside the Nautilus?"

"How will they manage that?"

"By jumping down the hatches you're about to open."

"Professor Aronnax," Captain Nemo replied serenely, "the Nautilus's hatches
aren't to be entered in that fashion even when they're open."

I gaped at the captain.

"You don't understand?" he said to me.

"Not in the least."

"Well, come along and you'll see!"

I headed to the central companionway. There, very puzzled, Ned Land and
Conseil watched the crewmen opening the hatches, while a frightful clamor and
furious shouts resounded outside.

The hatch lids fell back onto the outer plating. Twenty horrible faces
appeared. But when the first islander laid hands on the companionway railing, he
was flung backward by some invisible power, lord knows what! He ran off,
howling in terror and wildly prancing around.

Ten of his companions followed him. All ten met the same fate.

Conseil was in ecstasy. Carried away by his violent instincts, Ned Land
leaped up the companionway. But as soon as his hands seized the railing, he was
thrown backward in his turn.

"Damnation!" he exclaimed. "I've been struck by a lightning bolt!"

These words explained everything to me. It wasn't just a railing that led to
the platform, it was a metal cable fully charged with the ship's electricity.
Anyone who touched it got a fearsome shock-- and such a shock would have
been fatal if Captain Nemo had thrown the full current from his equipment into
this conducting cable! It could honestly be said that he had stretched between
himself and his assailants a network of electricity no one could clear with
impunity.

Meanwhile, crazed with terror, the unhinged Papuans beat a retreat. As for
us, half laughing, we massaged and comforted poor Ned Land, who was
swearing like one possessed.

But just then, lifted off by the tide's final undulations, the Nautilus left its
coral bed at exactly that fortieth minute pinpointed by the captain. Its propeller


churned the waves with lazy majesty. Gathering speed little by little, the ship
navigated on the surface of the ocean, and safe and sound, it left behind the
dangerous narrows of the Torres Strait.


CHAPTER 23


"Aegri Somnia"*

*Latin: "troubled dreams." Ed.

THE FOLLOWING DAY, January 10, the Nautilus resumed its travels in
midwater but at a remarkable speed that I estimated to be at least thirty-five
miles per hour. The propeller was going so fast I could neither follow nor count
its revolutions.

I thought about how this marvelous electric force not only gave motion, heat,
and light to the Nautilus but even protected it against outside attack,
transforming it into a sacred ark no profane hand could touch without being
blasted; my wonderment was boundless, and it went from the submersible itself
to the engineer who had created it.

We were traveling due west and on January 11 we doubled Cape Wessel,
located in longitude 135 degrees and latitude 10 degrees north, the western tip of
the Gulf of Carpentaria. Reefs were still numerous but more widely scattered
and were fixed on the chart with the greatest accuracy. The Nautilus easily
avoided the Money breakers to port and the Victoria reefs to starboard,
positioned at longitude 130 degrees on the tenth parallel, which we went along
rigorously.

On January 13, arriving in the Timor Sea, Captain Nemo raised the island of
that name at longitude 122 degrees. This island, whose surface area measures
1,625 square leagues, is governed by rajahs. These aristocrats deem themselves
the sons of crocodiles, in other words, descendants with the most exalted origins
to which a human being can lay claim. Accordingly, their scaly ancestors infest
the island's rivers and are the subjects of special veneration. They are sheltered,
nurtured, flattered, pampered, and offered a ritual diet of nubile maidens; and
woe to the foreigner who lifts a finger against these sacred saurians.

But the Nautilus wanted nothing to do with these nasty animals. Timor Island
was visible for barely an instant at noon while the chief officer determined his
position. I also caught only a glimpse of little Roti Island, part of this same
group, whose women have a well-established reputation for beauty in the
Malaysian marketplace.

After our position fix, the Nautilus's latitude bearings were modulated to the
southwest. Our prow pointed to the Indian Ocean. Where would Captain Nemo's
fancies take us? Would he head up to the shores of Asia? Would he pull nearer to
the beaches of Europe? Unlikely choices for a man who avoided populated


areas! So would he go down south? Would he double the Cape of Good Hope,
then Cape Horn, and push on to the Antarctic pole? Finally, would he return to
the seas of the Pacific, where his Nautilus could navigate freely and easily? Time
would tell.

After cruising along the Cartier, Hibernia, Seringapatam, and Scott reefs, the
solid element's last exertions against the liquid element, we were beyond all
sight of shore by January 14. The Nautilus slowed down in an odd manner, and
very unpredictable in its ways, it sometimes swam in the midst of the waters,
sometimes drifted on their surface.

During this phase of our voyage, Captain Nemo conducted interesting
experiments on the different temperatures in various strata of the sea. Under
ordinary conditions, such readings are obtained using some pretty complicated
instruments whose findings are dubious to say the least, whether they're
thermometric sounding lines, whose glass often shatters under the water's
pressure, or those devices based on the varying resistance of metals to electric
currents. The results so obtained can't be adequately double-checked. By
contrast, Captain Nemo would seek the sea's temperature by going himself into
its depths, and when he placed his thermometer in contact with the various layers
of liquid, he found the sought-for degree immediately and with certainty.

And so, by loading up its ballast tanks, or by sinking obliquely with its
slanting fins, the Nautilus successively reached depths of 3,000, 4,000, 5,000,
7,000, 9,000, and 10,000 meters, and the ultimate conclusion from these
experiments was that, in all latitudes, the sea had a permanent temperature of 4.5
degrees centigrade at a depth of 1,000 meters.

I watched these experiments with the most intense fascination. Captain
Nemo brought a real passion to them. I often wondered why he took these
observations. Were they for the benefit of his fellow man? It was unlikely,
because sooner or later his work would perish with him in some unknown sea!
Unless he intended the results of his experiments for me. But that meant this
strange voyage of mine would come to an end, and no such end was in sight.

Be that as it may, Captain Nemo also introduced me to the different data he
had obtained on the relative densities of the water in our globe's chief seas. From
this news I derived some personal enlightenment having nothing to do with
science.

It happened the morning of January 15. The captain, with whom I was
strolling on the platform, asked me if I knew how salt water differs in density
from sea to sea. I said no, adding that there was a lack of rigorous scientific
observations on this subject.

"T've taken such observations," he told me, "and I can vouch for their


reliability."

"Fine," I replied, "but the Nautilus lives in a separate world, and the secrets
of its scientists don't make their way ashore."

"You're right, professor," he told me after a few moments of silence. "This is
a separate world. It's as alien to the earth as the planets accompanying our globe
around the sun, and we'll never become familiar with the work of scientists on
Saturn or Jupiter. But since fate has linked our two lives, I can reveal the results
of my observations to you."

"T'm all attention, captain."


"You're aware, professor, that salt water is denser than fresh water, but this
density isn't uniform. In essence, if I represent the density of fresh water by
1.000, then I find 1.028 for the waters of the Atlantic, 1.026 for the waters of the
Pacific, 1.030 for the waters of the Mediterranean--"

Aha, I thought, so he ventures into the Mediterranean?

"--1.018 for the waters of the Ionian Sea, and 1.029 for the waters of the
Adriatic."

Assuredly, the Nautilus didn't avoid the heavily traveled seas of Europe, and
from this insight I concluded that the ship would take us back--perhaps very
soon--to more civilized shores. I expected Ned Land to greet this news with
unfeigned satisfaction.

For several days our work hours were spent in all sorts of experiments, on
the degree of salinity in waters of different depths, or on their electric properties,
coloration, and transparency, and in every instance Captain Nemo displayed an
ingenuity equaled only by his graciousness toward me. Then I saw no more of
him for some days and again lived on board in seclusion.

On January 16 the Nautilus seemed to have fallen asleep just a few meters
beneath the surface of the water. Its electric equipment had been turned off, and
the motionless propeller let it ride with the waves. I assumed that the crew were
busy with interior repairs, required by the engine's strenuous mechanical action.

My companions and I then witnessed an unusual sight. The panels in the
lounge were open, and since the Nautilus's beacon was off, a hazy darkness
reigned in the midst of the waters. Covered with heavy clouds, the stormy sky
gave only the faintest light to the ocean's upper strata.

I was observing the state of the sea under these conditions, and even the
largest fish were nothing more than ill-defined shadows, when the Nautilus was
suddenly transferred into broad daylight. At first I thought the beacon had gone
back on and was casting its electric light into the liquid mass. I was mistaken,
and after a hasty examination I discovered my error.

The Nautilus had drifted into the midst of some phosphorescent strata,
which, in this darkness, came off as positively dazzling. This effect was caused
by myriads of tiny, luminous animals whose brightness increased when they
glided over the metal hull of our submersible. In the midst of these luminous
sheets of water, I then glimpsed flashes of light, like those seen inside a blazing
furnace from streams of molten lead or from masses of metal brought to a white
heat--flashes so intense that certain areas of the light became shadows by
comparison, in a fiery setting from which every shadow should seemingly have
been banished. No, this was no longer the calm emission of our usual lighting!
This light throbbed with unprecedented vigor and activity! You sensed that it


was alive!

In essence, it was a cluster of countless open-sea infusoria, of noctiluca an
eighth of an inch wide, actual globules of transparent jelly equipped with a
threadlike tentacle, up to 25,000 of which have been counted in thirty cubic
centimeters of water. And the power of their light was increased by those
glimmers unique to medusas, starfish, common jellyfish, angel-wing clams, and
other phosphorescent zoophytes, which were saturated with grease from organic
matter decomposed by the sea, and perhaps with mucus secreted by fish.

For several hours the Nautilus drifted in this brilliant tide, and our
wonderment grew when we saw huge marine animals cavorting in it, like the
fire-dwelling salamanders of myth. In the midst of these flames that didn't burn,
I could see swift, elegant porpoises, the tireless pranksters of the seas, and
sailfish three meters long, those shrewd heralds of hurricanes, whose fearsome
broadswords sometimes banged against the lounge window. Then smaller fish
appeared: miscellaneous triggerfish, leather jacks, unicornfish, and a hundred
others that left stripes on this luminous atmosphere in their course.

Some magic lay behind this dazzling sight! Perhaps some atmospheric
condition had intensified this phenomenon? Perhaps a storm had been unleashed
on the surface of the waves? But only a few meters down, the Nautilus felt no
tempest's fury, and the ship rocked peacefully in the midst of the calm waters.

And so it went, some new wonder constantly delighting us. Conseil observed
and classified his zoophytes, articulates, mollusks, and fish. The days passed
quickly, and I no longer kept track of them. Ned, as usual, kept looking for
changes of pace from our standard fare. Like actual snails, we were at home in
our shell, and I can vouch that it's easy to turn into a full-fledged snail.

So this way of living began to seem simple and natural to us, and we no
longer envisioned a different lifestyle on the surface of the planet earth, when
something happened to remind us of our strange circumstances.

On January 18 the Nautilus lay in longitude 105 degrees and latitude 15
degrees south. The weather was threatening, the sea rough and billowy. The
wind was blowing a strong gust from the east. The barometer, which had been
falling for some days, forecast an approaching struggle of the elements.

I had climbed onto the platform just as the chief officer was taking his
readings of hour angles. Out of habit I waited for him to pronounce his daily
phrase. But that day it was replaced by a different phrase, just as
incomprehensible. Almost at once I saw Captain Nemo appear, lift his spyglass,
and inspect the horizon.

For some minutes the captain stood motionless, rooted to the spot contained
within the field of his lens. Then he lowered his spyglass and exchanged about


ten words with his chief officer. The latter seemed to be in the grip of an
excitement he tried in vain to control. More in command of himself, Captain
Nemo remained cool. Furthermore, he seemed to be raising certain objections
that his chief officer kept answering with flat assurances. At least that's what I
gathered from their differences in tone and gesture.

As for me, I stared industriously in the direction under observation but
without spotting a thing. Sky and water merged into a perfectly clean horizon
line.

Meanwhile Captain Nemo strolled from one end of the platform to the other,
not glancing at me, perhaps not even seeing me. His step was firm but less
regular than usual. Sometimes he would stop, cross his arms over his chest, and
observe the sea. What could he be looking for over that immense expanse? By
then the Nautilus lay hundreds of miles from the nearest coast!

The chief officer kept lifting his spyglass and stubbornly examining the
horizon, walking up and down, stamping his foot, in his nervous agitation a
sharp contrast to his superior.

But this mystery would inevitably be cleared up, and soon, because Captain
Nemo gave orders to increase speed; at once the engine stepped up its drive
power, setting the propeller in swifter rotation.

Just then the chief officer drew the captain's attention anew. The latter
interrupted his strolling and aimed his spyglass at the point indicated. He
observed it a good while. As for me, deeply puzzled, I went below to the lounge
and brought back an excellent long-range telescope I habitually used. Leaning
my elbows on the beacon housing, which jutted from the stern of the platform, I
got set to scour that whole stretch of sky and sea.

But no sooner had I peered into the eyepiece than the instrument was
snatched from my hands.

I spun around. Captain Nemo was standing before me, but I almost didn't
recognize him. His facial features were transfigured. Gleaming with dark fire,
his eyes had shrunk beneath his frowning brow. His teeth were half bared. His
rigid body, clenched fists, and head drawn between his shoulders, all attested to a
fierce hate breathing from every pore. He didn't move. My spyglass fell from his
hand and rolled at his feet.

Had I accidentally caused these symptoms of anger? Did _ this
incomprehensible individual think I had detected some secret forbidden to guests
on the Nautilus?

No! I wasn't the subject of his hate because he wasn't even looking at me; his
eyes stayed stubbornly focused on that inscrutable point of the horizon.

Finally Captain Nemo regained his self-control. His facial appearance, so


profoundly changed, now resumed its usual calm. He addressed a few words to
his chief officer in their strange language, then he turned to me:

"Professor Aronnax," he told me in a tone of some urgency, "I ask that you
now honor one of the binding agreements between us."

"Which one, captain?"

"You and your companions must be placed in confinement until I see fit to
set you free."

"You're in command," I answered, gaping at him. "But may I address a
question to you?"

"You may not, sir.”

After that, I stopped objecting and started obeying, since resistance was
useless.

I went below to the cabin occupied by Ned Land and Conseil, and I informed
them of the captain's decision. I'll let the reader decide how this news was
received by the Canadian. In any case, there was no time for explanations. Four
crewmen were waiting at the door, and they led us to the cell where we had spent
our first night aboard the Nautilus.

Ned Land tried to lodge a complaint, but the only answer he got was a door
shut in his face.

"Will master tell me what this means?" Conseil asked me.

I told my companions what had happened. They were as astonished as I was,
but no wiser.

Then I sank into deep speculation, and Captain Nemo's strange facial seizure
kept haunting me. I was incapable of connecting two ideas in logical order, and I
had strayed into the most absurd hypotheses, when I was snapped out of my
mental struggles by these words from Ned Land:

"Well, look here! Lunch is served!"

Indeed, the table had been laid. Apparently Captain Nemo had given this
order at the same time he commanded the Nautilus to pick up speed.

"Will master allow me to make him a recommendation?" Conseil asked me.

"Yes, my boy," I replied.

"Well, master needs to eat his lunch! It's prudent, because we have no idea
what the future holds."

"You're right, Conseil."

"Unfortunately," Ned Land said, "they've only given us the standard menu."

"Ned my friend," Conseil answered, "what would you say if they'd given us
no lunch at all?"

This dose of sanity cut the harpooner's complaints clean off.

We sat down at the table. Our meal proceeded pretty much in silence. I ate


very little. Conseil, everlastingly prudent, "forcefed" himself; and despite the
menu, Ned Land didn't waste a bite. Then, lunch over, each of us propped
himself in a comer.

Just then the luminous globe lighting our cell went out, leaving us in
profound darkness. Ned Land soon dozed off, and to my astonishment, Conseil
also fell into a heavy slumber. I was wondering what could have caused this
urgent need for sleep, when I felt a dense torpor saturate my brain. I tried to keep
my eyes open, but they closed in spite of me. I was in the grip of anguished
hallucinations. Obviously some sleep-inducing substance had been laced into the
food we'd just eaten! So imprisonment wasn't enough to conceal Captain Nemo's
plans from us-- sleep was needed as well!

Then I heard the hatches close. The sea's undulations, which had been
creating a gentle rocking motion, now ceased. Had the Nautilus left the surface
of the ocean? Was it reentering the motionless strata deep in the sea?

I tried to fight off this drowsiness. It was impossible. My breathing grew
weaker. I felt a mortal chill freeze my dull, nearly paralyzed limbs. Like little
domes of lead, my lids fell over my eyes. I couldn't raise them. A morbid sleep,
full of hallucinations, seized my whole being. Then the visions disappeared and
left me in utter oblivion.


CHAPTER 24


The Coral Realm


THE NEXT DAY I woke up with my head unusually clear. Much to my
surprise, I was in my stateroom. No doubt my companions had been put back in
their cabin without noticing it any more than I had. Like me, they would have no
idea what took place during the night, and to unravel this mystery I could count
only on some future happenstance.

I then considered leaving my stateroom. Was I free or still a prisoner?
Perfectly free. I opened my door, headed down the gangways, and climbed the
central companionway. Hatches that had been closed the day before were now
open. I arrived on the platform.

Ned Land and Conseil were there waiting for me. I questioned them. They
knew nothing. Lost in a heavy sleep of which they had no memory, they were
quite startled to be back in their cabin.

As for the Nautilus, it seemed as tranquil and mysterious as ever. It was
cruising on the surface of the waves at a moderate speed. Nothing seemed to
have changed on board.

Ned Land observed the sea with his penetrating eyes. It was deserted. The
Canadian sighted nothing new on the horizon, neither sail nor shore. A breeze
was blowing noisily from the west, and disheveled by the wind, long billows
made the submersible roll very noticeably.

After renewing its air, the Nautilus stayed at an average depth of fifteen
meters, enabling it to return quickly to the surface of the waves. And, contrary to
custom, it executed such a maneuver several times during that day of January 19.
The chief officer would then climb onto the platform, and his usual phrase would
ring through the ship's interior.

As for Captain Nemo, he didn't appear. Of the other men on board, I saw
only my emotionless steward, who served me with his usual mute efficiency.

Near two o'clock I was busy organizing my notes in the lounge, when the
captain opened the door and appeared. I bowed to him. He gave me an almost
imperceptible bow in return, without saying a word to me. I resumed my work,


hoping he might give me some explanation of the previous afternoon's events.
He did nothing of the sort. I stared at him. His face looked exhausted; his
reddened eyes hadn't been refreshed by sleep; his facial features expressed
profound sadness, real chagrin. He walked up and down, sat and stood, picked
up a book at random, discarded it immediately, consulted his instruments without
taking his customary notes, and seemed unable to rest easy for an instant.

Finally he came over to me and said:

"Are you a physician, Professor Aronnax?"

This inquiry was so unexpected that I stared at him a good while without
replying.

"Are you a physician?" he repeated. "Several of your scientific colleagues
took their degrees in medicine, such as Gratiolet, Moquin-Tandon, and others."

"That's right," I said, "I am a doctor, I used to be on call at the hospitals. I
was in practice for several years before joining the museum."

"Excellent, sir."

My reply obviously pleased Captain Nemo. But not knowing what he was
driving at, I waited for further questions, ready to reply as circumstances
dictated.

"Professor Aronnax," the captain said to me, “would you consent to give
your medical attentions to one of my men?"

"Someone is sick?"

"Yes."

"I'm ready to go with you."

"Come."

I admit that my heart was pounding. Lord knows why, but I saw a definite
connection between this sick crewman and yesterday's happenings, and the
mystery of those events concerned me at least as much as the man's sickness.

Captain Nemo led me to the Nautilus's stern and invited me into a cabin
located next to the sailors' quarters.

On a bed there lay a man some forty years old, with strongly molded
features, the very image of an Anglo-Saxon.

I bent over him. Not only was he sick, he was wounded. Swathed in blood-
soaked linen, his head was resting on a folded pillow. I undid the linen bandages,
while the wounded man gazed with great staring eyes and let me proceed
without making a single complaint.

It was a horrible wound. The cranium had been smashed open by some blunt
instrument, leaving the naked brains exposed, and the cerebral matter had
suffered deep abrasions. Blood clots had formed in this dissolving mass, taking
on the color of wine dregs. Both contusion and concussion of the brain had


occurred. The sick man's breathing was labored, and muscle spasms quivered in
his face. Cerebral inflammation was complete and had brought on a paralysis of
movement and sensation.

I took the wounded man's pulse. It was intermittent. The body's extremities
were already growing cold, and I saw that death was approaching without any
possibility of my holding it in check. After dressing the poor man's wound, I
redid the linen bandages around his head, and I turned to Captain Nemo.

"How did he get this wound?" I asked him.

"That's not important," the captain replied evasively. "The Nautilus suffered
a collision that cracked one of the engine levers, and it struck this man. My chief
officer was standing beside him. This man leaped forward to intercept the blow.
A brother lays down his life for his brother, a friend for his friend, what could be
simpler? That's the law for everyone on board the Nautilus. But what's your
diagnosis of his condition?"

I hesitated to speak my mind.

"You may talk freely," the captain told me. "This man doesn't understand
French."

I took a last look at the wounded man, then I replied:

"This man will be dead in two hours."

"Nothing can save him?"

"Nothing."

Captain Nemo clenched his fists, and tears slid from his eyes, which I had
thought incapable of weeping.

For a few moments more I observed the dying man, whose life was ebbing
little by little. He grew still more pale under the electric light that bathed his
deathbed. I looked at his intelligent head, furrowed with premature wrinkles that
misfortune, perhaps misery, had etched long before. I was hoping to detect the
secret of his life in the last words that might escape from his lips!

"You may go, Professor Aronnax," Captain Nemo told me.

I left the captain in the dying man's cabin and I repaired to my stateroom,
very moved by this scene. All day long I was aquiver with gruesome
forebodings. That night I slept poorly, and between my fitful dreams, I thought I
heard a distant moaning, like a funeral dirge. Was it a prayer for the dead,
murmured in that language I couldn't understand?

The next morning I climbed on deck. Captain Nemo was already there. As
soon as he saw me, he came over.

"Professor," he said to me, "would it be convenient for you to make an
underwater excursion today?"

"With my companions?" I asked.


"If they're agreeable."

"We're yours to command, captain."

"Then kindly put on your diving suits."

As for the dead or dying man, he hadn't come into the picture. I rejoined Ned
Land and Conseil. I informed them of Captain Nemo's proposition. Conseil was
eager to accept, and this time the Canadian proved perfectly amenable to going
with us.

It was eight o'clock in the morning. By 8:30 we were suited up for this new
stroll and equipped with our two devices for lighting and breathing. The double
door opened, and accompanied by Captain Nemo with a dozen crewmen
following, we set foot on the firm seafloor where the Nautilus was resting, ten
meters down.

A gentle slope gravitated to an uneven bottom whose depth was about fifteen
fathoms. This bottom was completely different from the one I had visited during
my first excursion under the waters of the Pacific Ocean. Here I saw no fine-
grained sand, no underwater prairies, not one open-sea forest. I immediately
recognized the wondrous region in which Captain Nemo did the honors that day.
It was the coral realm.

In the zoophyte branch, class Alcyonaria, one finds the order Gorgonaria,
which contains three groups: sea fans, isidian polyps, and coral polyps. It's in
this last that precious coral belongs, an unusual substance that, at different times,
has been classified in the mineral, vegetable, and animal kingdoms. Medicine to
the ancients, jewelry to the moderns, it wasn't decisively placed in the animal
kingdom until 1694, by Peysonnel of Marseilles.

A coral is a unit of tiny animals assembled over a polypary that's brittle and
stony in nature. These polyps have a unique generating mechanism that
reproduces them via the budding process, and they have an individual existence
while also participating in a communal life. Hence they embody a sort of natural
socialism. I was familiar with the latest research on this bizarre zoophyte--
which turns to stone while taking on a tree form, as some naturalists have very
aptly observed--and nothing could have been more fascinating to me than to visit
one of these petrified forests that nature has planted on the bottom of the sea.

We turned on our Ruhmkorff devices and went along a coral shoal in the
process of forming, which, given time, will someday close off this whole part of
the Indian Ocean. Our path was bordered by hopelessly tangled bushes, formed
from snarls of shrubs all covered with little star-shaped, white-streaked flowers.
Only, contrary to plants on shore, these tree forms become attached to rocks on
the seafloor by heading from top to bottom.

Our lights produced a thousand delightful effects while playing over these


brightly colored boughs. I fancied I saw these cylindrical, membrane-filled tubes
trembling beneath the water's undulations. I was tempted to gather their fresh
petals, which were adorned with delicate tentacles, some newly in bloom, others
barely opened, while nimble fish with fluttering fins brushed past them like
flocks of birds. But if my hands came near the moving flowers of these sensitive,
lively creatures, an alarm would instantly sound throughout the colony. The
white petals retracted into their red sheaths, the flowers vanished before my
eyes, and the bush changed into a chunk of stony nipples.

Sheer chance had placed me in the presence of the most valuable specimens
of this zoophyte. This coral was the equal of those fished up from the
Mediterranean off the Barbary Coast or the shores of France and Italy. With its
bright colors, it lived up to those poetic names of blood flower and blood foam
that the industry confers on its finest exhibits. Coral sells for as much as 500
francs per kilogram, and in this locality the liquid strata hid enough to make the
fortunes of a whole host of coral fishermen. This valuable substance often
merges with other polyparies, forming compact, hopelessly tangled units known
as "macciota," and I noted some wonderful pink samples of this coral.

But as the bushes shrank, the tree forms magnified. Actual petrified thickets
and long alcoves from some fantastic school of architecture kept opening up
before our steps. Captain Nemo entered beneath a dark gallery whose gentle
slope took us to a depth of 100 meters. The light from our glass coils produced
magical effects at times, lingering on the wrinkled roughness of some natural
arch, or some overhang suspended like a chandelier, which our lamps flecked
with fiery sparks. Amid these shrubs of precious coral, I observed other polyps
no less unusual: melita coral, rainbow coral with jointed outgrowths, then a few
tufts of genus Corallina, some green and others red, actually a type of seaweed
encrusted with limestone salts, which, after long disputes, naturalists have finally
placed in the vegetable kingdom. But as one intellectual has remarked, "Here,
perhaps, is the actual point where life rises humbly out of slumbering stone, but
without breaking away from its crude starting point."

Finally, after two hours of walking, we reached a depth of about 300 meters,
in other words, the lowermost limit at which coral can begin to form. But here it
was no longer some isolated bush or a modest grove of low timber. It was an
immense forest, huge mineral vegetation, enormous petrified trees linked by
garlands of elegant hydras from the genus Plumularia, those tropical creepers of
the sea, all decked out in shades and gleams. We passed freely under their lofty
boughs, lost up in the shadows of the waves, while at our feet organ-pipe coral,
stony coral, star coral, fungus coral, and sea anemone from the genus
Caryophylia formed a carpet of flowers all strewn with dazzling gems.


What an indescribable sight! Oh, if only we could share our feelings! Why
were we imprisoned behind these masks of metal and glass! Why were we
forbidden to talk with each other! At least let us lead the lives of the fish that
populate this liquid element, or better yet, the lives of amphibians, which can
spend long hours either at sea or on shore, traveling through their double domain
as their whims dictate!

Meanwhile Captain Nemo had called a halt. My companions and I stopped
walking, and turning around, I saw the crewmen form a semicircle around their
leader. Looking with greater care, I observed that four of them were carrying on
their shoulders an object that was oblong in shape.

At this locality we stood in the center of a huge clearing surrounded by the
tall tree forms of this underwater forest. Our lamps cast a sort of brilliant twilight
over the area, making inordinately long shadows on the seafloor. Past the
boundaries of the clearing, the darkness deepened again, relieved only by little
sparkles given off by the sharp crests of coral.

Ned Land and Conseil stood next to me. We stared, and it dawned on me that
I was about to witness a strange scene. Observing the seafloor, I saw that it
swelled at certain points from low bulges that were encrusted with limestone
deposits and arranged with a symmetry that betrayed the hand of man.

In the middle of the clearing, on a pedestal of roughly piled rocks, there
stood a cross of coral, extending long arms you would have thought were made
of petrified blood.

At a signal from Captain Nemo, one of his men stepped forward and, a few
feet from this cross, detached a mattock from his belt and began to dig a hole.

I finally understood! This clearing was a cemetery, this hole a grave, that
oblong object the body of the man who must have died during the night! Captain
Nemo and his men had come to bury their companion in this communal resting
place on the inaccessible ocean floor!

No! My mind was reeling as never before! Never had ideas of such impact
raced through my brain! I didn't want to see what my eyes saw!

Meanwhile the grave digging went slowly. Fish fled here and there as their
retreat was disturbed. I heard the pick ringing on the limestone soil, its iron tip
sometimes giving off sparks when it hit a stray piece of flint on the sea bottom.
The hole grew longer, wider, and soon was deep enough to receive the body.

Then the pallbearers approached. Wrapped in white fabric made from
filaments of the fan mussel, the body was lowered into its watery grave. Captain
Nemo, arms crossed over his chest, knelt in a posture of prayer, as did all the
friends of him who had loved them. . . . My two companions and I bowed
reverently.


The grave was then covered over with the rubble dug from the seafloor, and
it formed a low mound.

When this was done, Captain Nemo and his men stood up; then they all
approached the grave, sank again on bended knee, and extended their hands in a
sign of final farewell... .

Then the funeral party went back up the path to the Nautilus, returning
beneath the arches of the forest, through the thickets, along the coral bushes,
going steadily higher.

Finally the ship's rays appeared. Their luminous trail guided us to the
Nautilus. By one o'clock we had returned.

After changing clothes, I climbed onto the platform, and in the grip of
dreadfully obsessive thoughts, I sat next to the beacon.

Captain Nemo rejoined me. I stood up and said to him:

"So, as I predicted, that man died during the night?"

"Yes, Professor Aronnax," Captain Nemo replied.

"And now he rests beside his companions in that coral cemetery?"

"Yes, forgotten by the world but not by us! We dig the graves, then entrust
the polyps with sealing away our dead for eternity!"

And with a sudden gesture, the captain hid his face in his clenched fists,
vainly trying to hold back a sob. Then he added:

"There lies our peaceful cemetery, hundreds of feet beneath the surface of the
waves!"

"At least, captain, your dead can sleep serenely there, out of the reach of
sharks!"

"Yes, sir," Captain Nemo replied solemnly, "of sharks and men!"


END OF THE FIRST PART


Author's Note: About 106 meters. An English foot is only 30.4 centimeters.
German: "Bulletin." Ed. Author's Note: A pier is a type of wharf expressly set
aside for an individual vessel. Author's Note: Tenders are small steamboats that
assist the big liners. Author's Note: A Bowie knife is a wide-bladed dagger that
Americans are forever carrying around. Author's Note: A steward is a waiter on
board a steamer. Latin: nemo means "no one." Ed. Latin: "in a class by itself."
Ed. **Author's Note: And sure enough, there's now talk of such a discovery, in


which a new set of levers generates considerable power. Did its inventor meet up
with Captain Nemo? Author's Note: "Ladyfingers" are small, thin, white clouds
with ragged edges. Latin: a spigot "just for that purpose." Ed. *Latin: "troubled
dreams." Ed. 2 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas


8 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas


A Runaway Reef - 9


A Runaway Reef - 11


16 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas


The Pros and Cons - 17


18 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas


As Master Wishes - 19


22 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas


As Master Wishes - 23


28 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas


Ned Land - 27


30 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas


At Random! - 29


- Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas


At Random! - 31


32 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas


At Random! - 35


At Random! - 37


42 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas


At Full Steam - 43


46 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas


At Full Steam - 47


52 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas


A Whale of Unknown Species - 53


54 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas
"Mobilis in Mobili" - 54


"Mobilis in Mobili" - 53


54 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas


60 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas


"Mobilis in Mobili" - 61


62 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas
The Tantrums of Ned Land - 62


The Tantrums of Ned Land - 61


64 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas


70 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas


The Tantrums of Ned Land - 69


76 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas


The Man of the Waters : 77


78 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas


80 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas


86 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas


The Nautilus - 87


94 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas


Everything through Electricity - 93


96 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas
Some Figures - 96


Some Figures - 95


102 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas


Some Figures - 101


Some Figures - 103


112 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas


The Black Current - 111


The Black Current -


114 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas


An Invitation in Writing - 113


Strolling the Plains - 121


122 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas


Strolling the Plains - 123


124 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas
Strolling the Plains - 124


Strolling the Plains - 125


126 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas


130 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas


An Underwater Forest - 129


94 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas 94 - Twenty Thousand
Leagues Under the Seas


131 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas


140 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas


Four Thousand Leagues Under the Pacific - 139


148 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas


Vanikoro : 147


- Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas
The Torres Strait -


The Torres Strait - 149


156 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas


The Torres Strait - 155


158 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas


Some Days Ashore - 158


Some Days Ashore - 157


168 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas


Some Days Ashore - 167


170 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas
The Lightning Bolts of Captain Nemo - 170


The Lightning Bolts of Captain Nemo - 169


180 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas


The Lightning Bolts of Captain Nemo - 179


182 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas


184 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas


"Aegri Somnia" : 131


186 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas


190 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas


"Aegri Somnia" - 189


192 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas


The Coral Realm - 193


194 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas


198 - Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas


The Coral Realm - 197


SECOND PART


CHAPTER 1


The Indian Ocean


NOW WE BEGIN the second part of this voyage under the seas. The first
ended in that moving scene at the coral cemetery, which left a profound
impression on my mind. And so Captain Nemo would live out his life entirely in
the heart of this immense sea, and even his grave lay ready in its impenetrable
depths. There the last sleep of the Nautilus's occupants, friends bound together in
death as in life, would be disturbed by no monster of the deep! "No man either!"
the captain had added.

Always that same fierce, implacable defiance of human society!

As for me, I was no longer content with the hypotheses that satisfied Conseil.
That fine lad persisted in seeing the Nautilus's commander as merely one of
those unappreciated scientists who repay humanity's indifference with contempt.
For Conseil, the captain was still a misunderstood genius who, tired of the
world's deceptions, had been driven to take refuge in this inaccessible
environment where he was free to follow his instincts. But to my mind, this
hypothesis explained only one side of Captain Nemo.

In fact, the mystery of that last afternoon when we were locked in prison and
put to sleep, the captain's violent precaution of snatching from my grasp a
spyglass poised to scour the horizon, and the fatal wound given that man during
some unexplained collision suffered by the Nautilus, all led me down a plain
trail. No! Captain Nemo wasn't content simply to avoid humanity! His fearsome
submersible served not only his quest for freedom, but also, perhaps, it was used
in lord-knows-what schemes of dreadful revenge.

Right now, nothing is clear to me, I still glimpse only glimmers in the dark,
and I must limit my pen, as it were, to taking dictation from events.

But nothing binds us to Captain Nemo. He believes that escaping from the
Nautilus is impossible. We are not even constrained by our word of honor. No
promises fetter us. We're simply captives, prisoners masquerading under the
name "guests" for the sake of everyday courtesy. Even so, Ned Land hasn't given
up all hope of recovering his freedom. He's sure to take advantage of the first
chance that comes his way. No doubt I will do likewise. And yet I will feel some
regret at making off with the Nautilus's secrets, so generously unveiled for us by
Captain Nemo! Because, ultimately, should we detest or admire this man? Is he
the persecutor or the persecuted? And in all honesty, before I leave him forever, I


want to finish this underwater tour of the world, whose first stages have been so
magnificent. I want to observe the full series of these wonders gathered under
the seas of our globe. I want to see what no man has seen yet, even if I must pay
for this insatiable curiosity with my life! What are my discoveries to date?
Nothing, relatively speaking-- since so far we've covered only 6,000 leagues
across the Pacific!

Nevertheless, I'm well aware that the Nautilus is drawing near to populated
shores, and if some chance for salvation becomes available to us, it would be
sheer cruelty to sacrifice my companions to my passion for the unknown. I must
go with them, perhaps even guide them. But will this opportunity ever arise? The
human being, robbed of his free will, craves such an opportunity; but the
scientist, forever inquisitive, dreads it.

That day, January 21, 1868, the chief officer went at noon to take the sun's
altitude. I climbed onto the platform, lit a cigar, and watched him at work. It
seemed obvious to me that this man didn't understand French, because I made
several remarks in a loud voice that were bound to provoke him to some
involuntary show of interest had he understood them; but he remained mute and
emotionless.

While he took his sights with his sextant, one of the Nautilus's sailors-- that
muscular man who had gone with us to Crespo Island during our first
underwater excursion--came up to clean the glass panes of the beacon. I then
examined the fittings of this mechanism, whose power was increased a
hundredfold by biconvex lenses that were designed like those in a lighthouse and
kept its rays productively focused. This electric lamp was so constructed as to
yield its maximum illuminating power. In essence, its light was generated in a
vacuum, insuring both its steadiness and intensity. Such a vacuum also reduced
wear on the graphite points between which the luminous arc expanded. This was
an important savings for Captain Nemo, who couldn't easily renew them. But
under these conditions, wear and tear were almost nonexistent.

When the Nautilus was ready to resume its underwater travels, I went below
again to the lounge. The hatches closed once more, and our course was set due
west.

We then plowed the waves of the Indian Ocean, vast liquid plains with an
area of 550,000,000 hectares, whose waters are so transparent it makes you
dizzy to lean over their surface. There the Nautilus generally drifted at a depth
between 100 and 200 meters. It behaved in this way for some days. To anyone
without my grand passion for the sea, these hours would surely have seemed
long and monotonous; but my daily strolls on the platform where I was revived
by the life-giving ocean air, the sights in the rich waters beyond the lounge


windows, the books to be read in the library, and the composition of my
memoirs, took up all my time and left me without a moment of weariness or
boredom.

All in all, we enjoyed a highly satisfactory state of health. The diet on board
agreed with us perfectly, and for my part, I could easily have gone without those
changes of pace that Ned Land, in a spirit of protest, kept taxing his ingenuity to
supply us. What's more, in this constant temperature we didn't even have to
worry about catching colds. Besides, the ship had a good stock of the madrepore
Dendrophylia, known in Provence by the name sea fennel, and a poultice made
from the dissolved flesh of its polyps will furnish an excellent cough medicine.

For some days we saw a large number of aquatic birds with webbed feet,
known as gulls or sea mews. Some were skillfully slain, and when cooked in a
certain fashion, they make a very acceptable platter of water game. Among the
great wind riders--carried over long distances from every shore and resting on
the waves from their exhausting flights-- I spotted some magnificent albatross,
birds belonging to the Longipennes (long-winged) family, whose discordant calls
sound like the braying of an ass. The Totipalmes (fully webbed) family was
represented by swift frigate birds, nimbly catching fish at the surface, and by
numerous tropic birds of the genus Phaeton, among others the red-tailed tropic
bird, the size of a pigeon, its white plumage shaded with pink tints that
contrasted with its dark-hued wings.

The Nautilus's nets hauled up several types of sea turtle from the hawksbill
genus with arching backs whose scales are highly prized. Diving easily, these
reptiles can remain a good while underwater by closing the fleshy valves located
at the external openings of their nasal passages. When they were captured, some
hawksbills were still asleep inside their carapaces, a refuge from other marine
animals. The flesh of these turtles was nothing memorable, but their eggs made
an excellent feast.

As for fish, they always filled us with wonderment when, staring through the
open panels, we could unveil the secrets of their aquatic lives. I noted several
species I hadn't previously been able to observe.

I'll mention chiefly some trunkfish unique to the Red Sea, the sea of the East
Indies, and that part of the ocean washing the coasts of equinoctial America.
Like turtles, armadillos, sea urchins, and crustaceans, these fish are protected by
armor plate that's neither chalky nor stony but actual bone. Sometimes this armor
takes the shape of a solid triangle, sometimes that of a solid quadrangle. Among
the triangular type, I noticed some half a decimeter long, with brown tails,
yellow fins, and wholesome, exquisitely tasty flesh; I even recommend that they
be acclimatized to fresh water, a change, incidentally, that a number of saltwater


fish can make with ease. I'll also mention some quadrangular trunkfish topped by
four large protuberances along the back; trunkfish sprinkled with white spots on
the underside of the body, which make good house pets like certain birds;
boxfish armed with stings formed by extensions of their bony crusts, and whose
odd grunting has earned them the nickname "sea pigs"; then some trunkfish
known as dromedaries, with tough, leathery flesh and big conical humps.

From the daily notes kept by Mr. Conseil, I also retrieve certain fish from the
genus Tetradon unique to these seas: southern puffers with red backs and white
chests distinguished by three lengthwise rows of filaments, and jugfish, seven
inches long, decked out in the brightest colors. Then, as specimens of other
genera, blowfish resembling a dark brown egg, furrowed with white bands, and
lacking tails; globefish, genuine porcupines of the sea, armed with stings and
able to inflate themselves until they look like a pin cushion bristling with
needles; seahorses common to every ocean; flying dragonfish with long snouts
and highly distended pectoral fins shaped like wings, which enable them, if not
to fly, at least to spring into the air; spatula-shaped paddlefish whose tails are
covered with many scaly rings; snipefish with long jaws, excellent animals
twenty-five centimeters long and gleaming with the most cheerful colors; bluish
gray dragonets with wrinkled heads; myriads of leaping blennies with black
stripes and long pectoral fins, gliding over the surface of the water with
prodigious speed; delicious sailfish that can hoist their fins in a favorable current
like so many unfurled sails; splendid nurseryfish on which nature has lavished
yellow, azure, silver, and gold; yellow mackerel with wings made of filaments;
bullheads forever spattered with mud, which make distinct hissing sounds; sea
robins whose livers are thought to be poisonous; ladyfish that can flutter their
eyelids; finally, archerfish with long, tubular snouts, real oceangoing flycatchers,
armed with a rifle unforeseen by either Remington or Chassepot: it slays insects
by shooting them with a simple drop of water.

From the eighty-ninth fish genus in Lacépéde's system of classification,
belonging to his second subclass of bony fish (characterized by gill covers and a
bronchial membrane), I noted some scorpionfish whose heads are adorned with
stings and which have only one dorsal fin; these animals are covered with small
scales, or have none at all, depending on the subgenus to which they belong. The
second subgenus gave us some Didactylus specimens three to four decimeters
long, streaked with yellow, their heads having a phantasmagoric appearance. As
for the first subgenus, it furnished several specimens of that bizarre fish aptly
nicknamed "toadfish," whose big head is sometimes gouged with deep cavities,
sometimes swollen with protuberances; bristling with stings and strewn with
nodules, it sports hideously irregular horns; its body and tail are adorned with


callosities; its stings can inflict dangerous injuries; it's repulsive and horrible.

From January 21 to the 23rd, the Nautilus traveled at the rate of 250 leagues
in twenty-four hours, hence 540 miles at twenty-two miles per hour. If, during
our trip, we were able to identify these different varieties of fish, it's because
they were attracted by our electric light and tried to follow alongside; but most
of them were outdistanced by our speed and soon fell behind; temporarily,
however, a few managed to keep pace in the Nautilus's waters.

On the morning of the 24th, in latitude 12 degrees 5' south and longitude 94
degrees 33', we raised Keeling Island, a madreporic upheaving planted with
magnificent coconut trees, which had been visited by Mr. Darwin and Captain
Fitzroy. The Nautilus cruised along a short distance off the shore of this desert
island. Our dragnets brought up many specimens of polyps and echinoderms
plus some unusual shells from the branch Mollusca. Captain Nemo's treasures
were enhanced by some valuable exhibits from the delphinula snail species, to
which I joined some pointed star coral, a sort of parasitic polypary that often
attaches itself to seashells.

Soon Keeling Island disappeared below the horizon, and our course was set
to the northwest, toward the tip of the Indian peninsula.

"Civilization!" Ned Land told me that day. "Much better than those Papuan
Islands where we ran into more savages than venison! On this Indian shore,
professor, there are roads and railways, English, French, and Hindu villages. We
wouldn't go five miles without bumping into a fellow countryman. Come on
now, isn't it time for our sudden departure from Captain Nemo?"

"No, no, Ned," I replied in a very firm tone. "Let's ride it out, as you
seafaring fellows say. The Nautilus is approaching populated areas. It's going
back toward Europe, let it take us there. After we arrive in home waters, we can
do as we see fit. Besides, I don't imagine Captain Nemo will let us go hunting on
the coasts of Malabar or Coromandel as he did in the forests of New Guinea."

"Well, sir, can't we manage without his permission?"

I didn't answer the Canadian. I wanted no arguments. Deep down, I was
determined to fully exploit the good fortune that had put me on board the
Nautilus.

After leaving Keeling Island, our pace got generally slower. It also got more
unpredictable, often taking us to great depths. Several times we used our slanting
fins, which internal levers could set at an oblique angle to our waterline. Thus
we went as deep as two or three kilometers down but without ever verifying the
lowest depths of this sea near India, which soundings of 13,000 meters have
been unable to reach. As for the temperature in these lower strata, the
thermometer always and invariably indicated 4 degrees centigrade. I merely


observed that in the upper layers, the water was always colder over shallows
than in the open sea.

On January 25, the ocean being completely deserted, the Nautilus spent the
day on the surface, churning the waves with its powerful propeller and making
them spurt to great heights. Under these conditions, who wouldn't have mistaken
it for a gigantic cetacean? I spent three-quarters of the day on the platform. I
stared at the sea. Nothing on the horizon, except near four o'clock in the
afternoon a long steamer to the west, running on our opposite tack. Its masting
was Visible for an instant, but it couldn't have seen the Nautilus because we were
lying too low in the water. I imagine that steamboat belonged to the Peninsular
& Oriental line, which provides service from the island of Ceylon to Sidney, also
calling at King George Sound and Melbourne.

At five o'clock in the afternoon, just before that brief twilight that links day
with night in tropical zones, Conseil and I marveled at an unusual sight.

It was a delightful animal whose discovery, according to the ancients, is a
sign of good luck. Aristotle, Athenaeus, Pliny, and Oppian studied its habits and
lavished on its behalf all the scientific poetry of Greece and Italy. They called it
"nautilus" and "pompilius." But modern science has not endorsed these
designations, and this mollusk is now known by the name argonaut.

Anyone consulting Conseil would soon learn from the gallant lad that the
branch Mollusca is divided into five classes; that the first class features the
Cephalopoda (whose members are sometimes naked, sometimes covered with a
shell), which consists of two families, the Dibranchiata and the Tetrabranchiata,
which are distinguished by their number of gills; that the family Dibranchiata
includes three genera, the argonaut, the squid, and the cuttlefish, and that the
family Tetrabranchiata contains only one genus, the nautilus. After this catalog,
if some recalcitrant listener confuses the argonaut, which is acetabuliferous (in
other words, a bearer of suction tubes), with the nautilus, which is
tentaculiferous (a bearer of tentacles), it will be simply unforgivable.

Now, it was a school of argonauts then voyaging on the surface of the ocean.
We could count several hundred of them. They belonged to that species of
argonaut covered with protuberances and exclusive to the seas near India.

These graceful mollusks were swimming backward by means of their
locomotive tubes, sucking water into these tubes and then expelling it. Six of
their eight tentacles were long, thin, and floated on the water, while the other two
were rounded into palms and spread to the wind like light sails. I could see
perfectly their undulating, spiral-shaped shells, which Cuvier aptly compared to
an elegant cockleboat. It's an actual boat indeed. It transports the animal that
secretes it without the animal sticking to it.


"The argonaut is free to leave its shell," I told Conseil, "but it never does."

"Not unlike Captain Nemo," Conseil replied sagely. "Which is why he
should have christened his ship the Argonaut."

For about an hour the Nautilus cruised in the midst of this school of
mollusks. Then, lord knows why, they were gripped with a sudden fear. As if at a
signal, every sail was abruptly lowered; arms folded, bodies contracted, shells
turned over by changing their center of gravity, and the whole flotilla
disappeared under the waves. It was instantaneous, and no squadron of ships
ever maneuvered with greater togetherness.

Just then night fell suddenly, and the waves barely surged in the breeze,
spreading placidly around the Nautilus's side plates.

The next day, January 26, we cut the equator on the 82nd meridian and we
reentered the northern hemisphere.

During that day a fearsome school of sharks provided us with an escort.
Dreadful animals that teem in these seas and make them extremely dangerous.
There were Port Jackson sharks with a brown back, a whitish belly, and eleven
rows of teeth, bigeye sharks with necks marked by a large black spot encircled in
white and resembling an eye, and Isabella sharks whose rounded snouts were
strewn with dark speckles. Often these powerful animals rushed at the lounge
window with a violence less than comforting. By this point Ned Land had lost
all self-control. He wanted to rise to the surface of the waves and harpoon the
monsters, especially certain smooth-hound sharks whose mouths were paved
with teeth arranged like a mosaic, and some big five-meter tiger sharks that
insisted on personally provoking him. But the Nautilus soon picked up speed and
easily left astern the fastest of these man-eaters.

On January 27, at the entrance to the huge Bay of Bengal, we repeatedly
encountered a gruesome sight: human corpses floating on the surface of the
waves! Carried by the Ganges to the high seas, these were deceased Indian
villagers who hadn't been fully devoured by vultures, the only morticians in
these parts. But there was no shortage of sharks to assist them with their
undertaking chores.

Near seven o'clock in the evening, the Nautilus lay half submerged,
navigating in the midst of milky white waves. As far as the eye could see, the
ocean seemed lactified. Was it an effect of the moon's rays? No, because the new
moon was barely two days old and was still lost below the horizon in the sun's
rays. The entire sky, although lit up by stellar radiation, seemed pitch-black in
comparison with the whiteness of these waters.

Conseil couldn't believe his eyes, and he questioned me about the causes of
this odd phenomenon. Luckily I was in a position to answer him.


"That's called a milk sea," I told him, "a vast expanse of white waves often
seen along the coasts of Amboina and in these waterways."

"But," Conseil asked, "could master tell me the cause of this effect, because I
presume this water hasn't really changed into milk!"

"No, my boy, and this whiteness that amazes you is merely due to the
presence of myriads of tiny creatures called infusoria, a sort of diminutive
glowworm that's colorless and gelatinous in appearance, as thick as a strand of
hair, and no longer than one-fifth of a millimeter. Some of these tiny creatures
stick together over an area of several leagues."

"Several leagues!" Conseil exclaimed.

"Yes, my boy, and don't even try to compute the number of these infusoria.
You won't pull it off, because if I'm not mistaken, certain navigators have cruised
through milk seas for more than forty miles."

I'm not sure that Conseil heeded my recommendation, because he seemed to
be deep in thought, no doubt trying to calculate how many one-fifths of a
millimeter are found in forty square miles. As for me, I continued to observe this
phenomenon. For several hours the Nautilus's spur sliced through these whitish
waves, and I watched it glide noiselessly over this soapy water, as if it were
cruising through those foaming eddies that a bay's currents and countercurrents
sometimes leave between each other.

Near midnight the sea suddenly resumed its usual hue, but behind us all the
way to the horizon, the skies kept mirroring the whiteness of those waves and for
a good while seemed imbued with the hazy glow of an aurora borealis.


CHAPTER 2


A New Proposition from Captain Nemo


ON JANUARY 28, in latitude 9 degrees 4' north, when the Nautilus returned
at noon to the surface of the sea, it lay in sight of land some eight miles to the
west. Right off, I observed a cluster of mountains about 2,000 feet high, whose
shapes were very whimsically sculpted. After our position fix, I reentered the
lounge, and when our bearings were reported on the chart, I saw that we were off
the island of Ceylon, that pearl dangling from the lower lobe of the Indian
peninsula.

I went looking in the library for a book about this island, one of the most
fertile in the world. Sure enough, I found a volume entitled Ceylon and the
Singhalese by H. C. Sirr, Esq. Reentering the lounge, I first noted the bearings of
Ceylon, on which antiquity lavished so many different names. It was located
between latitude 5 degrees 55' and 9 degrees 49' north, and between longitude 79
degrees 42' and 82 degrees 4' east of the meridian of Greenwich; its length is 275
miles; its maximum width, 150 miles; its circumference, 900 miles; its surface
area, 24,448 square miles, in other words, a little smaller than that of Ireland.

Just then Captain Nemo and his chief officer appeared.

The captain glanced at the chart. Then, turning to me:

"The island of Ceylon," he said, "is famous for its pearl fisheries. Would you
be interested, Professor Aronnax, in visiting one of those fisheries?"

"Certainly, captain."

"Fine. It's easily done. Only, when we see the fisheries, we'll see no
fishermen. The annual harvest hasn't yet begun. No matter. I'll give orders to
make for the Gulf of Mannar, and we'll arrive there late tonight."

The captain said a few words to his chief officer who went out immediately.
Soon the Nautilus reentered its liquid element, and the pressure gauge indicated
that it was staying at a depth of thirty feet.

With the chart under my eyes, I looked for the Gulf of Mannar. I found it by
the 9th parallel off the northwestern shores of Ceylon. It was formed by the long
curve of little Mannar Island. To reach it we had to go all the way up Ceylon's
west coast.

"Professor," Captain Nemo then told me, "there are pearl fisheries in the Bay
of Bengal, the seas of the East Indies, the seas of China and Japan, plus those
seas south of the United States, the Gulf of Panama and the Gulf of California;


but it's off Ceylon that such fishing reaps its richest rewards. No doubt we'll be
arriving a little early. Fishermen gather in the Gulf of Mannar only during the
month of March, and for thirty days some 300 boats concentrate on the lucrative
harvest of these treasures from the sea. Each boat is manned by ten oarsmen and
ten fishermen. The latter divide into two groups, dive in rotation, and descend to
a depth of twelve meters with the help of a heavy stone clutched between their
feet and attached by a rope to their boat."

"You mean," I said, "that such primitive methods are still all that they use?"

"All," Captain Nemo answered me, "although these fisheries belong to the
most industrialized people in the world, the English, to whom the Treaty of
Amiens granted them in 1802."

"Yet it strikes me that diving suits like yours could perform yeoman service
in such work."

"Yes, since those poor fishermen can't stay long underwater. On his voyage
to Ceylon, the Englishman Percival made much of a Kaffir who stayed under
five minutes without coming up to the surface, but I find that hard to believe. I
know that some divers can last up to fifty-seven seconds, and highly skillful ones
to eighty-seven; but such men are rare, and when the poor fellows climb back on
board, the water coming out of their noses and ears is tinted with blood. I believe
the average time underwater that these fishermen can tolerate is thirty seconds,
during which they hastily stuff their little nets with all the pearl oysters they can
tear loose. But these fishermen generally don't live to advanced age: their vision
weakens, ulcers break out on their eyes, sores form on their bodies, and some are
even stricken with apoplexy on the ocean floor."

"Yes," I said, "it's a sad occupation, and one that exists only to gratify the
whims of fashion. But tell me, captain, how many oysters can a boat fish up in a
workday?"

"About 40,000 to 50,000. It's even said that in 1814, when the English
government went fishing on its own behalf, its divers worked just twenty days
and brought up 76,000,000 oysters."

"At least," I asked, "the fishermen are well paid, aren't they?"

"Hardly, professor. In Panama they make just $1.00 per week. In most places
they earn only a penny for each oyster that has a pearl, and they bring up so
many that have none!"

"Only one penny to those poor people who make their employers rich! That's
atrocious!"

"On that note, professor," Captain Nemo told me, "you and your companions
will visit the Mannar oysterbank, and if by chance some eager fisherman arrives
early, well, we can watch him at work."


"That suits me, captain."

"By the way, Professor Aronnax, you aren't afraid of sharks, are you?"

"Sharks?" I exclaimed.

This struck me as a pretty needless question, to say the least.

"Well?" Captain Nemo went on.

"T admit, captain, I'm not yet on very familiar terms with that genus of fish."

"We're used to them, the rest of us," Captain Nemo answered. "And in time
you will be too. Anyhow, we'll be armed, and on our way we might hunt a man-
eater or two. It's a fascinating sport. So, professor, I'll see you tomorrow, bright
and early."

This said in a carefree tone, Captain Nemo left the lounge.

If you're invited to hunt bears in the Swiss mountains, you might say: "Oh
good, I get to go bear hunting tomorrow!" If you're invited to hunt lions on the
Atlas plains or tigers in the jungles of India, you might say: "Ha! Now's my
chance to hunt lions and tigers!" But if you're invited to hunt sharks in their
native element, you might want to think it over before accepting.

As for me, I passed a hand over my brow, where beads of cold sweat were
busy forming.

"Let's think this over," I said to myself, "and let's take our time. Hunting
otters in underwater forests, as we did in the forests of Crespo Island, is an
acceptable activity. But to roam the bottom of the sea when you're almost certain
to meet man-eaters in the neighborhood, that's another story! I know that in
certain countries, particularly the Andaman Islands, Negroes don't hesitate to
attack sharks, dagger in one hand and noose in the other; but I also know that
many who face those fearsome animals don't come back alive. Besides, I'm not a
Negro, and even if I were a Negro, in this instance I don't think a little hesitation
on my part would be out of place."

And there I was, fantasizing about sharks, envisioning huge jaws armed with
multiple rows of teeth and capable of cutting a man in half. I could already feel a
definite pain around my pelvic girdle. And how I resented the offhand manner in
which the captain had extended his deplorable invitation! You would have
thought it was an issue of going into the woods on some harmless fox hunt!

"Thank heavens!" I said to myself. "Conseil will never want to come along,
and that'll be my excuse for not going with the captain."

As for Ned Land, I admit I felt less confident of his wisdom. Danger,
however great, held a perennial attraction for his aggressive nature.

I went back to reading Sirr's book, but I leafed through it mechanically.
Between the lines I kept seeing fearsome, wide-open jaws.

Just then Conseil and the Canadian entered with a calm, even gleeful air.


Little did they know what was waiting for them.

"Ye gods, sir!" Ned Land told me. "Your Captain Nemo--the devil take him--
has just made us a very pleasant proposition!"

"Oh!" I said "You know about--"

"With all due respect to master," Conseil replied, "the Nautilus's commander
has invited us, together with master, for a visit tomorrow to Ceylon's magnificent
pearl fisheries. He did so in the most cordial terms and conducted himself like a
true gentleman.”

"He didn't tell you anything else?"

"Nothing, sir," the Canadian replied. "He said you'd already discussed this
little stroll."

"Indeed," I said. "But didn't he give you any details on--"

"Not a one, Mr. Naturalist. You will be going with us, right?"

"Me? Why yes, certainly, of course! I can see that you like the idea, Mr.
Land."

"Yes! It will be a really unusual experience!"

"And possibly dangerous!" I added in an insinuating tone.

"Dangerous?" Ned Land replied. "A simple trip to an oysterbank?"

Assuredly, Captain Nemo hadn't seen fit to plant the idea of sharks in the
minds of my companions. For my part, I stared at them with anxious eyes, as if
they were already missing a limb or two. Should I alert them? Yes, surely, but I
hardly knew how to go about it.

"Would master," Conseil said to me, "give us some background on pearl
fishing?"

"On the fishing itself?" I asked. "Or on the occupational hazards that--"

"On the fishing," the Canadian replied. "Before we tackle the terrain, it helps
to be familiar with it."

"All right, sit down, my friends, and I'll teach you everything I myself have
just been taught by the Englishman H. C. Sirr!"

Ned and Conseil took seats on a couch, and right off the Canadian said to
me:

"Sir, just what is a pearl exactly?"

"My gallant Ned," I replied, "for poets a pearl is a tear from the sea; for
Orientals it's a drop of solidified dew; for the ladies it's a jewel they can wear on
their fingers, necks, and ears that's oblong in shape, glassy in luster, and formed
from mother-of-pearl; for chemists it's a mixture of calcium phosphate and
calcium carbonate with a little gelatin protein; and finally, for naturalists it's a
simple festering secretion from the organ that produces mother-of-pearl in
certain bivalves."


"Branch Mollusca," Conseil said, "class Acephala, order Testacea."

"Correct, my scholarly Conseil. Now then, those Testacea capable of
producing pearls include rainbow abalone, turbo snails, giant clams, and
saltwater scallops--briefly, all those that secrete mother-of-pearl, in other words,
that blue, azure, violet, or white substance lining the insides of their valves."

"Are mussels included too?" the Canadian asked.

"Yes! The mussels of certain streams in Scotland, Wales, Ireland, Saxony,
Bohemia, and France."

"Good!" the Canadian replied. "From now on we'll pay closer attention to
‘em."

"But," I went on, "for secreting pearls, the ideal mollusk is the pearl oyster
Meleagrina margaritifera, that valuable shellfish. Pearls result simply from
mother-of-pearl solidifying into a globular shape. Either they stick to the oyster's
shell, or they become embedded in the creature's folds. On the valves a pearl
sticks fast; on the flesh it lies loose. But its nucleus is always some small, hard
object, say a sterile egg or a grain of sand, around which the mother-of-pearl is
deposited in thin, concentric layers over several years in succession."

"Can one find several pearls in the same oyster?" Conseil asked.

"Yes, my boy. There are some shellfish that turn into real jewel coffers. They
even mention one oyster, about which I remain dubious, that supposedly
contained at least 150 sharks."

"150 sharks!" Ned Land yelped.

"Did I say sharks?" I exclaimed hastily. "I meant 150 pearls. Sharks wouldn't
make sense."

"Indeed," Conseil said. "But will master now tell us how one goes about
extracting these pearls?"

"One proceeds in several ways, and often when pearls stick to the valves,
fishermen even pull them loose with pliers. But usually the shellfish are spread
out on mats made from the esparto grass that covers the beaches. Thus they die
in the open air, and by the end of ten days they've rotted sufficiently. Next they're
immersed in huge tanks of salt water, then they're opened up and washed. At this
point the sorters begin their twofold task. First they remove the layers of mother-
of-pearl, which are known in the industry by the names legitimate silver, bastard
white, or bastard black, and these are shipped out in cases weighing 125 to 150
kilograms. Then they remove the oyster's meaty tissue, boil it, and finally strain
it, in order to extract even the smallest pearls."

"Do the prices of these pearls differ depending on their size?" Conseil asked.

"Not only on their size," I replied, "but also according to their shape, their
water--in other words, their color--and their orient-- in other words, that dappled,


shimmering glow that makes them so delightful to the eye. The finest pearls are
called virgin pearls, or paragons; they form in isolation within the mollusk's
tissue. They're white, often opaque but sometimes of opalescent transparency,
and usually spherical or pear-shaped. The spherical ones are made into bracelets;
the pear-shaped ones into earrings, and since they're the most valuable, they're
priced individually. The other pearls that stick to the oyster's shell are more
erratically shaped and are priced by weight. Finally, classed in the lowest order,
the smallest pearls are known by the name seed pearls; they're priced by the
measuring cup and are used mainly in the creation of embroidery for church
vestments."

"But it must be a long, hard job, sorting out these pearls by size," the
Canadian said.

"No, my friend. That task is performed with eleven strainers, or sieves, that
are pierced with different numbers of holes. Those pearls staying in the strainers
with twenty to eighty holes are in the first order. Those not slipping through the
sieves pierced with 100 to 800 holes are in the second order. Finally, those pearls
for which one uses strainers pierced with 900 to 1,000 holes make up the seed
pearls."

"How ingenious,” Conseil said, "to reduce dividing and classifying pearls to
a mechanical operation. And could master tell us the profits brought in by
harvesting these banks of pearl oysters?"

"According to Sirr's book," I replied, "these Ceylon fisheries are farmed
annually for a total profit of 3,000,000 man-eaters."

"Francs!" Conseil rebuked.

"Yes, francs! 3,000,000 francs!" I went on. "But I don't think these fisheries
bring in the returns they once did. Similarly, the Central American fisheries used
to make an annual profit of 4,000,000 francs during the reign of King Charles V,
but now they bring in only two-thirds of that amount. All in all, it's estimated
that 9,000,000 francs is the current yearly return for the whole pearl-harvesting
industry."

"But," Conseil asked, "haven't certain famous pearls been quoted at
extremely high prices?"

"Yes, my boy. They say Julius Caesar gave Servilia a pearl worth 120,000
francs in our currency."

"I've even heard stories," the Canadian said, "about some lady in ancient
times who drank pearls in vinegar."

"Cleopatra," Conseil shot back.

"Tt must have tasted pretty bad," Ned Land added.

"Abominable, Ned my friend," Conseil replied. "But when a little glass of


vinegar is worth 1,500,000 francs, its taste is a small price to pay."

"I'm sorry I didn't marry the gal," the Canadian said, throwing up his hands
with an air of discouragement.

"Ned Land married to Cleopatra?" Conseil exclaimed.

"But I was all set to tie the knot, Conseil," the Canadian replied in all
seriousness, "and it wasn't my fault the whole business fell through. I even
bought a pearl necklace for my fiancée, Kate Tender, but she married somebody
else instead. Well, that necklace cost me only $1.50, but you can absolutely trust
me on this, professor, its pearls were so big, they wouldn't have gone through
that strainer with twenty holes."

"My gallant Ned," I replied, laughing, "those were artificial pearls, ordinary
glass beads whose insides were coated with Essence of Orient."

"Wow!" the Canadian replied. "That Essence of Orient must sell for quite a
large sum."

"As little as zero! It comes from the scales of a European carp, it's nothing
more than a silver substance that collects in the water and is preserved in
ammonia. It's worthless."

"Maybe that's why Kate Tender married somebody else," replied Mr. Land
philosophically.

"But," I said, "getting back to pearls of great value, I don't think any
sovereign ever possessed one superior to the pearl owned by Captain Nemo."

"This one?" Conseil said, pointing to a magnificent jewel in its glass case.

"Exactly. And I'm certainly not far off when I estimate its value at 2,000,000

ao eer

"Francs!" Conseil said quickly.

"Yes," I said, "2,000,000 francs, and no doubt all it cost our captain was the
effort to pick it up."

"Ha!" Ned Land exclaimed. "During our stroll tomorrow, who says we won't
run into one just like it?"

"Bah!" Conseil put in.

"And why not?"

"What good would a pearl worth millions do us here on the Nautilus?"

"Here, no," Ned Land said. "But elsewhere. .. ."

"Oh! Elsewhere!" Conseil put in, shaking his head.

"In fact," I said, "Mr. Land is right. And if we ever brought back to Europe or
America a pearl worth millions, it would make the story of our adventures more
authentic--and much more rewarding."

"That's how I see it," the Canadian said.

"But," said Conseil, who perpetually returned to the didactic side of things,


"is this pearl fishing ever dangerous?"

"No," I replied quickly, "especially if one takes certain precautions."

"What risks would you run in a job like that?" Ned Land said. "Swallowing a
few gulps of salt water?"

"Whatever you say, Ned." Then, trying to imitate Captain Nemo's carefree
tone, I asked, "By the way, gallant Ned, are you afraid of sharks?"

"Me?" the Canadian replied. "I'm a professional harpooner! It's my job to
make a mockery of them!"

"Tt isn't an issue," I said, "of fishing for them with a swivel hook, hoisting
them onto the deck of a ship, chopping off the tail with a sweep of the ax,
opening the belly, ripping out the heart, and tossing it into the sea."

"So it's an issue of... 2"

"Yes, precisely."

"In the water?"

"In the water."

"Ye gods, just give me a good harpoon! You see, sir, these sharks are badly
designed. They have to roll their bellies over to snap you up, and in the
meantime..."

Ned Land had a way of pronouncing the word "snap" that sent chills down
the spine.

"Well, how about you, Conseil? What are your feelings about these man-
eaters?"

"Me?" Conseil said. "I'm afraid I must be frank with master."

Good for you, I thought.

"If master faces these sharks," Conseil said, "I think his loyal manservant
should face them with him!"


CHAPTER 3


A Pearl Worth Ten Million


NIGHT FELL. I went to bed. I slept pretty poorly. Man-eaters played a
major role in my dreams. And I found it more or less appropriate that the French
word for shark, requin, has its linguistic roots in the word requiem.

The next day at four o'clock in the morning, I was awakened by the steward
whom Captain Nemo had placed expressly at my service. I got up quickly,
dressed, and went into the lounge.

Captain Nemo was waiting for me.

"Professor Aronnax," he said to me, "are you ready to start?"

"T'm ready."

"Kindly follow me."

"What about my companions, captain?"

"They've been alerted and are waiting for us."

"Aren't we going to put on our diving suits?" I asked.

"Not yet. I haven't let the Nautilus pull too near the coast, and we're fairly
well out from the Mannar oysterbank. But I have the skiff ready, and it will take
us to the exact spot where we'll disembark, which will save us a pretty long trek.
It's carrying our diving equipment, and we'll suit up just before we begin our
underwater exploring."

Captain Nemo took me to the central companionway whose steps led to the
platform. Ned and Conseil were there, enraptured with the "pleasure trip" getting
under way. Oars in position, five of the Nautilus's sailors were waiting for us
aboard the skiff, which was moored alongside. The night was still dark. Layers
of clouds cloaked the sky and left only a few stars in view. My eyes flew to the
side where land lay, but I saw only a blurred line covering three-quarters of the
horizon from southwest to northwest. Going up Ceylon's west coast during the
night, the Nautilus lay west of the bay, or rather that gulf formed by the mainland
and Mannar Island. Under these dark waters there stretched the bank of shellfish,
an inexhaustible field of pearls more than twenty miles long.

Captain Nemo, Conseil, Ned Land, and I found seats in the stern of the skiff.
The longboat's coxswain took the tiller; his four companions leaned into their
oars; the moorings were cast off and we pulled clear.


The skiff headed southward. The oarsmen took their time. I watched their
strokes vigorously catch the water, and they always waited ten seconds before
rowing again, following the practice used in most navies. While the longboat
coasted, drops of liquid flicked from the oars and hit the dark troughs of the
waves, pitter-pattering like splashes of molten lead. Coming from well out, a
mild swell made the skiff roll gently, and a few cresting billows lapped at its
bow.

We were silent. What was Captain Nemo thinking? Perhaps that this
approaching shore was too close for comfort, contrary to the Canadian's views in
which it still seemed too far away. As for Conseil, he had come along out of
simple curiosity.

Near 5:30 the first glimmers of light on the horizon defined the upper lines of
the coast with greater distinctness. Fairly flat to the east, it swelled a little toward
the south. Five miles still separated it from us, and its beach merged with the
misty waters. Between us and the shore, the sea was deserted. Not a boat, not a
diver. Profound solitude reigned over this gathering place of pearl fishermen. As
Captain Nemo had commented, we were arriving in these waterways a month
too soon.

At six o'clock the day broke suddenly, with that speed unique to tropical
regions, which experience no real dawn or dusk. The sun's rays pierced the cloud
curtain gathered on the easterly horizon, and the radiant orb rose swiftly.

I could clearly see the shore, which featured a few sparse trees here and
there.

The skiff advanced toward Mannar Island, which curved to the south.
Captain Nemo stood up from his thwart and studied the sea.

At his signal the anchor was lowered, but its chain barely ran because the
bottom lay no more than a meter down, and this locality was one of the
shallowest spots near the bank of shellfish. Instantly the skiff wheeled around
under the ebb tide's outbound thrust.

"Here we are, Professor Aronnax," Captain Nemo then said. "You observe
this confined bay? A month from now in this very place, the numerous fishing
boats of the harvesters will gather, and these are the waters their divers will
ransack so daringly. This bay is felicitously laid out for their type of fishing. It's
sheltered from the strongest winds, and the sea is never very turbulent here,
highly favorable conditions for diving work. Now let's put on our underwater
suits, and we'll begin our stroll."

I didn't reply, and while staring at these suspicious waves, I began to put on
my heavy aquatic clothes, helped by the longboat's sailors. Captain Nemo and
my two companions suited up as well. None of the Nautilus's men were to go


with us on this new excursion.

Soon we were imprisoned up to the neck in india-rubber clothing, and straps
fastened the air devices onto our backs. As for the Ruhmkorff device, it didn't
seem to be in the picture. Before inserting my head into its copper capsule, I
commented on this to the captain.

"Our lighting equipment would be useless to us," the captain answered me.
"We won't be going very deep, and the sun's rays will be sufficient to light our
way. Besides, it's unwise to carry electric lanterns under these waves. Their
brightness might unexpectedly attract certain dangerous occupants of these
waterways."

As Captain Nemo pronounced these words, I turned to Conseil and Ned
Land. But my two friends had already encased their craniums in their metal
headgear, and they could neither hear nor reply.

I had one question left to address to Captain Nemo.

"What about our weapons?" I asked him. "Our rifles?"

"Rifles! What for? Don't your mountaineers attack bears dagger in hand?
And isn't steel surer than lead? Here's a sturdy blade. Slip it under your belt and
let's be off."

I stared at my companions. They were armed in the same fashion, and Ned
Land was also brandishing an enormous harpoon he had stowed in the skiff
before leaving the Nautilus.

Then, following the captain's example, I let myself be crowned with my
heavy copper sphere, and our air tanks immediately went into action.

An instant later, the longboat's sailors helped us overboard one after the
other, and we set foot on level sand in a meter and a half of water. Captain Nemo
gave us a hand signal. We followed him down a gentle slope and disappeared
under the waves.

There the obsessive fears in my brain left me. I became surprisingly calm
again. The ease with which I could move increased my confidence, and the
many strange sights captivated my imagination.

The sun was already sending sufficient light under these waves. The tiniest
objects remained visible. After ten minutes of walking, we were in five meters of
water, and the terrain had become almost flat.

Like a covey of snipe over a marsh, there rose underfoot schools of unusual
fish from the genus Monopterus, whose members have no fin but their tail. I
recognized the Javanese eel, a genuine eight-decimeter serpent with a bluish
gray belly, which, without the gold lines over its flanks, could easily be confused
with the conger eel. From the butterfish genus, whose oval bodies are very flat, I
observed several adorned in brilliant colors and sporting a dorsal fin like a


sickle, edible fish that, when dried and marinated, make an excellent dish known
by the name "karawade"; then some sea poachers, fish belonging to the genus
Aspidophoroides, whose bodies are covered with scaly armor divided into eight
lengthwise sections.

Meanwhile, as the sun got progressively higher, it lit up the watery mass
more and more. The seafloor changed little by little. Its fine-grained sand was
followed by a genuine causeway of smooth crags covered by a carpet of
mollusks and zoophytes. Among other specimens in these two branches, I noted
some windowpane oysters with thin valves of unequal size, a type of ostracod
unique to the Red Sea and the Indian Ocean, then orange-hued lucina with
circular shells, awl-shaped auger shells, some of those Persian murex snails that
supply the Nautilus with such wonderful dye, spiky periwinkles fifteen
centimeters long that rose under the waves like hands ready to grab you, turban
snails with shells made of horn and bristling all over with spines, lamp shells,
edible duck clams that feed the Hindu marketplace, subtly luminous jellyfish of
the species Pelagia panopyra, and finally some wonderful Oculina flabelliforma,
magnificent sea fans that fashion one of the most luxuriant tree forms in this
ocean.

In the midst of this moving vegetation, under arbors of water plants, there
raced legions of clumsy articulates, in particular some fanged frog crabs whose
carapaces form a slightly rounded triangle, robber crabs exclusive to these
waterways, and horrible parthenope crabs whose appearance was repulsive to the
eye. One animal no less hideous, which I encountered several times, was the
enormous crab that Mr. Darwin observed, to which nature has given the instinct
and requisite strength to eat coconuts; it scrambles up trees on the beach and
sends the coconuts tumbling; they fracture in their fall and are opened by its
powerful pincers. Here, under these clear waves, this crab raced around with
matchless agility, while green turtles from the species frequenting the Malabar
coast moved sluggishly among the crumbling rocks.

Near seven o'clock we finally surveyed the bank of shellfish, where pearl
oysters reproduce by the millions. These valuable mollusks stick to rocks, where
they're strongly attached by a mass of brown filaments that forbids their moving
about. In this respect oysters are inferior even to mussels, to whom nature has
not denied all talent for locomotion.

The shellfish Meleagrina, that womb for pearls whose valves are nearly
equal in size, has the shape of a round shell with thick walls and a very rough
exterior. Some of these shells were furrowed with flaky, greenish bands that
radiated down from the top. These were the young oysters. The others had
rugged black surfaces, measured up to fifteen centimeters in width, and were ten


or more years old.

Captain Nemo pointed to this prodigious heap of shellfish, and I saw that
these mines were genuinely inexhaustible, since nature's creative powers are
greater than man's destructive instincts. True to those instincts, Ned Land
greedily stuffed the finest of these mollusks into a net he carried at his side.

But we couldn't stop. We had to follow the captain, who headed down trails
seemingly known only to himself. The seafloor rose noticeably, and when I lifted
my arms, sometimes they would pass above the surface of the sea. Then the level
of the oysterbank would lower unpredictably. Often we went around tall, pointed
rocks rising like pyramids. In their dark crevices huge crustaceans, aiming their
long legs like heavy artillery, watched us with unblinking eyes, while underfoot
there crept millipedes, bloodworms, aricia worms, and annelid worms, whose
antennas and tubular tentacles were incredibly long.

Just then a huge cave opened up in our path, hollowed from a picturesque
pile of rocks whose smooth heights were completely hung with underwater flora.
At first this cave looked pitch-black to me. Inside, the sun's rays seemed to
diminish by degrees. Their hazy transparency was nothing more than drowned
light.

Captain Nemo went in. We followed him. My eyes soon grew accustomed to
this comparative gloom. I distinguished the unpredictably contoured springings
of a vault, supported by natural pillars firmly based on a granite foundation, like
the weighty columns of Tuscan architecture. Why had our incomprehensible
guide taken us into the depths of this underwater crypt? I would soon find out.

After going down a fairly steep slope, our feet trod the floor of a sort of
circular pit. There Captain Nemo stopped, and his hand indicated an object that I
hadn't yet noticed.

It was an oyster of extraordinary dimensions, a titanic giant clam, a holy-
water font that could have held a whole lake, a basin more than two meters wide,
hence even bigger than the one adorning the Nautilus's lounge.

I approached this phenomenal mollusk. Its mass of filaments attached it to a
table of granite, and there it grew by itself in the midst of the cave's calm waters.
I estimated the weight of this giant clam at 300 kilograms. Hence such an oyster
held fifteen kilos of meat, and you'd need the stomach of King Gargantua to eat a
couple dozen.

Captain Nemo was obviously familiar with this bivalve's existence. This
wasn't the first time he'd paid it a visit, and I thought his sole reason for leading
us to this locality was to show us a natural curiosity. I was mistaken. Captain
Nemo had an explicit personal interest in checking on the current condition of
this giant clam.


The mollusk's two valves were partly open. The captain approached and
stuck his dagger vertically between the shells to discourage any ideas about
closing; then with his hands he raised the fringed, membrane-filled tunic that
made up the animal's mantle.

There, between its leaflike folds, I saw a loose pearl as big as a coconut. Its
globular shape, perfect clarity, and wonderful orient made it a jewel of
incalculable value. Carried away by curiosity, I stretched out my hand to take it,
weigh it, fondle it! But the captain stopped me, signaled no, removed his dagger
in one swift motion, and let the two valves snap shut.

I then understood Captain Nemo's intent. By leaving the pearl buried beneath
the giant clam's mantle, he allowed it to grow imperceptibly. With each passing
year the mollusk's secretions added new concentric layers. The captain alone was
familiar with the cave where this wonderful fruit of nature was "ripening"; he
alone reared it, so to speak, in order to transfer it one day to his dearly beloved
museum. Perhaps, following the examples of oyster farmers in China and India,
he had even predetermined the creation of this pearl by sticking under the
mollusk's folds some piece of glass or metal that was gradually covered with
mother-of-pearl. In any case, comparing this pearl to others I already knew
about, and to those shimmering in the captain's collection, I estimated that it was
worth at least 10,000,000 francs. It was a superb natural curiosity rather than a
luxurious piece of jewelry, because I don't know of any female ear that could
handle it.

Our visit to this opulent giant clam came to an end. Captain Nemo left the
cave, and we climbed back up the bank of shellfish in the midst of these clear
waters not yet disturbed by divers at work.

We walked by ourselves, genuine loiterers stopping or straying as our fancies
dictated. For my part, I was no longer worried about those dangers my
imagination had so ridiculously exaggerated. The shallows drew noticeably
closer to the surface of the sea, and soon, walking in only a meter of water, my
head passed well above the level of the ocean. Conseil rejoined me, and gluing
his huge copper capsule to mine, his eyes gave me a friendly greeting. But this
lofty plateau measured only a few fathoms, and soon we reentered Our Element.
I think I've now earned the right to dub it that.

Ten minutes later, Captain Nemo stopped suddenly. I thought he'd called a
halt so that we could turn and start back. No. With a gesture he ordered us to
crouch beside him at the foot of a wide crevice. His hand motioned toward a spot
within the liquid mass, and I looked carefully.

Five meters away a shadow appeared and dropped to the seafloor. The
alarming idea of sharks crossed my mind. But I was mistaken, and once again


we didn't have to deal with monsters of the deep.

It was a man, a living man, a black Indian fisherman, a poor devil who no
doubt had come to gather what he could before harvest time. I saw the bottom of
his dinghy, moored a few feet above his head. He would dive and go back up in
quick succession. A stone cut in the shape of a sugar loaf, which he gripped
between his feet while a rope connected it to his boat, served to lower him more
quickly to the ocean floor. This was the extent of his equipment. Arriving on the
seafloor at a depth of about five meters, he fell to his knees and stuffed his sack
with shellfish gathered at random. Then he went back up, emptied his sack,
pulled up his stone, and started all over again, the whole process lasting only
thirty seconds.

This diver didn't see us. A shadow cast by our crag hid us from his view. And
besides, how could this poor Indian ever have guessed that human beings,
creatures like himself, were near him under the waters, eavesdropping on his
movements, not missing a single detail of his fishing!

So he went up and down several times. He gathered only about ten shellfish
per dive, because he had to tear them from the banks where each clung with its
tough mass of filaments. And how many of these oysters for which he risked his
life would have no pearl in them!

I observed him with great care. His movements were systematically
executed, and for half an hour no danger seemed to threaten him. So I had gotten
used to the sight of this fascinating fishing when all at once, just as the Indian
was kneeling on the seafloor, I saw him make a frightened gesture, stand, and
gather himself to spring back to the surface of the waves.

I understood his fear. A gigantic shadow appeared above the poor diver. It
was a Shark of huge size, moving in diagonally, eyes ablaze, jaws wide open!

I was speechless with horror, unable to make a single movement.

With one vigorous stroke of its fins, the voracious animal shot toward the
Indian, who jumped aside and avoided the shark's bite but not the thrashing of its
tail, because that tail struck him across the chest and stretched him out on the
seafloor.

This scene lasted barely a few seconds. The shark returned, rolled over on its
back, and was getting ready to cut the Indian in half, when Captain Nemo, who
was stationed beside me, suddenly stood up. Then he strode right toward the
monster, dagger in hand, ready to fight it at close quarters.

Just as it was about to snap up the poor fisherman, the man-eater saw its new
adversary, repositioned itself on its belly, and headed swiftly toward him.

I can see Captain Nemo's bearing to this day. Bracing himself, he waited for
the fearsome man-eater with wonderful composure, and when the latter rushed at


him, the captain leaped aside with prodigious quickness, avoided a collision, and
sank his dagger into its belly. But that wasn't the end of the story. A dreadful
battle was joined.

The shark bellowed, so to speak. Blood was pouring into the waves from its
wounds. The sea was dyed red, and through this opaque liquid I could see
nothing else.

Nothing else until the moment when, through a rift in the clouds, I saw the
daring captain clinging to one of the animal's fins, fighting the monster at close
quarters, belaboring his enemy's belly with stabs of the dagger yet unable to
deliver the deciding thrust, in other words, a direct hit to the heart. In its
struggles the man-eater churned the watery mass so furiously, its eddies
threatened to knock me over.

I wanted to run to the captain's rescue. But I was transfixed with horror,
unable to move.

I stared, wild-eyed. I saw the fight enter a new phase. The captain fell to the
seafloor, toppled by the enormous mass weighing him down. Then the shark's
jaws opened astoundingly wide, like a pair of industrial shears, and that would
have been the finish of Captain Nemo had not Ned Land, quick as thought,
rushed forward with his harpoon and driven its dreadful point into the shark's
underside.

The waves were saturated with masses of blood. The waters shook with the
movements of the man-eater, which thrashed about with indescribable fury. Ned
Land hadn't missed his target. This was the monster's death rattle. Pierced to the
heart, it was struggling with dreadful spasms whose aftershocks knocked Conseil
off his feet.

Meanwhile Ned Land pulled the captain clear. Uninjured, the latter stood up,
went right to the Indian, quickly cut the rope binding the man to his stone, took
the fellow in his arms, and with a vigorous kick of the heel, rose to the surface of
the sea.

The three of us followed him, and a few moments later, miraculously safe,
we reached the fisherman's longboat.

Captain Nemo's first concern was to revive this unfortunate man. I wasn't
sure he would succeed. I hoped so, since the poor devil hadn't been under very
long. But that stroke from the shark's tail could have been his deathblow.

Fortunately, after vigorous massaging by Conseil and the captain, I saw the
nearly drowned man regain consciousness little by little. He opened his eyes.
How startled he must have felt, how frightened even, at seeing four huge, copper
craniums leaning over him!

And above all, what must he have thought when Captain Nemo pulled a bag


of pearls from a pocket in his diving suit and placed it in the fisherman's hands?
This magnificent benefaction from the Man of the Waters to the poor Indian
from Ceylon was accepted by the latter with trembling hands. His bewildered
eyes indicated that he didn't know to what superhuman creatures he owed both
his life and his fortune.

At the captain's signal we returned to the bank of shellfish, and retracing our
steps, we walked for half an hour until we encountered the anchor connecting the
seafloor with the Nautilus's skiff.

Back on board, the sailors helped divest us of our heavy copper carapaces.

Captain Nemo's first words were spoken to the Canadian.

"Thank you, Mr. Land," he told him.

"Tit for tat, captain,” Ned Land replied. "I owed it to you."

The ghost of a smile glided across the captain's lips, and that was all.

"To the Nautilus," he said.

The longboat flew over the waves. A few minutes later we encountered the
shark's corpse again, floating.

From the black markings on the tips of its fins, I recognized the dreadful
Squalus melanopterus from the seas of the East Indies, a variety in the species of
sharks proper. It was more than twenty-five feet long; its enormous mouth
occupied a third of its body. It was an adult, as could be seen from the six rows
of teeth forming an isosceles triangle in its upper jaw.

Conseil looked at it with purely scientific fascination, and I'm sure he placed
it, not without good reason, in the class of cartilaginous fish, order
Chondropterygia with fixed gills, family Selacia, genus Squalus.

While I was contemplating this inert mass, suddenly a dozen of these
voracious melanoptera appeared around our longboat; but, paying no attention to
us, they pounced on the corpse and quarreled over every scrap of it.

By 8:30 we were back on board the Nautilus.

There I fell to thinking about the incidents that marked our excursion over
the Mannar oysterbank. Two impressions inevitably stood out. One concerned
Captain Nemo's matchless bravery, the other his devotion to a human being, a
representative of that race from which he had fled beneath the seas. In spite of
everything, this strange man hadn't yet succeeded in completely stifling his
heart.

When I shared these impressions with him, he answered me in a tone
touched with emotion:

"That Indian, professor, lives in the land of the oppressed, and I am to this
day, and will be until my last breath, a native of that same land!"


CHAPTER 4


The Red Sea


DURING THE DAY of January 29, the island of Ceylon disappeared below
the horizon, and at a speed of twenty miles per hour, the Nautilus glided into the
labyrinthine channels that separate the Maldive and Laccadive Islands. It
likewise hugged Kiltan Island, a shore of madreporic origin discovered by Vasco
da Gama in 1499 and one of nineteen chief islands in the island group of the
Laccadives, located between latitude 10 degrees and 14 degrees 30' north, and
between longitude 50 degrees 72' and 69 degrees east.

By then we had fared 16,220 miles, or 7,500 leagues, from our starting point
in the seas of Japan.

The next day, January 30, when the Nautilus rose to the surface of the ocean,
there was no more land in sight. Setting its course to the north-northwest, the
ship headed toward the Gulf of Oman, carved out between Arabia and the Indian
peninsula and providing access to the Persian Gulf.

This was obviously a blind alley with no possible outlet. So where was
Captain Nemo taking us? I was unable to say. Which didn't satisfy the Canadian,
who that day asked me where we were going.

"We're going, Mr. Ned, where the captain's fancy takes us."

"His fancy,” the Canadian replied, "won't take us very far. The Persian Gulf
has no outlet, and if we enter those waters, it won't be long before we return in
our tracks."

"All right, we'll return, Mr. Land, and after the Persian Gulf, if the Nautilus
wants to visit the Red Sea, the Strait of Bab el Mandeb is still there to let us in!"

"I don't have to tell you, sir," Ned Land replied, "that the Red Sea is just as
landlocked as the gulf, since the Isthmus of Suez hasn't been cut all the way
through yet; and even if it was, a boat as secretive as ours wouldn't risk a canal
intersected with locks. So the Red Sea won't be our way back to Europe either."

"But I didn't say we'd return to Europe."

"What do you figure, then?"

"I figure that after visiting these unusual waterways of Arabia and Egypt, the
Nautilus will go back down to the Indian Ocean, perhaps through Mozambique
Channel, perhaps off the Mascarene Islands, and then make for the Cape of
Good Hope."

"And once we're at the Cape of Good Hope?" the Canadian asked with


typical persistence.

"Well then, we'll enter that Atlantic Ocean with which we aren't yet familiar.
What's wrong, Ned my friend? Are you tired of this voyage under the seas? Are
you bored with the constantly changing sight of these underwater wonders?
Speaking for myself, I'll be extremely distressed to see the end of a voyage so
few men will ever have a chance to make."

"But don't you realize, Professor Aronnax," the Canadian replied, "that soon
we'll have been imprisoned for three whole months aboard this Nautilus?"

"No, Ned, I didn't realize it, I don't want to realize it, and I don't keep track
of every day and every hour."

"But when will it be over?"

"In its appointed time. Meanwhile there's nothing we can do about it, and our
discussions are futile. My gallant Ned, if you come and tell me, 'A chance to
escape is available to us,' then I'll discuss it with you. But that isn't the case, and
in all honesty, I don't think Captain Nemo ever ventures into European seas."

This short dialogue reveals that in my mania for the Nautilus, I was turning
into the spitting image of its commander.

As for Ned Land, he ended our talk in his best speechifying style: "That's all
fine and dandy. But in my humble opinion, a life in jail is a life without joy."

For four days until February 3, the Nautilus inspected the Gulf of Oman at
various speeds and depths. It seemed to be traveling at random, as if hesitating
over which course to follow, but it never crossed the Tropic of Cancer.

After leaving this gulf we raised Muscat for an instant, the most important
town in the country of Oman. I marveled at its strange appearance in the midst of
the black rocks surrounding it, against which the white of its houses and forts
stood out sharply. I spotted the rounded domes of its mosques, the elegant tips of
its minarets, and its fresh, leafy terraces. But it was only a fleeting vision, and
the Nautilus soon sank beneath the dark waves of these waterways.

Then our ship went along at a distance of six miles from the Arabic coasts of
Mahra and Hadhramaut, their undulating lines of mountains relieved by a few
ancient ruins. On February 5 we finally put into the Gulf of Aden, a genuine
funnel stuck into the neck of Bab el Mandeb and bottling these Indian waters in
the Red Sea.

On February 6 the Nautilus cruised in sight of the city of Aden, perched on a
promontory connected to the continent by a narrow isthmus, a sort of
inaccessible Gibraltar whose fortifications the English rebuilt after capturing it in
1839. I glimpsed the octagonal minarets of this town, which used to be one of
the wealthiest, busiest commercial centers along this coast, as the Arab historian
Idrisi tells it.


I was convinced that when Captain Nemo reached this point, he would back
out again; but I was mistaken, and much to my surprise, he did nothing of the
sort.

The next day, February 7, we entered the Strait of Bab el Mandeb, whose
name means "Gate of Tears" in the Arabic language. Twenty miles wide, it's only
fifty-two kilometers long, and with the Nautilus launched at full speed, clearing
it was the work of barely an hour. But I didn't see a thing, not even Perim Island
where the British government built fortifications to strengthen Aden's position.
There were many English and French steamers plowing this narrow passageway,
liners going from Suez to Bombay, Calcutta, Melbourne, Réunion Island, and
Mauritius; far too much traffic for the Nautilus to make an appearance on the
surface. So it wisely stayed in midwater.

Finally, at noon, we were plowing the waves of the Red Sea.

The Red Sea: that great lake so famous in biblical traditions, seldom
replenished by rains, fed by no important rivers, continually drained by a high
rate of evaporation, its water level dropping a meter and a half every year! If it
were fully landlocked like a lake, this odd gulf might dry up completely; on this
score it's inferior to its neighbors, the Caspian Sea and the Dead Sea, whose
levels lower only to the point where their evaporation exactly equals the amounts
of water they take to their hearts.

This Red Sea is 2,600 kilometers long with an average width of 240. In the
days of the

Ptolemies and the Roman emperors, it was a great commercial artery for the
world, and when its isthmus has been cut through, it will completely regain that
bygone importance that the Suez railways have already brought back in part.

I would not even attempt to understand the whim that induced Captain Nemo
to take us into this gulf. But I wholeheartedly approved of the Nautilus's entering
it. It adopted a medium pace, sometimes staying on the surface, sometimes
diving to avoid some ship, and so I could observe both the inside and topside of
this highly unusual sea.

On February 8, as early as the first hours of daylight, Mocha appeared before
us: a town now in ruins, whose walls would collapse at the mere sound of a
cannon, and which shelters a few leafy date trees here and there. This once-
important city used to contain six public marketplaces plus twenty-six mosques,
and its walls, protected by fourteen forts, fashioned a three-kilometer girdle
around it.

Then the Nautilus drew near the beaches of Africa, where the sea is
considerably deeper. There, through the open panels and in a midwater of crystal
clarity, our ship enabled us to study wonderful bushes of shining coral and huge


chunks of rock wrapped in splendid green furs of algae and fucus. What an
indescribable sight, and what a variety of settings and scenery where these reefs
and volcanic islands leveled off by the Libyan coast! But soon the Nautilus
hugged the eastern shore where these tree forms appeared in all their glory. This
was off the coast of Tihama, and there such zoophyte displays not only
flourished below sea level but they also fashioned picturesque networks that
unreeled as high as ten fathoms above it; the latter were more whimsical but less
colorful than the former, which kept their bloom thanks to the moist vitality of
the waters.

How many delightful hours I spent in this way at the lounge window! How
many new specimens of underwater flora and fauna I marveled at beneath the
light of our electric beacon! Mushroom-shaped fungus coral, some slate-colored
sea anemone including the species Thalassianthus aster among others, organ-
pipe coral arranged like flutes and just begging for a puff from the god Pan,
shells unique to this sea that dwell in madreporic cavities and whose bases are
twisted into squat spirals, and finally a thousand samples of a polypary I hadn't
observed until then: the common sponge.

First division in the polyp group, the class Spongiaria has been created by
scientists precisely for this unusual exhibit whose usefulness is beyond dispute.
The sponge is definitely not a plant, as some naturalists still believe, but an
animal of the lowest order, a polypary inferior even to coral. Its animal nature
isn't in doubt, and we can't accept even the views of the ancients, who regarded it
as halfway between plant and animal. But I must say that naturalists are not in
agreement on the structural mode of sponges. For some it's a polypary, and for
others, such as Professor Milne-Edwards, it's a single, solitary individual.

The class Spongiaria contains about 300 species that are encountered in a
large number of seas and even in certain streams, where they've been given the
name freshwater sponges. But their waters of choice are the Red Sea and the
Mediterranean near the Greek Islands or the coast of Syria. These waters witness
the reproduction and growth of soft, delicate bath sponges whose prices run as
high as 150 francs apiece: the yellow sponge from Syria, the horn sponge from
Barbary, etc. But since I had no hope of studying these zoophytes in the seaports
of the Levant, from which we were separated by the insuperable Isthmus of
Suez, I had to be content with observing them in the waters of the Red Sea.

So I called Conseil to my side, while at an average depth of eight to nine
meters, the Nautilus slowly skimmed every beautiful rock on the easterly coast.

There sponges grew in every shape, globular, stalklike, leaflike, fingerlike.
With reasonable accuracy, they lived up to their nicknames of basket sponges,
chalice sponges, distaff sponges, elkhorn sponges, lion's paws, peacock's tails,


and Neptune's gloves-- designations bestowed on them by fishermen, more
poetically inclined than scientists. A gelatinous, semifluid substance coated the
fibrous tissue of these sponges, and from this tissue there escaped a steady
trickle of water that, after carrying sustenance to each cell, was being expelled
by a contracting movement. This jellylike substance disappears when the polyp
dies, emitting ammonia as it rots. Finally nothing remains but the fibers, either
gelatinous or made of horn, that constitute your household sponge, which takes
on a russet hue and is used for various tasks depending on its degree of elasticity,
permeability, or resistance to saturation.

These polyparies were sticking to rocks, shells of mollusks, and even the
stalks of water plants. They adorned the smallest crevices, some sprawling,
others standing or hanging like coral outgrowths. I told Conseil that sponges are
fished up in two ways, either by dragnet or by hand. The latter method calls for
the services of a diver, but it's preferable because it spares the polypary's tissue,
leaving it with a much higher market value.

Other zoophytes swarming near the sponges consisted chiefly of a very
elegant species of jellyfish; mollusks were represented by varieties of squid that,
according to Professor Orbigny, are unique to the Red Sea; and reptiles by
virgata turtles belonging to the genus Chelonia, which furnished our table with a
dainty but wholesome dish.

As for fish, they were numerous and often remarkable. Here are the ones that
the Nautilus's nets most frequently hauled on board: rays, including spotted rays
that were oval in shape and brick red in color, their bodies strewn with erratic
blue speckles and identifiable by their jagged double stings, silver-backed skates,
common stingrays with stippled tails, butterfly rays that looked like huge two-
meter cloaks flapping at middepth, toothless guitarfish that were a type of
cartilaginous fish closer to the shark, trunkfish known as dromedaries that were
one and a half feet long and had humps ending in backward-curving stings,
serpentine moray eels with silver tails and bluish backs plus brown pectorals
trimmed in gray piping, a species of butterfish called the fiatola decked out in
thin gold stripes and the three colors of the French flag, Montague blennies four
decimeters long, superb jacks handsomely embellished by seven black crosswise
streaks with blue and yellow fins plus gold and silver scales, snooks, standard
mullet with yellow heads, parrotfish, wrasse, triggerfish, gobies, etc., plus a
thousand other fish common to the oceans we had already crossed.

On February 9 the Nautilus cruised in the widest part of the Red Sea,
measuring 190 miles straight across from Suakin on the west coast to Qunfidha
on the east coast.

At noon that day after our position fix, Captain Nemo climbed onto the


platform, where I happened to be. I vowed not to let him go below again without
at least sounding him out on his future plans. As soon as he saw me, he came
over, graciously offered me a cigar, and said to me:

"Well, professor, are you pleased with this Red Sea? Have you seen enough
of its hidden wonders, its fish and zoophytes, its gardens of sponges and forests
of coral? Have you glimpsed the towns built on its shores?"

"Yes, Captain Nemo," I replied, "and the Nautilus is wonderfully suited to
this whole survey. Ah, it's a clever boat!"

"Yes, sir, clever, daring, and invulnerable! It fears neither the Red Sea's
dreadful storms nor its currents and reefs."

"Indeed," I said, "this sea is mentioned as one of the worst, and in the days of
the ancients, if I'm not mistaken, it had an abominable reputation."

"Thoroughly abominable, Professor Aronnax. The Greek and Latin
historians can find nothing to say in its favor, and the Greek geographer Strabo
adds that it's especially rough during the rainy season and the period of summer
prevailing winds. The Arab Idrisi, referring to it by the name Gulf of Colzoum,
relates that ships perished in large numbers on its sandbanks and that no one
risked navigating it by night. This, he claims, is a sea subject to fearful
hurricanes, strewn with inhospitable islands, and 'with nothing good to offer,’
either on its surface or in its depths. As a matter of fact, the same views can also
be found in Arrian, Agatharchides, and Artemidorus."

"One can easily see," I answered, "that those historians didn't navigate
aboard the Nautilus."

"Indeed," the captain replied with a smile, "and in this respect, the moderns
aren't much farther along than the ancients. It took many centuries to discover
the mechanical power of steam! Who knows whether we'll see a second Nautilus
within the next 100 years! Progress is slow, Professor Aronnax."

"It's true," I replied. "Your ship is a century ahead of its time, perhaps several
centuries. It would be most unfortunate if such a secret were to die with its
inventor!"

Captain Nemo did not reply. After some minutes of silence:

"We were discussing,” he said, "the views of ancient historians on the
dangers of navigating this Red Sea?"

"True," I replied. "But weren't their fears exaggerated?"

"Yes and no, Professor Aronnax," answered Captain Nemo, who seemed to
know "his Red Sea" by heart. "To a modern ship, well rigged, solidly
constructed, and in control of its course thanks to obedient steam, some
conditions are no longer hazardous that offered all sorts of dangers to the vessels
of the ancients. Picture those early navigators venturing forth in sailboats built


from planks lashed together with palm-tree ropes, caulked with powdered resin,
and coated with dogfish grease. They didn't even have instruments for taking
their bearings, they went by guesswork in the midst of currents they barely knew.
Under such conditions, shipwrecks had to be numerous. But nowadays steamers
providing service between Suez and the South Seas have nothing to fear from
the fury of this gulf, despite the contrary winds of its monsoons. Their captains
and passengers no longer prepare for departure with sacrifices to placate the
gods, and after returning, they don't traipse in wreaths and gold ribbons to say
thanks at the local temple."

"Agreed," I said. "And steam seems to have killed off all gratitude in
seamen's hearts. But since you seem to have made a special study of this sea,
captain, can you tell me how it got its name?"

"Many explanations exist on the subject, Professor Aronnax. Would you like
to hear the views of one chronicler in the 14th century?"

"Gladly."

"This fanciful fellow claims the sea was given its name after the crossing of
the Israelites, when the Pharaoh perished in those waves that came together
again at Moses' command:

To mark that miraculous sequel, the sea turned a red without equal.

Thus no other course would do but to name it for its hue."

"An artistic explanation, Captain Nemo," I replied, "but I'm unable to rest
content with it. So I'll ask you for your own personal views."

"Here they come. To my thinking, Professor Aronnax, this 'Red Sea’
designation must be regarded as a translation of the Hebrew word 'Edrom,' and if
the ancients gave it that name, it was because of the unique color of its waters."

"Until now, however, I've seen only clear waves, without any unique hue."

"Surely, but as we move ahead to the far end of this gulf, you'll note its odd
appearance. I recall seeing the bay of El Tur completely red, like a lake of
blood."

"And you attribute this color to the presence of microscopic algae?"

"Yes. It's a purplish, mucilaginous substance produced by those tiny buds
known by the name trichodesmia, 40,000 of which are needed to occupy the
space of one square millimeter. Perhaps you'll encounter them when we reach El
Tur."

"Hence, Captain Nemo, this isn't the first time you've gone through the Red
Sea aboard the Nautilus?"

"No, sir."

"Then, since you've already mentioned the crossing of the Israelites and the
catastrophe that befell the Egyptians, I would ask if you've ever discovered any


traces under the waters of that great historic event?"

"No, professor, and for an excellent reason."

"What's that?”

"It's because that same locality where Moses crossed with all his people is
now so clogged with sand, camels can barely get their legs wet. You can
understand that my Nautilus wouldn't have enough water for itself."

"And that locality is... ?" I asked.

"That locality lies a little above Suez in a sound that used to form a deep
estuary when the Red Sea stretched as far as the Bitter Lakes. Now, whether or
not their crossing was literally miraculous, the Israelites did cross there in
returning to the Promised Land, and the Pharaoh's army did perish at precisely
that locality. So I think that excavating those sands would bring to light a great
many weapons and tools of Egyptian origin."

"Obviously," I replied. "And for the sake of archaeology, let's hope that
sooner or later such excavations do take place, once new towns are settled on the
isthmus after the Suez Canal has been cut through-- a canal, by the way, of little
use to a ship such as the Nautilus!"

"Surely, but of great use to the world at large," Captain Nemo said. "The
ancients well understood the usefulness to commerce of connecting the Red Sea
with the Mediterranean, but they never dreamed of cutting a canal between the
two, and instead they picked the Nile as their link. If we can trust tradition, it
was probably Egypt's King Sesostris who started digging the canal needed to
join the Nile with the Red Sea. What's certain is that in 615 B.C. King Necho II
was hard at work on a canal that was fed by Nile water and ran through the
Egyptian plains opposite Arabia. This canal could be traveled in four days, and it
was so wide, two triple-tiered galleys could pass through it abreast. Its
construction was continued by Darius the Great, son of Hystaspes, and probably
completed by King Ptolemy II. Strabo saw it used for shipping; but the weakness
of its slope between its starting point, near Bubastis, and the Red Sea left it
navigable only a few months out of the year. This canal served commerce until
the century of Rome's Antonine emperors; it was then abandoned and covered
with sand, subsequently reinstated by Arabia's Caliph Omar I, and finally filled
in for good in 761 or 762 A.D. by Caliph Al-Mansur, in an effort to prevent
supplies from reaching Mohammed ibn Abdullah, who had rebelled against him.
During his Egyptian campaign, your General Napoleon Bonaparte discovered
traces of this old canal in the Suez desert, and when the tide caught him by
surprise, he wellnigh perished just a few hours before rejoining his regiment at
Hadjaroth, the very place where Moses had pitched camp 3,300 years before
him."


"Well, captain, what the ancients hesitated to undertake, Mr. de Lesseps is
now finishing up; his joining of these two seas will shorten the route from Cadiz
to the East Indies by 9,000 kilometers, and he'll soon change Africa into an
immense island."

"Yes, Professor Aronnax, and you have every right to be proud of your
fellow countryman. Such a man brings a nation more honor than the greatest
commanders! Like so many others, he began with difficulties and setbacks, but
he triumphed because he has the volunteer spirit. And it's sad to think that this
deed, which should have been an international deed, which would have insured
that any administration went down in history, will succeed only through the
efforts of one man. So all hail to Mr. de Lesseps!"

"Yes, all hail to that great French citizen," I replied, quite startled by how
emphatically Captain Nemo had just spoken.

"Unfortunately," he went on, "I can't take you through that Suez Canal, but
the day after tomorrow, you'll be able to see the long jetties of Port Said when
we're in the Mediterranean."

"In the Mediterranean!" I exclaimed.

"Yes, professor. Does that amaze you?"

"What amazes me is thinking we'll be there the day after tomorrow."

"Oh really?"

"Yes, captain, although since I've been aboard your vessel, I should have
formed the habit of not being amazed by anything!"

"But what is it that startles you?"

"The thought of how hideously fast the Nautilus will need to go, if it's to
double the Cape of Good Hope, circle around Africa, and lie in the open
Mediterranean by the day after tomorrow."

"And who says it will circle Africa, professor? What's this talk about
doubling the Cape of Good Hope?"

"But unless the Nautilus navigates on dry land and crosses over the isthmus--

"Or under it, Professor Aronnax."

"Under it?"

"Surely," Captain Nemo replied serenely. "Under that tongue of land, nature
long ago made what man today is making on its surface."

"What! There's a passageway?"

"Yes, an underground passageway that I've named the Arabian Tunnel. It
starts below Suez and leads to the Bay of Pelusium."

"But isn't that isthmus only composed of quicksand?"

"To a certain depth. But at merely fifty meters, one encounters a firm


foundation of rock."

"And it's by luck that you discovered this passageway?" I asked, more and
more startled.

"Luck plus logic, professor, and logic even more than luck."

"Captain, I hear you, but I can't believe my ears."

"Oh, sir! The old saying still holds good: Aures habent et non audient!* Not
only does this passageway exist, but I've taken advantage of it on several
occasions. Without it, I wouldn't have ventured today into such a blind alley as
the Red Sea."

*Latin: "They have ears but hear not." Ed.

"Is it indiscreet to ask how you discovered this tunnel?"

"Sir," the captain answered me, "there can be no secrets between men who
will never leave each other."

I ignored this innuendo and waited for Captain Nemo's explanation.

"Professor," he told me, "the simple logic of the naturalist led me to discover
this passageway, and I alone am familiar with it. I'd noted that in the Red Sea
and the Mediterranean there exist a number of absolutely identical species of
fish: eels, butterfish, greenfish, bass, jewelfish, flying fish. Certain of this fact, I
wondered if there weren't a connection between the two seas. If there were, its
underground current had to go from the Red Sea to the Mediterranean simply
because of their difference in level. So I caught a large number of fish in the
vicinity of Suez. I slipped copper rings around their tails and tossed them back
into the sea. A few months later off the coast of Syria, I recaptured a few
specimens of my fish, adorned with their telltale rings. So this proved to me that
some connection existed between the two seas. I searched for it with my
Nautilus, I discovered it, I ventured into it; and soon, professor, you also will
have cleared my Arabic tunnel!"


CHAPTER 5


Arabian Tunnel


THE SAME DAY, I reported to Conseil and Ned Land that part of the
foregoing conversation directly concerning them. When I told them we would be
lying in Mediterranean waters within two days, Conseil clapped his hands, but
the Canadian shrugged his shoulders.

"An underwater tunnel!" he exclaimed. "A connection between two seas!
Who ever heard of such malarkey!"

"Ned my friend," Conseil replied, "had you ever heard of the Nautilus? No,
yet here it is! So don't shrug your shoulders so blithely, and don't discount
something with the feeble excuse that you've never heard of it."

"We'll soon see!" Ned Land shot back, shaking his head. "After all, I'd like
nothing better than to believe in your captain's little passageway, and may
Heaven grant it really does take us to the Mediterranean."

The same evening, at latitude 21 degrees 30' north, the Nautilus was afloat
on the surface of the sea and drawing nearer to the Arab coast. I spotted Jidda, an
important financial center for Egypt, Syria, Turkey, and the East Indies. I could
distinguish with reasonable clarity the overall effect of its buildings, the ships
made fast along its wharves, and those bigger vessels whose draft of water
required them to drop anchor at the port's offshore mooring. The sun, fairly low
on the horizon, struck full force on the houses in this town, accenting their
whiteness. Outside the city limits, some wood or reed huts indicated the quarter
where the bedouins lived.

Soon Jidda faded into the shadows of evening, and the Nautilus went back
beneath the mildly phosphorescent waters.

The next day, February 10, several ships appeared, running on our opposite
tack. The Nautilus resumed its underwater navigating; but at the moment of our
noon sights, the sea was deserted and the ship rose again to its waterline.

With Ned and Conseil, I went to sit on the platform. The coast to the east
looked like a slightly blurred mass in a damp fog.

Leaning against the sides of the skiff, we were chatting of one thing and
another, when Ned Land stretched his hand toward a point in the water, saying to
me:

"See anything out there, professor?"

"No, Ned," I replied, "but you know I don't have your eyes."


"Take a good look," Ned went on. "There, ahead to starboard, almost level
with the beacon! Don't you see a mass that seems to be moving around?"

"Right," I said after observing carefully, "I can make out something like a
long, blackish object on the surface of the water."

"A second Nautilus?" Conseil said.

"No," the Canadian replied, "unless I'm badly mistaken, that's some marine
animal."

"Are there whales in the Red Sea?" Conseil asked.

"Yes, my boy," I replied, "they're sometimes found here."

"That's no whale," continued Ned Land, whose eyes never strayed from the
object they had sighted. "We're old chums, whales and I, and I couldn't mistake
their little ways."

"Let's wait and see," Conseil said. "The Nautilus is heading that direction,
and we'll soon know what we're in for."

In fact, that blackish object was soon only a mile away from us. It looked
like a huge reef stranded in midocean. What was it? I still couldn't make up my
mind.

"Oh, it's moving off! It's diving!" Ned Land exclaimed. "Damnation! What
can that animal be? It doesn't have a forked tail like baleen whales or sperm
whales, and its fins look like sawed-off limbs."

"But in that case--" I put in.

"Good lord," the Canadian went on, "it's rolled over on its back, and it's
raising its breasts in the air!"

"It's a siren!" Conseil exclaimed. "With all due respect to master, it's an
actual mermaid!"

That word "siren" put me back on track, and I realized that the animal
belonged to the order Sirenia: marine creatures that legends have turned into
mermaids, half woman, half fish.

"No," I told Conseil, "that's no mermaid, it's an unusual creature of which
only a few specimens are left in the Red Sea. That's a dugong."

"Order Sirenia, group Pisciforma, subclass Monodelphia, class Mammalia,
branch Vertebrata," Conseil replied.

And when Conseil has spoken, there's nothing else to be said.

Meanwhile Ned Land kept staring. His eyes were gleaming with desire at the
sight of that animal. His hands were ready to hurl a harpoon. You would have
thought he was waiting for the right moment to jump overboard and attack the
creature in its own element.

"Oh, sir," he told me in a voice trembling with excitement, "I've never killed
anything like that!"


His whole being was concentrated in this last word.

Just then Captain Nemo appeared on the platform. He spotted the dugong.
He understood the Canadian's frame of mind and addressed him directly:

"If you held a harpoon, Mr. Land, wouldn't your hands be itching to put it to
work?"

"Positively, sir."

"And just for one day, would it displease you to return to your fisherman's
trade and add this cetacean to the list of those you've already hunted down?"

"Tt wouldn't displease me one bit."

"All right, you can try your luck!"

"Thank you, sir," Ned Land replied, his eyes ablaze.

"Only," the captain went on, "I urge you to aim carefully at this animal, in
your own personal interest."

"Is the dugong dangerous to attack?" I asked, despite the Canadian's shrug of
the shoulders.

"Yes, sometimes," the captain replied. "These animals have been known to
turn on their assailants and capsize their longboats. But with Mr. Land that
danger isn't to be feared. His eye is sharp, his arm is sure. If I recommend that he
aim carefully at this dugong, it's because the animal is justly regarded as fine
game, and I know Mr. Land doesn't despise a choice morsel."

"Aha!" the Canadian put in. "This beast offers the added luxury of being
good to eat?"

"Yes, Mr. Land. Its flesh is actual red meat, highly prized, and set aside
throughout Malaysia for the tables of aristocrats. Accordingly, this excellent
animal has been hunted so bloodthirstily that, like its manatee relatives, it has
become more and more scarce."

"In that case, captain,” Conseil said in all seriousness, "on the offchance that
this creature might be the last of its line, wouldn't it be advisable to spare its life,
in the interests of science?"

"Maybe," the Canadian answered, "it would be better to hunt it down, in the
interests of mealtime."

"Then proceed, Mr. Land," Captain Nemo replied.

Just then, as mute and emotionless as ever, seven crewmen climbed onto the
platform. One carried a harpoon and line similar to those used in whale fishing.
Its deck paneling opened, the skiff was wrenched from its socket and launched to
sea. Six rowers Sat on the thwarts, and the coxswain took the tiller. Ned, Conseil,
and I found seats in the stern.

"Aren't you coming, captain?" I asked.

"No, sir, but I wish you happy hunting.”


The skiff pulled clear, and carried off by its six oars, it headed swiftly toward
the dugong, which by then was floating two miles from the Nautilus.

Arriving within a few cable lengths of the cetacean, our longboat slowed
down, and the sculls dipped noiselessly into the tranquil waters. Harpoon in
hand, Ned Land went to take his stand in the skiff's bow. Harpoons used for
hunting whales are usually attached to a very long rope that pays out quickly
when the wounded animal drags it with him. But this rope measured no more
than about ten fathoms, and its end had simply been fastened to a small barrel
that, while floating, would indicate the dugong's movements beneath the waters.

I stood up and could clearly observe the Canadian's adversary. This dugong--
which also boasts the name halicore--closely resembled a manatee. Its oblong
body ended in a very long caudal fin and its lateral fins in actual fingers. It
differs from the manatee in that its upper jaw is armed with two long, pointed
teeth that form diverging tusks on either side.

This dugong that Ned Land was preparing to attack was of colossal
dimensions, easily exceeding seven meters in length. It didn't stir and seemed to
be sleeping on the surface of the waves, a circumstance that should have made it
easier to capture.

The skiff approached cautiously to within three fathoms of the animal. The
oars hung suspended above their rowlocks. I was crouching. His body leaning
slightly back, Ned Land brandished his harpoon with expert hands.

Suddenly a hissing sound was audible, and the dugong disappeared.
Although the harpoon had been forcefully hurled, it apparently had hit only
water.

"Damnation!" exclaimed the furious Canadian. "I missed it!"

"No," I said, "the animal's wounded, there's its blood; but your weapon didn't
stick in its body."

"My harpoon! Get my harpoon!" Ned Land exclaimed.

The sailors went back to their sculling, and the coxswain steered the
longboat toward the floating barrel. We fished up the harpoon, and the skiff
started off in pursuit of the animal.

The latter returned from time to time to breathe at the surface of the sea. Its
wound hadn't weakened it because it went with tremendous speed. Driven by
energetic arms, the longboat flew on its trail. Several times we got within a few
fathoms of it, and the Canadian hovered in readiness to strike; but then the
dugong would steal away with a sudden dive, and it proved impossible to
overtake the beast.

I'll let you assess the degree of anger consuming our impatient Ned Land. He
hurled at the hapless animal the most potent swearwords in the English


language. For my part, I was simply distressed to see this dugong outwit our
every scheme.

We chased it unflaggingly for a full hour, and I'd begun to think it would
prove too difficult to capture, when the animal got the untimely idea of taking
revenge on us, a notion it would soon have cause to regret. It wheeled on the
skiff, to assault us in its turn.

This maneuver did not escape the Canadian.

"Watch out!" he said.

The coxswain pronounced a few words in his bizarre language, and no doubt
he alerted his men to keep on their guard.

Arriving within twenty feet of the skiff, the dugong stopped, sharply sniffing
the air with its huge nostrils, pierced not at the tip of its muzzle but on its
topside. Then it gathered itself and sprang at us.

The skiff couldn't avoid the collision. Half overturned, it shipped a ton or
two of water that we had to bail out. But thanks to our skillful coxswain, we
were fouled on the bias rather than broadside, so we didn't capsize. Clinging to
the stempost, Ned Land thrust his harpoon again and again into the gigantic
animal, which imbedded its teeth in our gunwale and lifted the longboat out of
the water as a lion would lift a deer. We were thrown on top of each other, and I
have no idea how the venture would have ended had not the Canadian, still
thirsting for the beast's blood, finally pierced it to the heart.

I heard its teeth grind on sheet iron, and the dugong disappeared, taking our
harpoon along with it. But the barrel soon popped up on the surface, and a few
moments later the animal's body appeared and rolled over on its back. Our skiff
rejoined it, took it in tow, and headed to the Nautilus.

It took pulleys of great strength to hoist this dugong onto the platform. The
beast weighed 5,000 kilograms. It was carved up in sight of the Canadian, who
remained to watch every detail of the operation. At dinner the same day, my
steward served me some slices of this flesh, skillfully dressed by the ship's cook.
I found it excellent, even better than veal if not beef.

The next morning, February 11, the Nautilus's pantry was enriched by more
dainty game. A covey of terns alighted on the Nautilus. They were a species of
Sterna nilotica unique to Egypt: beak black, head gray and stippled, eyes
surrounded by white dots, back, wings, and tail grayish, belly and throat white,
feet red. Also caught were a couple dozen Nile duck, superior-tasting wildfowl
whose neck and crown of the head are white speckled with black.

By then the Nautilus had reduced speed. It moved ahead at a saunter, so to
speak. I observed that the Red Sea's water was becoming less salty the closer we
got to Suez.


Near five o'clock in the afternoon, we sighted Cape Ras Mohammed to the
north. This cape forms the tip of Arabia Petraea, which lies between the Gulf of
Suez and the Gulf of Aqaba.

The Nautilus entered the Strait of Jubal, which leads to the Gulf of Suez. I
could clearly make out a high mountain crowning Ras Mohammed between the
two gulfs. It was Mt. Horeb, that biblical Mt. Sinai on whose summit Moses met
God face to face, that summit the mind's eye always pictures as wreathed in
lightning.

At six o'clock, sometimes afloat and sometimes submerged, the Nautilus
passed well out from El Tur, which sat at the far end of a bay whose waters
seemed to be dyed red, as Captain Nemo had already mentioned. Then night fell
in the midst of a heavy silence occasionally broken by the calls of pelicans and
nocturnal birds, by the sound of surf chafing against rocks, or by the distant
moan of a steamer churning the waves of the gulf with noisy blades.

From eight to nine o'clock, the Nautilus stayed a few meters beneath the
waters. According to my calculations, we had to be quite close to Suez. Through
the panels in the lounge, I spotted rocky bottoms brightly lit by our electric rays.
It seemed to me that the strait was getting narrower and narrower.

At 9:15 when our boat returned to the surface, I climbed onto the platform. I
was quite impatient to clear Captain Nemo's tunnel, couldn't sit still, and wanted
to breathe the fresh night air.

Soon, in the shadows, I spotted a pale signal light glimmering a mile away,
half discolored by mist.

"A floating lighthouse," said someone next to me.

I turned and discovered the captain.

"That's the floating signal light of Suez," he went on. "It won't be long before
we reach the entrance to the tunnel."

"Tt can't be very easy to enter it."

"No, sir. Accordingly, I'm in the habit of staying in the pilothouse and
directing maneuvers myself. And now if you'll kindly go below, Professor
Aronnax, the Nautilus is about to sink beneath the waves, and it will only return
to the surface after we've cleared the Arabian Tunnel."

I followed Captain Nemo. The hatch closed, the ballast tanks filled with
water, and the submersible sank some ten meters down.

Just as I was about to repair to my stateroom, the captain stopped me.

"Professor," he said to me, "would you like to go with me to the
wheelhouse?"

"I was afraid to ask," I replied.

"Come along, then. This way, you'll learn the full story about this


combination underwater and underground navigating."

Captain Nemo led me to the central companionway. In midstair he opened a
door, went along the upper gangways, and arrived at the wheelhouse, which, as
you know, stands at one end of the platform.

It was a cabin measuring six feet square and closely resembling those
occupied by the helmsmen of steamboats on the Mississippi or Hudson rivers. In
the center stood an upright wheel geared to rudder cables running to the
Nautilus's stern. Set in the cabin's walls were four deadlights, windows of
biconvex glass that enabled the man at the helm to see in every direction.

The cabin was dark; but my eyes soon grew accustomed to its darkness and I
saw the pilot, a muscular man whose hands rested on the pegs of the wheel.
Outside, the sea was brightly lit by the beacon shining behind the cabin at the
other end of the platform.

"Now," Captain Nemo said, "let's look for our passageway."

Electric wires linked the pilothouse with the engine room, and from this
cabin the captain could simultaneously signal heading and speed to his Nautilus.
He pressed a metal button and at once the propeller slowed down significantly.

I stared in silence at the high, sheer wall we were skirting just then, the firm
base of the sandy mountains on the coast. For an hour we went along it in this
fashion, staying only a few meters away. Captain Nemo never took his eyes off
the two concentric circles of the compass hanging in the cabin. At a mere gesture
from him, the helmsman would instantly change the Nautilus's heading.

Standing by the port deadlight, I spotted magnificent coral substructures,
zoophytes, algae, and crustaceans with enormous quivering claws that stretched
forth from crevices in the rock.

At 10:15 Captain Nemo himself took the helm. Dark and deep, a wide
gallery opened ahead of us. The Nautilus was brazenly swallowed up. Strange
rumblings were audible along our sides. It was the water of the Red Sea, hurled
toward the Mediterranean by the tunnel's slope. Our engines tried to offer
resistance by churning the waves with propeller in reverse, but the Nautilus went
with the torrent, as swift as an arrow.

Along the narrow walls of this passageway, I saw only brilliant streaks, hard
lines, fiery furrows, all scrawled by our speeding electric light. With my hand I
tried to curb the pounding of my heart.

At 10:35 Captain Nemo left the steering wheel and turned to me:

"The Mediterranean," he told me.

In less than twenty minutes, swept along by the torrent, the Nautilus had just
cleared the Isthmus of Suez.


CHAPTER 6


The Greek Islands


AT SUNRISE the next morning, February 12, the Nautilus rose to the surface
of the waves.

I rushed onto the platform. The hazy silhouette of Pelusium was outlined
three miles to the south. A torrent had carried us from one sea to the other. But
although that tunnel was easy to descend, going back up must have been
impossible.

Near seven o'clock Ned and Conseil joined me. Those two inseparable
companions had slept serenely, utterly unaware of the Nautilus's feat.

"Well, Mr. Naturalist," the Canadian asked in a gently mocking tone,
how about that Mediterranean?"

"We're floating on its surface, Ned my friend."

"What!" Conseil put in. "Last night... 2"

"Yes, last night, in a matter of minutes, we cleared that insuperable isthmus."

"IT don't believe a word of it," the Canadian replied.

"And you're in the wrong, Mr. Land," I went on. "That flat coastline curving
southward is the coast of Egypt."

"Tell it to the marines, sir," answered the stubborn Canadian.

"But if master says so," Conseil told him, "then so be it."

"What's more, Ned," I said, "Captain Nemo himself did the honors in his
tunnel, and I stood beside him in the pilothouse while he steered the Nautilus
through that narrow passageway."

"You hear, Ned?" Conseil said.

"And you, Ned, who have such good eyes," I added, "you can spot the jetties
of Port Said stretching out to sea."

The Canadian looked carefully.

"Correct," he said. "You're right, professor, and your captain's a superman.
We're in the Mediterranean. Fine. So now let's have a chat about our little
doings, if you please, but in such a way that nobody overhears."

I could easily see what the Canadian was driving at. In any event, I thought it
best to let him have his chat, and we all three went to sit next to the beacon,
where we were less exposed to the damp spray from the billows.

"Now, Ned, we're all ears," I said. "What have you to tell us?"

"What I've got to tell you is very simple," the Canadian replied. "We're in


W


and


Europe, and before Captain Nemo's whims take us deep into the polar seas or
back to Oceania, I say we should leave this Nautilus."

I confess that such discussions with the Canadian always baffled me. I didn't
want to restrict my companions' freedom in any way, and yet I had no desire to
leave Captain Nemo. Thanks to him and his submersible, I was finishing my
undersea research by the day, and I was rewriting my book on the great ocean
depths in the midst of its very element. Would I ever again have such an
opportunity to observe the ocean's wonders? Absolutely not! So I couldn't
entertain this idea of leaving the Nautilus before completing our course of
inquiry.

"Ned my friend," I said, "answer me honestly. Are you bored with this ship?
Are you sorry that fate has cast you into Captain Nemo's hands?"

The Canadian paused for a short while before replying. Then, crossing his
arms:

"Honestly," he said, "I'm not sorry about this voyage under the seas. I'll be
glad to have done it, but in order to have done it, it has to finish. That's my
feeling.”

"It will finish, Ned."

"Where and when?"

"Where? I don't know. When? I can't say. Or, rather, I suppose it will be over
when these seas have nothing more to teach us. Everything that begins in this
world must inevitably come to an end."

"I think as master does," Conseil replied, "and it's extremely possible that
after crossing every sea on the globe, Captain Nemo will bid the three of us a
fond farewell."

"Bid us a fond farewell?" the Canadian exclaimed. "You mean beat us to a
fare-thee-well!"

"Let's not exaggerate, Mr. Land," I went on. "We have nothing to fear from
the captain, but neither do I share Conseil's views. We're privy to the Nautilus's
secrets, and I don't expect that its commander, just to set us free, will meekly
stand by while we spread those secrets all over the world."

"But in that case what do you expect?" the Canadian asked.

"That we'll encounter advantageous conditions for escaping just as readily in
six months as now."

"Great Scott!" Ned Land put in. "And where, if you please, will we be in six
months, Mr. Naturalist?"

"Perhaps here, perhaps in China. You know how quickly the Nautilus moves.
It crosses oceans like swallows cross the air or express trains continents. It
doesn't fear heavily traveled seas. Who can say it won't hug the coasts of France,


England, or America, where an escape attempt could be carried out just as
effectively as here."

"Professor Aronnax,” the Canadian replied, "your arguments are rotten to the
core. You talk way off in the future: 'We'll be here, we'll be there!’ Me, I'm
talking about right now: we are here, and we must take advantage of it!"

I was hard pressed by Ned Land's common sense, and I felt myself losing
ground. I no longer knew what arguments to put forward on my behalf.

"Sir," Ned went on, "let's suppose that by some impossibility, Captain Nemo
offered your freedom to you this very day. Would you accept?"

"I don't know," I replied.

"And suppose he adds that this offer he's making you today won't ever be
repeated, then would you accept?"

I did not reply.

"And what thinks our friend Conseil?" Ned Land asked.

"Your friend Conseil," the fine lad replied serenely, "has nothing to say for
himself. He's a completely disinterested party on this question. Like his master,
like his comrade Ned, he's a bachelor. Neither wife, parents, nor children are
waiting for him back home. He's in master's employ, he thinks like master, he
speaks like master, and much to his regret, he can't be counted on to form a
majority. Only two persons face each other here: master on one side, Ned Land
on the other. That said, your friend Conseil is listening, and he's ready to keep
score."

I couldn't help smiling as Conseil wiped himself out of existence. Deep
down, the Canadian must have been overjoyed at not having to contend with
him.

"Then, sir," Ned Land said, "since Conseil is no more, we'll have this
discussion between just the two of us. I've talked, you've listened. What's your
reply?"

It was obvious that the matter had to be settled, and evasions were distasteful
to me.

"Ned my friend," I said, "here's my reply. You have right on your side and
my arguments can't stand up to yours. It will never do to count on Captain
Nemo's benevolence. The most ordinary good sense would forbid him to set us
free. On the other hand, good sense decrees that we take advantage of our first
opportunity to leave the Nautilus."

"Fine, Professor Aronnax, that's wisely said."

"But one proviso," I said, "just one. The opportunity must be the real thing.
Our first attempt to escape must succeed, because if it misfires, we won't get a
second chance, and Captain Nemo will never forgive us."


"That's also well put," the Canadian replied. "But your proviso applies to any
escape attempt, whether it happens in two years or two days. So this is still the
question: if a promising opportunity comes up, we have to grab it."

"Agreed. And now, Ned, will you tell me what you mean by a promising
opportunity?"

"One that leads the Nautilus on a cloudy night within a short distance of
some European coast."

"And you'll try to get away by swimming?"

"Yes, if we're close enough to shore and the ship's afloat on the surface. No,
if we're well out and the ship's navigating under the waters."

"And in that event?"

"In that event I'll try to get hold of the skiff. I know how to handle it. We'll
stick ourselves inside, undo the bolts, and rise to the surface, without the
helmsman in the bow seeing a thing."

"Fine, Ned. Stay on the lookout for such an opportunity, but don't forget, one
slipup will finish us."

"I won't forget, sir."

"And now, Ned, would you like to know my overall thinking on your plan?"

"Gladly, Professor Aronnax."

"Well then, I think--and I don't mean ‘I hope'--that your promising
opportunity won't ever arise."

"Why not?"

"Because Captain Nemo recognizes that we haven't given up all hope of
recovering our freedom, and he'll keep on his guard, above all in seas within
sight of the coasts of Europe."

"I'm of master's opinion," Conseil said.

"We'll soon see," Ned Land replied, shaking his head with a determined
expression.

"And now, Ned Land," I added, "let's leave it at that. Not another word on
any of this. The day you're ready, alert us and we're with you. I turn it all over to
you."

That's how we ended this conversation, which later was to have such serious
consequences. At first, I must say, events seemed to confirm my forecasts, much
to the Canadian's despair. Did Captain Nemo view us with distrust in these
heavily traveled seas, or did he simply want to hide from the sight of those ships
of every nation that plowed the Mediterranean? I have no idea, but usually he
stayed in midwater and well out from any coast. Either the Nautilus surfaced
only enough to let its pilothouse emerge, or it slipped away to the lower depths,
although, between the Greek Islands and Asia Minor, we didn't find bottom even


at 2,000 meters down.

Accordingly, I became aware of the isle of Karpathos, one of the Sporades
Islands, only when Captain Nemo placed his finger over a spot on the world map
and quoted me this verse from Virgil:

Est in Carpathio Neptuni gurgite vates

Caeruleus Proteus. . .*

*Latin: "There in King Neptune's domain by Karpathos, his spokesman / is
azure-hued Proteus..." Ed.

It was indeed that bygone abode of Proteus, the old shepherd of King
Neptune's flocks: an island located between Rhodes and Crete, which Greeks
now call Karpathos, Italians Scarpanto. Through the lounge window I could see
only its granite bedrock.

The next day, February 14, I decided to spend a few hours studying the fish
of this island group; but for whatever reason, the panels remained hermetically
sealed. After determining the Nautilus's heading, I noted that it was proceeding
toward the ancient island of Crete, also called Candia. At the time I had shipped
aboard the Abraham Lincoln, this whole island was in rebellion against its
tyrannical rulers, the Ottoman Empire of Turkey. But since then I had absolutely
no idea what happened to this revolution, and Captain Nemo, deprived of all
contact with the shore, was hardly the man to keep me informed.

So I didn't allude to this event when, that evening, I chanced to be alone with
the captain in the lounge. Besides, he seemed silent and preoccupied. Then,
contrary to custom, he ordered that both panels in the lounge be opened, and
going from the one to the other, he carefully observed the watery mass. For what
purpose? I hadn't a guess, and for my part, I spent my time studying the fish that
passed before my eyes.

Among others I noted that sand goby mentioned by Aristotle and commonly
known by the name sea loach, which is encountered exclusively in the salty
waters next to the Nile Delta. Near them some semiphosphorescent red porgy
rolled by, a variety of gilthead that the Egyptians ranked among their sacred
animals, lauding them in religious ceremonies when their arrival in the river's
waters announced the fertile flood season. I also noticed some wrasse known as
the tapiro, three decimeters long, bony fish with transparent scales whose bluish
gray color is mixed with red spots; they're enthusiastic eaters of marine
vegetables, which gives them an exquisite flavor; hence these tapiro were much
in demand by the epicures of ancient Rome, and their entrails were dressed with
brains of peacock, tongue of flamingo, and testes of moray to make that divine
platter that so enraptured the Roman emperor Vitellius.

Another resident of these seas caught my attention and revived all my


memories of antiquity. This was the remora, which travels attached to the bellies
of sharks; as the ancients tell it, when these little fish cling to the undersides of a
ship, they can bring it to a halt, and by so impeding

Mark Antony's vessel during the Battle of Actium, one of them facilitated the
victory of Augustus Caesar. From such slender threads hang the destinies of
nations! I also observed some wonderful snappers belonging to the order
Lutianida, sacred fish for the Greeks, who claimed they could drive off sea
monsters from the waters they frequent; their Greek name anthias means
"flower," and they live up to it in the play of their colors and in those fleeting
reflections that turn their dorsal fins into watered silk; their hues are confined to
a gamut of reds, from the pallor of pink to the glow of ruby. I couldn't take my
eyes off these marine wonders, when I was suddenly jolted by an unexpected
apparition.

In the midst of the waters, a man appeared, a diver carrying a little leather
bag at his belt. It was no corpse lost in the waves. It was a living man, swimming
vigorously, sometimes disappearing to breathe at the surface, then instantly
diving again.

I turned to Captain Nemo, and in an agitated voice:

"A man! A castaway!" I exclaimed. 'We must rescue him at all cost!"

The captain didn't reply but went to lean against the window.

The man drew near, and gluing his face to the panel, he stared at us.

To my deep astonishment, Captain Nemo gave him a signal. The diver
answered with his hand, immediately swam up to the surface of the sea, and
didn't reappear.

"Don't be alarmed," the captain told me. "That's Nicolas from Cape Matapan,
nicknamed 'Il Pesce.'* He's well known throughout the Cyclades Islands. A bold
diver! Water is his true element, and he lives in the sea more than on shore,
going constantly from one island to another, even to Crete."

*Ttalian: "The Fish." Ed.

"You know him, captain?"

"Why not, Professor Aronnax?"

This said, Captain Nemo went to a cabinet standing near the lounge's left
panel. Next to this cabinet I saw a chest bound with hoops of iron, its lid bearing
a copper plaque that displayed the Nautilus's monogram with its motto Mobilis
in Mobili.

Just then, ignoring my presence, the captain opened this cabinet, a sort of
safe that contained a large number of ingots.

They were gold ingots. And they represented an enormous sum of money.
Where had this precious metal come from? How had the captain amassed this


gold, and what was he about to do with it?

I didn't pronounce a word. I gaped. Captain Nemo took out the ingots one by
one and arranged them methodically inside the chest, filling it to the top. At
which point I estimate that it held more than 1,000 kilograms of gold, in other
words, close to 5,000,000 francs.

After securely fastening the chest, Captain Nemo wrote an address on its lid
in characters that must have been modern Greek.

This done, the captain pressed a button whose wiring was in communication
with the crew's quarters. Four men appeared and, not without difficulty, pushed
the chest out of the lounge. Then I heard them hoist it up the iron companionway
by means of pulleys.

Just then Captain Nemo turned to me:

"You were saying, professor?” he asked me.

"I wasn't saying a thing, captain."

"Then, sir, with your permission, I'll bid you good evening."

And with that, Captain Nemo left the lounge.

I reentered my stateroom, very puzzled, as you can imagine. I tried in vain to
fall asleep. I kept searching for a relationship between the appearance of the
diver and that chest filled with gold. Soon, from certain rolling and pitching
movements, I sensed that the Nautilus had left the lower strata and was back on
the surface of the water.

Then I heard the sound of footsteps on the platform. I realized that the skiff
was being detached and launched to sea. For an instant it bumped the Nautilus's
side, then all sounds ceased.

Two hours later, the same noises, the same comings and goings, were
repeated. Hoisted on board, the longboat was readjusted into its socket, and the
Nautilus plunged back beneath the waves.

So those millions had been delivered to their address. At what spot on the
continent? Who was the recipient of Captain Nemo's gold?

The next day I related the night's events to Conseil and the Canadian, events
that had aroused my curiosity to a fever pitch. My companions were as startled
as I was.

"But where does he get those millions?" Ned Land asked.

To this no reply was possible. After breakfast I made my way to the lounge
and went about my work. I wrote up my notes until five o'clock in the afternoon.
Just then--was it due to some personal indisposition?--I felt extremely hot and
had to take off my jacket made of fan mussel fabric. A perplexing circumstance
because we weren't in the low latitudes, and besides, once the Nautilus was
submerged, it shouldn't be subject to any rise in temperature. I looked at the


pressure gauge. It marked a depth of sixty feet, a depth beyond the reach of
atmospheric heat.

I kept on working, but the temperature rose to the point of becoming
unbearable.

"Could there be a fire on board?" I wondered.

I was about to leave the lounge when Captain Nemo entered. He approached
the thermometer, consulted it, and turned to me:

"42 degrees centigrade," he said.

"T've detected as much, captain," I replied, "and if it gets even slightly hotter,
we won't be able to stand it."

"Oh, professor, it won't get any hotter unless we want it to!"

"You mean you can control this heat?"

"No, but I can back away from the fireplace producing it."

"So it's outside?"

"Surely. We're cruising in a current of boiling water."

"Tt can't be!" I exclaimed.

"Look."

The panels had opened, and I could see a completely white sea around the
Nautilus. Steaming sulfurous fumes uncoiled in the midst of waves bubbling like
water in a boiler. I leaned my hand against one of the windows, but the heat was
so great, I had to snatch it back.

"Where are we?" I asked.

"Near the island of Santorini, professor," the captain answered me, "and right
in the channel that separates the volcanic islets of Nea Kameni and Palea
Kameni. I wanted to offer you the unusual sight of an underwater eruption."

"T thought," I said, "that the formation of such new islands had come to an
end."

"Nothing ever comes to an end in these volcanic waterways," Captain Nemo
replied, "and thanks to its underground fires, our globe is continuously under
construction in these regions. According to the Latin historians Cassiodorus and
Pliny, by the year 19 of the Christian era, a new island, the divine Thera, had
already appeared in the very place these islets have more recently formed. Then
Thera sank under the waves, only to rise and sink once more in the year 69 A.D.
From that day to this, such plutonic construction work has been in abeyance. But
on February 3, 1866, a new islet named George Island emerged in the midst of
sulfurous steam near Nea Kameni and was fused to it on the 6th of the same
month. Seven days later, on February 13, the islet of Aphroessa appeared,
leaving a ten-meter channel between itself and Nea Kameni. I was in these seas
when that phenomenon occurred and I was able to observe its every phase. The


islet of Aphroessa was circular in shape, measuring 300 feet in diameter and
thirty feet in height. It was made of black, glassy lava mixed with bits of
feldspar. Finally, on March 10, a smaller islet called Reka appeared next to Nea
Kameni, and since then, these three islets have fused to form one single,
selfsame island."

"What about this channel we're in right now?" I asked.

"Here it is," Captain Nemo replied, showing me a chart of the Greek Islands.
"You observe that I've entered the new islets in their place."

"But will this channel fill up one day?"

"Very likely, Professor Aronnax, because since 1866 eight little lava islets
have surged up in front of the port of St. Nicolas on Palea Kameni. So it's
obvious that Nea and Palea will join in days to come. In the middle of the
Pacific, tiny infusoria build continents, but here they're built by volcanic
phenomena. Look, sir! Look at the construction work going on under these
waves."

I returned to the window. The Nautilus was no longer moving. The heat had
become unbearable. From the white it had recently been, the sea was turning red,
a coloration caused by the presence of iron salts. Although the lounge was
hermetically sealed, it was filling with an intolerable stink of sulfur, and I could
see scarlet flames of such brightness, they overpowered our electric light.

I was swimming in perspiration, I was stifling, I was about to be cooked.
Yes, I felt myself cooking in actual fact!

"We can't stay any longer in this boiling water," I told the captain.

"No, it wouldn't be advisable," replied Nemo the Emotionless.

He gave an order. The Nautilus tacked about and retreated from this furnace
it couldn't brave with impunity. A quarter of an hour later, we were breathing
fresh air on the surface of the waves.

It then occurred to me that if Ned had chosen these waterways for our escape
attempt, we wouldn't have come out alive from this sea of fire.

The next day, February 16, we left this basin, which tallies depths of 3,000
meters between Rhodes and Alexandria, and passing well out from Cerigo Island
after doubling Cape Matapan, the Nautilus left the Greek Islands behind.


CHAPTER 7


The Mediterranean in Forty-Eight Hours


THE MEDITERRANEAN, your ideal blue sea: to Greeks simply "the sea,"
to Hebrews "the great sea," to Romans mare nostrum.* Bordered by orange
trees, aloes, cactus, and maritime pine trees, perfumed with the scent of myrtle,
framed by rugged mountains, saturated with clean, transparent air but
continuously under construction by fires in the earth, this sea is a genuine
battlefield where Neptune and Pluto still struggle for world domination. Here on
these beaches and waters, says the French historian Michelet, a man is revived
by one of the most invigorating climates in the world.

*Latin: "our sea." Ed.

But as beautiful as it was, I could get only a quick look at this basin whose
surface area comprises 2,000,000 square kilometers. Even Captain Nemo's
personal insights were denied me, because that mystifying individual didn't
appear one single time during our high-speed crossing. I estimate that the
Nautilus covered a track of some 600 leagues under the waves of this sea, and
this voyage was accomplished in just twenty-four hours times two. Departing
from the waterways of Greece on the morning of February 16, we cleared the
Strait of Gibraltar by sunrise on the 18th.

It was obvious to me that this Mediterranean, pinned in the middle of those
shores he wanted to avoid, gave Captain Nemo no pleasure. Its waves and
breezes brought back too many memories, if not too many regrets. Here he no
longer had the ease of movement and freedom of maneuver that the oceans
allowed him, and his Nautilus felt cramped so close to the coasts of both Africa
and Europe.

Accordingly, our speed was twenty-five miles (that is, twelve four-kilometer
leagues) per hour. Needless to say, Ned Land had to give up his escape plans,
much to his distress. Swept along at the rate of twelve to thirteen meters per
second, he could hardly make use of the skiff. Leaving the Nautilus under these
conditions would have been like jumping off a train racing at this speed, a rash
move if there ever was one. Moreover, to renew our air supply, the submersible
rose to the surface of the waves only at night, and relying solely on compass and
log, it steered by dead reckoning.

Inside the Mediterranean, then, I could catch no more of its fast-passing
scenery than a traveler might see from an express train; in other words, I could


view only the distant horizons because the foregrounds flashed by like lightning.
But Conseil and I were able to observe those Mediterranean fish whose powerful
fins kept pace for a while in the Nautilus's waters. We stayed on watch before the
lounge windows, and our notes enable me to reconstruct, in a few words, the
ichthyology of this sea.

Among the various fish inhabiting it, some I viewed, others I glimpsed, and
the rest I missed completely because of the Nautilus's speed. Kindly allow me to
sort them out using this whimsical system of classification. It will at least convey
the quickness of my observations.

In the midst of the watery mass, brightly lit by our electric beams, there
snaked past those one-meter lampreys that are common to nearly every clime. A
type of ray from the genus Oxyrhynchus, five feet wide, had a white belly with a
spotted, ash-gray back and was carried along by the currents like a huge, wide-
open shawl. Other rays passed by so quickly I couldn't tell if they deserved that
name "eagle ray" coined by the ancient Greeks, or those designations of "rat
ray," "bat ray," and "toad ray" that modern fishermen have inflicted on them.
Dogfish known as topes, twelve feet long and especially feared by divers, were
racing with each other. Looking like big bluish shadows, thresher sharks went
by, eight feet long and gifted with an extremely acute sense of smell. Dorados
from the genus Sparus, some measuring up to thirteen decimeters, appeared in
silver and azure costumes encircled with ribbons, which contrasted with the dark
color of their fins; fish sacred to the goddess Venus, their eyes set in brows of
gold; a valuable species that patronizes all waters fresh or salt, equally at home
in rivers, lakes, and oceans, living in every clime, tolerating any temperature,
their line dating back to prehistoric times on this earth yet preserving all its
beauty from those far-off days. Magnificent sturgeons, nine to ten meters long
and extremely fast, banged their powerful tails against the glass of our panels,
showing bluish backs with small brown spots; they resemble sharks, without
equaling their strength, and are encountered in every sea; in the spring they
delight in swimming up the great rivers, fighting the currents of the Volga,
Danube, Po, Rhine, Loire, and Oder, while feeding on herring, mackerel,
salmon, and codfish; although they belong to the class of cartilaginous fish, they
rate as a delicacy; they're eaten fresh, dried, marinated, or salt-preserved, and in
olden times they were borne in triumph to the table of the Roman epicure
Lucullus.

But whenever the Nautilus drew near the surface, those denizens of the
Mediterranean I could observe most productively belonged to the sixty-third
genus of bony fish. These were tuna from the genus Scomber, blue-black on top,
silver on the belly armor, their dorsal stripes giving off a golden gleam. They are


said to follow ships in search of refreshing shade from the hot tropical sun, and
they did just that with the Nautilus, as they had once done with the vessels of the
Count de La Pérouse. For long hours they competed in speed with our
submersible. I couldn't stop marveling at these animals so perfectly cut out for
racing, their heads small, their bodies sleek, spindle-shaped, and in some cases
over three meters long, their pectoral fins gifted with remarkable strength, their
caudal fins forked. Like certain flocks of birds, whose speed they equal, these
tuna swim in triangle formation, which prompted the ancients to say they'd
boned up on geometry and military strategy. And yet they can't escape the
Provencal fishermen, who prize them as highly as did the ancient inhabitants of
Turkey and Italy; and these valuable animals, as oblivious as if they were deaf
and blind, leap right into the Marseilles tuna nets and perish by the thousands.

Just for the record, I'll mention those Mediterranean fish that Conseil and I
barely glimpsed. There were whitish eels of the species Gymnotus fasciatus that
passed like elusive wisps of steam, conger eels three to four meters long that
were tricked out in green, blue, and yellow, three-foot hake with a liver that
makes a dainty morsel, wormfish drifting like thin seaweed, sea robins that poets
call lyrefish and seamen pipers and whose snouts have two jagged triangular
plates shaped like old Homer's lyre, swallowfish swimming as fast as the bird
they're named after, redheaded groupers whose dorsal fins are trimmed with
filaments, some shad (spotted with black, gray, brown, blue, yellow, and green)
that actually respond to tinkling handbells, splendid diamond-shaped turbot that
were like aquatic pheasants with yellowish fins stippled in brown and the left
topside mostly marbled in brown and yellow, finally schools of wonderful red
mullet, real oceanic birds of paradise that ancient Romans bought for as much as
10,000 sesterces apiece, and which they killed at the table, so they could
heartlessly watch it change color from cinnabar red when alive to pallid white
when dead.

And as for other fish common to the Atlantic and Mediterranean, I was
unable to observe miralets, triggerfish, puffers, seahorses, jewelfish, trumpetfish,
blennies, gray mullet, wrasse, smelt, flying fish, anchovies, sea bream, porgies,
garfish, or any of the chief representatives of the order Pleuronecta, such as sole,
flounder, plaice, dab, and brill, simply because of the dizzying speed with which
the Nautilus hustled through these opulent waters.

As for marine mammals, on passing by the mouth of the Adriatic Sea, I
thought I recognized two or three sperm whales equipped with the single dorsal
fin denoting the genus Physeter, some pilot whales from the genus
Globicephalus exclusive to the Mediterranean, the forepart of the head striped
with small distinct lines, and also a dozen seals with white bellies and black


coats, known by the name monk seals and just as solemn as if they were three-
meter Dominicans.

For his part, Conseil thought he spotted a turtle six feet wide and adorned
with three protruding ridges that ran lengthwise. I was sorry to miss this reptile,
because from Conseil's description, I believe I recognized the leatherback turtle,
a pretty rare species. For my part, I noted only some loggerhead turtles with long
carapaces.

As for zoophytes, for a few moments I was able to marvel at a wonderful,
orange-hued hydra from the genus Galeolaria that clung to the glass of our port
panel; it consisted of a long, lean filament that spread out into countless branches
and ended in the most delicate lace ever spun by the followers of Arachne.
Unfortunately I couldn't fish up this wonderful specimen, and surely no other
Mediterranean zoophytes would have been offered to my gaze, if, on the evening
of the 16th, the Nautilus hadn't slowed down in an odd fashion. This was the
situation.

By then we were passing between Sicily and the coast of Tunisia. In the
cramped space between Cape Bon and the Strait of Messina, the sea bottom rises
almost all at once. It forms an actual ridge with only seventeen meters of water
remaining above it, while the depth on either side is 170 meters. Consequently,
the Nautilus had to maneuver with caution so as not to bump into this
underwater barrier.

I showed Conseil the position of this long reef on our chart of the
Mediterranean.

"But with all due respect to master," Conseil ventured to observe, "it's like an
actual isthmus connecting Europe to Africa."

"Yes, my boy," I replied, "it cuts across the whole Strait of Sicily, and Smith's
soundings prove that in the past, these two continents were genuinely connected
between Cape Boeo and Cape Farina."

"T can easily believe it," Conseil said.

"I might add," I went on, "that there's a similar barrier between Gibraltar and
Ceuta, and in prehistoric times it closed off the Mediterranean completely."

"Gracious!" Conseil put in. "Suppose one day some volcanic upheaval raises
these two barriers back above the waves!"

"That's most unlikely, Conseil."

"If master will allow me to finish, I mean that if this phenomenon occurs, it
might prove distressing to Mr. de Lesseps, who has gone to such pains to cut
through his isthmus!"

"Agreed, but I repeat, Conseil: such a phenomenon won't occur. The
intensity of these underground forces continues to diminish. Volcanoes were


quite numerous in the world's early days, but they're going extinct one by one;
the heat inside the earth is growing weaker, the temperature in the globe's lower
strata is cooling appreciably every century, and to our globe's detriment, because
its heat is its life."

"But the sun--"

"The sun isn't enough, Conseil. Can it restore heat to a corpse?"

"Not that I've heard."

"Well, my friend, someday the earth will be just such a cold corpse. Like the
moon, which long ago lost its vital heat, our globe will become lifeless and
unlivable."

"In how many centuries?" Conseil asked.

"In hundreds of thousands of years, my boy."

"Then we have ample time to finish our voyage," Conseil replied, "if Ned
Land doesn't mess things up!"

Thus reassured, Conseil went back to studying the shallows that the Nautilus
was skimming at moderate speed.

On the rocky, volcanic seafloor, there bloomed quite a collection of moving
flora: sponges, sea cucumbers, jellyfish called sea gooseberries that were
adorned with reddish tendrils and gave off a subtle phosphorescence, members
of the genus Beroe that are commonly known by the name melon jellyfish and
are bathed in the shimmer of the whole solar spectrum, free-swimming crinoids
one meter wide that reddened the waters with their crimson hue, treelike basket
stars of the greatest beauty, sea fans from the genus Pavonacea with long stems,
numerous edible sea urchins of various species, plus green sea anemones with a
grayish trunk and a brown disk lost beneath the olive-colored tresses of their
tentacles.

Conseil kept especially busy observing mollusks and articulates, and
although his catalog is a little dry, I wouldn't want to wrong the gallant lad by
leaving out his personal observations.

From the branch Mollusca, he mentions numerous comb-shaped scallops,
hooflike spiny oysters piled on top of each other, triangular coquina, three-
pronged glass snails with yellow fins and transparent shells, orange snails from
the genus Pleurobranchus that looked like eggs spotted or speckled with greenish
dots, members of the genus Aplysia also known by the name sea hares, other sea
hares from the genus Dolabella, plump paper-bubble shells, umbrella shells
exclusive to the Mediterranean, abalone whose shell produces a mother-of-pearl
much in demand, pilgrim scallops, saddle shells that diners in the French
province of Languedoc are said to like better than oysters, some of those
cockleshells so dear to the citizens of Marseilles, fat white venus shells that are


among the clams so abundant off the coasts of North America and eaten in such
quantities by New Yorkers, variously colored comb shells with gill covers,
burrowing date mussels with a peppery flavor I relish, furrowed heart cockles
whose shells have riblike ridges on their arching summits, triton shells pocked
with scarlet bumps, carniaira snails with backward-curving tips that make them
resemble flimsy gondolas, crowned ferola snails, atlanta snails with spiral shells,
gray nudibranchs from the genus Tethys that were spotted with white and
covered by fringed mantles, nudibranchs from the suborder Eolidea that looked
like small slugs, sea butterflies crawling on their backs, seashells from the genus
Auricula including the oval-shaped Auricula myosotis, tan wentletrap snails,
common periwinkles, violet snails, cineraira snails, rock borers, ear shells,
cabochon snails, pandora shells, etc.

As for the articulates, in his notes Conseil has very appropriately divided
them into six classes, three of which belong to the marine world. These classes
are the Crustacea, Cirripedia, and Annelida.

Crustaceans are subdivided into nine orders, and the first of these consists of
the decapods, in other words, animals whose head and thorax are usually fused,
whose cheek-and-mouth mechanism is made up of several pairs of appendages,
and whose thorax has four, five, or six pairs of walking legs. Conseil used the
methods of our mentor Professor Milne-Edwards, who puts the decapods in three
divisions: Brachyura, Macrura, and Anomura. These names may look a tad
fierce, but they're accurate and appropriate. Among the Brachyura, Conseil
mentions some amanthia crabs whose fronts were armed with two big diverging
tips, those inachus scorpions that-- lord knows why--symbolized wisdom to the
ancient Greeks, spider crabs of the massena and spinimane varieties that had
probably gone astray in these shallows because they usually live in the lower
depths, xanthid crabs, pilumna crabs, rhomboid crabs, granular box crabs (easy
on the digestion, as Conseil ventured to observe), toothless masked crabs, ebalia
crabs, cymopolia crabs, woolly-handed crabs, etc. Among the Macrura (which
are subdivided into five families: hardshells, burrowers, crayfish, prawns, and
ghost crabs) Conseil mentions some common spiny lobsters whose females
supply a meat highly prized, slipper lobsters or common shrimp, waterside gebia
shrimp, and all sorts of edible species, but he says nothing of the crayfish
subdivision that includes the true lobster, because spiny lobsters are the only
type in the Mediterranean. Finally, among the Anomura, he saw common
drocina crabs dwelling inside whatever abandoned seashells they could take
over, homola crabs with spiny fronts, hermit crabs, hairy porcelain crabs, etc.

There Conseil's work came to a halt. He didn't have time to finish off the
class Crustacea through an examination of its stomatopods, amphipods,


homopods, isopods, trilobites, branchiopods, ostracods, and entomostraceans.
And in order to complete his study of marine articulates, he needed to mention
the class Cirripedia, which contains water fleas and carp lice, plus the class
Annelida, which he would have divided without fail into tubifex worms and
dorsibranchian worms. But having gone past the shallows of the Strait of Sicily,
the Nautilus resumed its usual deep-water speed. From then on, no more
mollusks, no more zoophytes, no more articulates. Just a few large fish sweeping
by like shadows.

During the night of February 16-17, we entered the second Mediterranean
basin, whose maximum depth we found at 3,000 meters. The Nautilus, driven
downward by its propeller and slanting fins, descended to the lowest strata of
this sea.

There, in place of natural wonders, the watery mass offered some thrilling
and dreadful scenes to my eyes. In essence, we were then crossing that part of
the whole Mediterranean so fertile in casualties. From the coast of Algiers to the
beaches of Provence, how many ships have wrecked, how many vessels have
vanished! Compared to the vast liquid plains of the Pacific, the Mediterranean is
a mere lake, but it's an unpredictable lake with fickle waves, today kindly and
affectionate to those frail single-masters drifting between a double ultramarine of
sky and water, tomorrow bad-tempered and turbulent, agitated by the winds,
demolishing the strongest ships beneath sudden waves that smash down with a
headlong wallop.

So, in our swift cruise through these deep strata, how many vessels I saw
lying on the seafloor, some already caked with coral, others clad only in a layer
of rust, plus anchors, cannons, shells, iron fittings, propeller blades, parts of
engines, cracked cylinders, staved-in boilers, then hulls floating in midwater,
here upright, there overturned.

Some of these wrecked ships had perished in collisions, others from hitting
granite reefs. I saw a few that had sunk straight down, their masting still upright,
their rigging stiffened by the water. They looked like they were at anchor by
some immense, open, offshore mooring where they were waiting for their
departure time. When the Nautilus passed between them, covering them with
sheets of electricity, they seemed ready to salute us with their colors and send us
their serial numbers! But no, nothing but silence and death filled this field of
catastrophes!

I observed that these Mediterranean depths became more and more cluttered
with such gruesome wreckage as the Nautilus drew nearer to the Strait of
Gibraltar. By then the shores of Africa and Europe were converging, and in this
narrow space collisions were commonplace. There I saw numerous iron


undersides, the phantasmagoric ruins of steamers, some lying down, others
rearing up like fearsome animals. One of these boats made a dreadful first
impression: sides tom open, funnel bent, paddle wheels stripped to the
mountings, rudder separated from the sternpost and still hanging from an iron
chain, the board on its stern eaten away by marine salts! How many lives were
dashed in this shipwreck! How many victims were swept under the waves! Had
some sailor on board lived to tell the story of this dreadful disaster, or do the
waves still keep this casualty a secret? It occurred to me, lord knows why, that
this boat buried under the sea might have been the Atlas, lost with all hands
some twenty years ago and never heard from again! Oh, what a gruesome tale
these Mediterranean depths could tell, this huge boneyard where so much wealth
has been lost, where so many victims have met their deaths!

Meanwhile, briskly unconcerned, the Nautilus ran at full propeller through
the midst of these ruins. On February 18, near three o'clock in the morning, it
hove before the entrance to the Strait of Gibraltar.

There are two currents here: an upper current, long known to exist, that
carries the ocean's waters into the Mediterranean basin; then a lower
countercurrent, the only present-day proof of its existence being logic. In
essence, the Mediterranean receives a continual influx of water not only from the
Atlantic but from rivers emptying into it; since local evaporation isn't enough to
restore the balance, the total amount of added water should make this sea's level
higher every year. Yet this isn't the case, and we're naturally forced to believe in
the existence of some lower current that carries the Mediterranean's surplus
through the Strait of Gibraltar and into the Atlantic basin.

And so it turned out. The Nautilus took full advantage of this countercurrent.
It advanced swiftly through this narrow passageway. For an instant I could
glimpse the wonderful ruins of the Temple of Hercules, buried undersea, as Pliny
and Avianus have mentioned, together with the flat island they stand on; and a
few minutes later, we were floating on the waves of the Atlantic.


CHAPTER 8


The Bay of Vigo


THE ATLANTIC! A vast expanse of water whose surface area is 25,000,000
square miles, with a length of 9,000 miles and an average width of 2,700. A
major sea nearly unknown to the ancients, except perhaps the Carthaginians,
those Dutchmen of antiquity who went along the west coasts of Europe and
Africa on their commercial junkets! An ocean whose parallel winding shores
form an immense perimeter fed by the world's greatest rivers: the St. Lawrence,
Mississippi, Amazon, Plata, Orinoco, Niger, Senegal, Elbe, Loire, and Rhine,
which bring it waters from the most civilized countries as well as the most
undeveloped areas! A magnificent plain of waves plowed continuously by ships
of every nation, shaded by every flag in the world, and ending in those two
dreadful headlands so feared by navigators, Cape Horn and the Cape of
Tempests!

The Nautilus broke these waters with the edge of its spur after doing nearly
10,000 leagues in three and a half months, a track longer than a great circle of
the earth. Where were we heading now, and what did the future have in store for
us?

Emerging from the Strait of Gibraltar, the Nautilus took to the high seas. It
returned to the surface of the waves, so our daily strolls on the platform were
restored to us.

I climbed onto it instantly, Ned Land and Conseil along with me. Twelve
miles away, Cape St. Vincent was hazily visible, the southwestern tip of the
Hispanic peninsula. The wind was blowing a pretty strong gust from the south.
The sea was swelling and surging. Its waves made the Nautilus roll and jerk
violently. It was nearly impossible to stand up on the platform, which was
continuously buffeted by this enormously heavy sea. After inhaling a few
breaths of air, we went below once more.

I repaired to my stateroom. Conseil returned to his cabin; but the Canadian,
looking rather worried, followed me. Our quick trip through the Mediterranean
hadn't allowed him to put his plans into execution, and he could barely conceal
his disappointment.

After the door to my stateroom was closed, he sat and stared at me silently.

"Ned my friend,” I told him, "I know how you feel, but you mustn't blame
yourself. Given the way the Nautilus was navigating, it would have been sheer


insanity to think of escaping!"

Ned Land didn't reply. His pursed lips and frowning brow indicated that he
was in the grip of his monomania.

"Look here," I went on, "as yet there's no cause for despair. We're going up
the coast of Portugal. France and England aren't far off, and there we'll easily
find refuge. Oh, I grant you, if the Nautilus had emerged from the Strait of
Gibraltar and made for that cape in the south, if it were taking us toward those
regions that have no continents, then I'd share your alarm. But we now know that
Captain Nemo doesn't avoid the seas of civilization, and in a few days I think we
can safely take action."

Ned Land stared at me still more intently and finally unpursed his lips:

"We'll do it this evening,” he said.

I straightened suddenly. I admit that I was less than ready for this
announcement. I wanted to reply to the Canadian, but words failed me.

"We agreed to wait for the right circumstances," Ned Land went on. "Now
we've got those circumstances. This evening we'll be just a few miles off the
coast of Spain. It'll be cloudy tonight. The wind's blowing toward shore. You
gave me your promise, Professor Aronnax, and I'm counting on you."

Since I didn't say anything, the Canadian stood up and approached me:

"We'll do it this evening at nine o'clock," he said. "I've alerted Conseil. By
that time Captain Nemo will be locked in his room and probably in bed. Neither
the mechanics or the crewmen will be able to see us. Conseil and I will go to the
central companionway. As for you, Professor Aronnax, you'll stay in the library
two steps away and wait for my signal. The oars, mast, and sail are in the skiff.
I've even managed to stow some provisions inside. I've gotten hold of a monkey
wrench to unscrew the nuts bolting the skiff to the Nautilus's hull. So
everything's ready. I'll see you this evening."

"The sea is rough," I said.

"Admitted," the Canadian replied, "but we've got to risk it. Freedom is worth
paying for. Besides, the longboat's solidly built, and a few miles with the wind
behind us is no big deal. By tomorrow, who knows if this ship won't be 100
leagues out to sea? If circumstances are in our favor, between ten and eleven this
evening we'll be landing on some piece of solid ground, or we'll be dead. So
we're in God's hands, and I'll see you this evening!"

This said, the Canadian withdrew, leaving me close to dumbfounded. I had
imagined that if it came to this, I would have time to think about it, to talk it
over. My stubborn companion hadn't granted me this courtesy. But after all, what
would I have said to him? Ned Land was right a hundred times over. These were
near-ideal circumstances, and he was taking full advantage of them. In my


selfish personal interests, could I go back on my word and be responsible for
ruining the future lives of my companions? Tomorrow, might not Captain Nemo
take us far away from any shore?

Just then a fairly loud hissing told me that the ballast tanks were filling, and
the Nautilus sank beneath the waves of the Atlantic.

I stayed in my stateroom. I wanted to avoid the captain, to hide from his eyes
the agitation overwhelming me. What an agonizing day I spent, torn between my
desire to regain my free will and my regret at abandoning this marvelous
Nautilus, leaving my underwater research incomplete! How could I relinquish
this ocean--"my own Atlantic," as I liked to call it--without observing its lower
strata, without wresting from it the kinds of secrets that had been revealed to me
by the seas of the East Indies and the Pacific! I was putting down my novel half
read, I was waking up as my dream neared its climax! How painfully the hours
passed, as I sometimes envisioned myself safe on shore with my companions, or,
despite my better judgment, as I sometimes wished that some unforeseen
circumstances would prevent Ned Land from carrying out his plans.

Twice I went to the lounge. I wanted to consult the compass. I wanted to see
if the Nautilus's heading was actually taking us closer to the coast or spiriting us
farther away. But no. The Nautilus was still in Portuguese waters. Heading north,
it was cruising along the ocean's beaches.

So I had to resign myself to my fate and get ready to escape. My baggage
wasn't heavy. My notes, nothing more.

As for Captain Nemo, I wondered what he would make of our escaping,
what concern or perhaps what distress it might cause him, and what he would do
in the twofold event of our attempt either failing or being found out! Certainly I
had no complaints to register with him, on the contrary. Never was hospitality
more wholehearted than his. Yet in leaving him I couldn't be accused of
ingratitude. No solemn promises bound us to him. In order to keep us captive, he
had counted only on the force of circumstances and not on our word of honor.
But his avowed intention to imprison us forever on his ship justified our every
effort.

I hadn't seen the captain since our visit to the island of Santorini. Would fate
bring me into his presence before our departure? I both desired and dreaded it. I
listened for footsteps in the stateroom adjoining mine. Not a sound reached my
ear. His stateroom had to be deserted.

Then I began to wonder if this eccentric individual was even on board. Since
that night when the skiff had left the Nautilus on some mysterious mission, my
ideas about him had subtly changed. In spite of everything, I thought that
Captain Nemo must have kept up some type of relationship with the shore. Did


he himself never leave the Nautilus? Whole weeks had often gone by without
my encountering him. What was he doing all the while? During all those times
I'd thought he was convalescing in the grip of some misanthropic fit, was he
instead far away from the ship, involved in some secret activity whose nature
still eluded me?

All these ideas and a thousand others assaulted me at the same time. In these
strange circumstances the scope for conjecture was unlimited. I felt an
unbearable queasiness. This day of waiting seemed endless. The hours struck too
slowly to keep up with my impatience.

As usual, dinner was served me in my stateroom. Full of anxiety, I ate little. I
left the table at seven o'clock. 120 minutes-- I was keeping track of them--still
separated me from the moment I was to rejoin Ned Land. My agitation
increased. My pulse was throbbing violently. I couldn't stand still. I walked up
and down, hoping to calm my troubled mind with movement. The possibility of
perishing in our reckless undertaking was the least of my worries; my heart was
pounding at the thought that our plans might be discovered before we had left
the Nautilus, at the thought of being hauled in front of Captain Nemo and
finding him angered, or worse, saddened by my deserting him.

I wanted to see the lounge one last time. I went down the gangways and
arrived at the museum where I had spent so many pleasant and productive hours.
I stared at all its wealth, all its treasures, like a man on the eve of his eternal
exile, a man departing to return no more. For so many days now, these natural
wonders and artistic masterworks had been central to my life, and I was about to
leave them behind forever. I wanted to plunge my eyes through the lounge
window and into these Atlantic waters; but the panels were hermetically sealed,
and a mantle of sheet iron separated me from this ocean with which I was still
unfamiliar.

Crossing through the lounge, I arrived at the door, contrived in one of the
canted corners, that opened into the captain's stateroom. Much to my
astonishment, this door was ajar. I instinctively recoiled. If Captain Nemo was in
his stateroom, he might see me. But, not hearing any sounds, I approached. The
stateroom was deserted. I pushed the door open. I took a few steps inside. Still
the same austere, monastic appearance.

Just then my eye was caught by some etchings hanging on the wall, which I
hadn't noticed during my first visit. They were portraits of great men of history
who had spent their lives in perpetual devotion to a great human ideal: Thaddeus
Kosciusko, the hero whose dying words had been Finis Poloniae;* Markos
Botzaris, for modern Greece the reincarnation of Sparta's King Leonidas; Daniel
O'Connell, Ireland's defender; George Washington, founder of the American


Union; Daniele Manin, the Italian patriot; Abraham Lincoln, dead from the
bullet of a believer in slavery; and finally, that martyr for the redemption of the
black race, John Brown, hanging from his gallows as Victor Hugo's pencil has so
terrifyingly depicted.

*Latin: "Save Poland's borders." Ed.

What was the bond between these heroic souls and the soul of Captain
Nemo? From this collection of portraits could I finally unravel the mystery of his
existence? Was he a fighter for oppressed peoples, a liberator of enslaved races?
Had he figured in the recent political or social upheavals of this century? Was he
a hero of that dreadful civil war in America, a war lamentable yet forever
glorious... ?

Suddenly the clock struck eight. The first stroke of its hammer on the chime
snapped me out of my musings. I shuddered as if some invisible eye had plunged
into my innermost thoughts, and I rushed outside the stateroom.

There my eyes fell on the compass. Our heading was still northerly. The log
indicated a moderate speed, the pressure gauge a depth of about sixty feet. So
circumstances were in favor of the Canadian's plans.

I stayed in my stateroom. I dressed warmly: fishing boots, otter cap, coat of
fan-mussel fabric lined with sealskin. I was ready. I was waiting. Only the
propeller's vibrations disturbed the deep silence reigning on board. I cocked an
ear and listened. Would a sudden outburst of voices tell me that Ned Land's
escape plans had just been detected? A ghastly uneasiness stole through me. I
tried in vain to recover my composure.

A few minutes before nine o'clock, I glued my ear to the captain's door. Not a
sound. I left my stateroom and returned to the lounge, which was deserted and
plunged in near darkness.

I opened the door leading to the library. The same inadequate light, the same
solitude. I went to man my post near the door opening into the well of the central
companionway. I waited for Ned Land's signal.

At this point the propeller's vibrations slowed down appreciably, then they
died out altogether. Why was the Nautilus stopping? Whether this layover would
help or hinder Ned Land's schemes I couldn't have said.

The silence was further disturbed only by the pounding of my heart.

Suddenly I felt a mild jolt. I realized the Nautilus had come to rest on the
ocean floor. My alarm increased. The Canadian's signal hadn't reached me. I
longed to rejoin Ned Land and urge him to postpone his attempt. I sensed that
we were no longer navigating under normal conditions.

Just then the door to the main lounge opened and Captain Nemo appeared.
He saw me, and without further preamble:


"Ah, professor," he said in an affable tone, "I've been looking for you. Do
you know your Spanish history?"

Even if he knew it by heart, a man in my disturbed, befuddled condition
couldn't have quoted a syllable of his own country's history.

"Well?" Captain Nemo went on. "Did you hear my question? Do you know
the history of Spain?"

"Very little of it," I replied.

"The most learned men," the captain said, "still have much to learn. Have a
seat," he added, "and I'll tell you about an unusual episode in this body of
history."

The captain stretched out on a couch, and I mechanically took a seat near
him, but half in the shadows.

"Professor," he said, "listen carefully. This piece of history concerns you in
one definite respect, because it will answer a question you've no doubt been
unable to resolve."

"I'm listening, captain," I said, not knowing what my partner in this dialogue
was driving at, and wondering if this incident related to our escape plans.

"Professor," Captain Nemo went on, "if you're amenable, we'll go back in
time to 1702. You're aware of the fact that in those days your King Louis XIV
thought an imperial gesture would suffice to humble the Pyrenees in the dust, so
he inflicted his grandson, the Duke of Anjou, on the Spaniards. Reigning more
or less poorly under the name King Philip V, this aristocrat had to deal with
mighty opponents abroad.

"In essence, the year before, the royal houses of Holland, Austria, and
England had signed a treaty of alliance at The Hague, aiming to wrest the
Spanish crown from King Philip V and to place it on the head of an archduke
whom they prematurely dubbed King Charles III.

"Spain had to withstand these allies. But the country had practically no army
or navy. Yet it wasn't short of money, provided that its galleons, laden with gold
and silver from America, could enter its ports. Now then, late in 1702 Spain was
expecting a rich convoy, which France ventured to escort with a fleet of twenty-
three vessels under the command of Admiral de Chateau-Renault, because by
that time the allied navies were roving the Atlantic.

"This convoy was supposed to put into Cadiz, but after learning that the
English fleet lay across those waterways, the admiral decided to make for a
French port.

"The Spanish commanders in the convoy objected to this decision. They
wanted to be taken to a Spanish port, if not to Cadiz, then to the Bay of Vigo,
located on Spain's northwest coast and not blockaded.


"Admiral de Chateau-Renault was so indecisive as to obey this directive, and
the galleons entered the Bay of Vigo.

"Unfortunately this bay forms an open, offshore mooring that's impossible to
defend. So it was essential to hurry and empty the galleons before the allied
fleets arrived, and there would have been ample time for this unloading, if a
wretched question of trade agreements hadn't suddenly come up.

"Are you clear on the chain of events?" Captain Nemo asked me.

"Perfectly clear," I said, not yet knowing why I was being given this history
lesson.

"Then I'll continue. Here's what came to pass. The tradesmen of Cadiz had
negotiated a charter whereby they were to receive all merchandise coming from
the West Indies. Now then, unloading the ingots from those galleons at the port
of Vigo would have been a violation of their rights. So they lodged a complaint
in Madrid, and they obtained an order from the indecisive King Philip V: without
unloading, the convoy would stay in custody at the offshore mooring of Vigo
until the enemy fleets had retreated.

"Now then, just as this decision was being handed down, English vessels
arrived in the Bay of Vigo on October 22, 1702. Despite his inferior forces,
Admiral de Chateau-Renault fought courageously. But when he saw that the
convoy's wealth was about to fall into enemy hands, he burned and scuttled the
galleons, which went to the bottom with their immense treasures."

Captain Nemo stopped. I admit it: I still couldn't see how this piece of
history concerned me.

"Well?" I asked him.

"Well, Professor Aronnax," Captain Nemo answered me, "we're actually in
that Bay of Vigo, and all that's left is for you to probe the mysteries of the place."

The captain stood up and invited me to follow him. I'd had time to collect
myself. I did so. The lounge was dark, but the sea's waves sparkled through the
transparent windows. I stared.

Around the Nautilus for a half-mile radius, the waters seemed saturated with
electric light. The sandy bottom was clear and bright. Dressed in diving suits,
crewmen were busy clearing away half-rotted barrels and disemboweled trunks
in the midst of the dingy hulks of ships. Out of these trunks and kegs spilled
ingots of gold and silver, cascades of jewels, pieces of eight. The sand was
heaped with them. Then, laden with these valuable spoils, the men returned to
the Nautilus, dropped off their burdens inside, and went to resume this
inexhaustible fishing for silver and gold.

I understood. This was the setting of that battle on October 22, 1702. Here, in
this very place, those galleons carrying treasure to the Spanish government had


gone to the bottom. Here, whenever he needed, Captain Nemo came to withdraw
these millions to ballast his Nautilus. It was for him, for him alone, that America
had yielded up its precious metals. He was the direct, sole heir to these treasures
wrested from the Incas and those peoples conquered by Hernando Cortez!

"Did you know, professor," he asked me with a smile, "that the sea contained
such wealth?"

"I know it's estimated," I replied, "that there are 2,000,000 metric tons of
silver held in suspension in seawater."

"Surely, but in extracting that silver, your expenses would outweigh your
profits. Here, by contrast, I have only to pick up what other men have lost, and
not only in this Bay of Vigo but at a thousand other sites where ships have gone
down, whose positions are marked on my underwater chart. Do you understand
now that I'm rich to the tune of billions?"

"IT understand, captain. Nevertheless, allow me to inform you that by
harvesting this very Bay of Vigo, you're simply forestalling the efforts of a rival
organization."

"What organization?"

"A company chartered by the Spanish government to search for these sunken
galleons. The company's investors were lured by the bait of enormous gains,
because this scuttled treasure is estimated to be worth 500,000,000 francs."

"It was 500,000,000 francs," Captain Nemo replied, "but no more!"

"Right," I said. "Hence a timely warning to those investors would be an act
of charity. Yet who knows if it would be well received? Usually what gamblers
regret the most isn't the loss of their money so much as the loss of their insane
hopes. But ultimately I feel less sorry for them than for the thousands of
unfortunate people who would have benefited from a fair distribution of this
wealth, whereas now it will be of no help to them!"

No sooner had I voiced this regret than I felt it must have wounded Captain
Nemo.

"No help!" he replied with growing animation. "Sir, what makes you assume
this wealth goes to waste when I'm the one amassing it? Do you think I toil to
gather this treasure out of selfishness? Who says I don't put it to good use? Do
you think I'm unaware of the suffering beings and oppressed races living on this
earth, poor people to comfort, victims to avenge? Don't you understand... ?"

Captain Nemo stopped on these last words, perhaps sorry that he had said too
much. But I had guessed. Whatever motives had driven him to seek
independence under the seas, he remained a human being before all else! His
heart still throbbed for suffering humanity, and his immense philanthropy went
out both to downtrodden races and to individuals!


And now I knew where Captain Nemo had delivered those millions, when
the Nautilus navigated the waters where Crete was in rebellion against the
Ottoman Empire!


CHAPTER 9


A Lost Continent


THE NEXT MORNING, February 19, I beheld the Canadian entering my
stateroom. I was expecting this visit. He wore an expression of great
disappointment.

"Well, sir?" he said to me.

"Well, Ned, the fates were against us yesterday."

"Yes! That damned captain had to call a halt just as we were going to escape
from his boat."

"Yes, Ned, he had business with his bankers."

"His bankers?"

"Or rather his bank vaults. By which I mean this ocean, where his wealth is
safer than in any national treasury."

I then related the evening's incidents to the Canadian, secretly hoping he
would come around to the idea of not deserting the captain; but my narrative had
no result other than Ned's voicing deep regret that he hadn't strolled across the
Vigo battlefield on his own behalf.

"Anyhow," he said, "it's not over yet! My first harpoon missed, that's all!
We'll succeed the next time, and as soon as this evening, if need be .. ."

"What's the Nautilus's heading?" I asked.

"T've no idea," Ned replied.

"All right, at noon we'll find out what our position is!"

The Canadian returned to Conseil's side. As soon as I was dressed, I went
into the lounge. The compass wasn't encouraging. The Nautilus's course was
south-southwest. We were turning our backs on Europe.

I could hardly wait until our position was reported on the chart. Near 11:30
the ballast tanks emptied, and the submersible rose to the surface of the ocean. I
leaped onto the platform. Ned Land was already there.

No more shore in sight. Nothing but the immenseness of the sea. A few sails
were on the horizon, no doubt ships going as far as Cape Sado Roque to find
favorable winds for doubling the Cape of Good Hope. The sky was overcast. A
squall was on the way.

Furious, Ned tried to see through the mists on the horizon. He still hoped that
behind all that fog there lay those shores he longed for.

At noon the sun made a momentary appearance. Taking advantage of this rift


in the clouds, the chief officer took the orb's altitude. Then the sea grew
turbulent, we went below again, and the hatch closed once more.

When I consulted the chart an hour later, I saw that the Nautilus's position
was marked at longitude 16 degrees 17' and latitude 33 degrees 22', a good 150
leagues from the nearest coast. It wouldn't do to even dream of escaping, and I'll
let the reader decide how promptly the Canadian threw a tantrum when I
ventured to tell him our situation.

As for me, I wasn't exactly grief-stricken. I felt as if a heavy weight had been
lifted from me, and I was able to resume my regular tasks in a state of
comparative calm.

Near eleven o'clock in the evening, I received a most unexpected visit from
Captain Nemo. He asked me very graciously if I felt exhausted from our vigil
the night before. I said no.

"Then, Professor Aronnax, I propose an unusual excursion."

"Propose away, captain."

"So far you've visited the ocean depths only by day and under sunlight.
Would you like to see these depths on a dark night?"

"Very much."

"IT warn you, this will be an exhausting stroll. We'll need to walk long hours
and scale a mountain. The roads aren't terribly well kept up."

"Everything you say, captain, just increases my curiosity. I'm ready to go
with you."

"Then come along, professor, and we'll go put on our diving suits."

Arriving at the wardrobe, I saw that neither my companions nor any
crewmen would be coming with us on this excursion. Captain Nemo hadn't even
suggested my fetching Ned or Conseil.

In a few moments we had put on our equipment. Air tanks, abundantly
charged, were placed on our backs, but the electric lamps were not in readiness. I
commented on this to the captain.

"They'll be useless to us," he replied.

I thought I hadn't heard him right, but I couldn't repeat my comment because
the captain's head had already disappeared into its metal covering. I finished
harnessing myself, I felt an alpenstock being placed in my hand, and a few
minutes later, after the usual procedures, we set foot on the floor of the Atlantic,
300 meters down.

Midnight was approaching. The waters were profoundly dark, but Captain
Nemo pointed to a reddish spot in the distance, a sort of wide glow shimmering
about two miles from the Nautilus. What this fire was, what substances fed it,
how and why it kept burning in the liquid mass, I couldn't say. Anyhow it lit our


way, although hazily, but I soon grew accustomed to this unique gloom, and in
these circumstances I understood the uselessness of the Ruhmkorff device.

Side by side, Captain Nemo and I walked directly toward this conspicuous
flame. The level seafloor rose imperceptibly. We took long strides, helped by our
alpenstocks; but in general our progress was slow, because our feet kept sinking
into a kind of slimy mud mixed with seaweed and assorted flat stones.

As we moved forward, I heard a kind of pitter-patter above my head.
Sometimes this noise increased and became a continuous crackle. I soon realized
the cause. It was a heavy rainfall rattling on the surface of the waves.
Instinctively I worried that I might get soaked! By water in the midst of water! I
couldn't help smiling at this outlandish notion. But to tell the truth, wearing these
heavy diving suits, you no longer feel the liquid element, you simply think
you're in the midst of air a little denser than air on land, that's all.

After half an hour of walking, the seafloor grew rocky. Jellyfish, microscopic
crustaceans, and sea-pen coral lit it faintly with their phosphorescent glimmers. I
glimpsed piles of stones covered by a couple million zoophytes and tangles of
algae. My feet often slipped on this viscous seaweed carpet, and without my
alpenstock I would have fallen more than once. When I turned around, I could
still see the Nautilus's whitish beacon, which was starting to grow pale in the
distance.

Those piles of stones just mentioned were laid out on the ocean floor with a
distinct but inexplicable symmetry. I spotted gigantic furrows trailing off into the
distant darkness, their length incalculable. There also were other peculiarities I
couldn't make sense of. It seemed to me that my heavy lead soles were crushing
a litter of bones that made a dry crackling noise. So what were these vast plains
we were now crossing? I wanted to ask the captain, but I still didn't grasp that
sign language that allowed him to chat with his companions when they went
with him on his underwater excursions.

Meanwhile the reddish light guiding us had expanded and inflamed the
horizon. The presence of this furnace under the waters had me extremely
puzzled. Was it some sort of electrical discharge? Was I approaching some
natural phenomenon still unknown to scientists on shore? Or, rather (and this
thought did cross my mind), had the hand of man intervened in that blaze? Had
human beings fanned those flames? In these deep strata would I meet up with
more of Captain Nemo's companions, friends he was about to visit who led lives
as strange as his own? Would I find a whole colony of exiles down here, men
tired of the world's woes, men who had sought and found independence in the
ocean's lower depths? All these insane, inadmissible ideas dogged me, and in
this frame of mind, continually excited by the series of wonders passing before


my eyes, I wouldn't have been surprised to find on this sea bottom one of those
underwater towns Captain Nemo dreamed about!

Our path was getting brighter and brighter. The red glow had turned white
and was radiating from a mountain peak about 800 feet high. But what I saw was
simply a reflection produced by the crystal waters of these strata. The furnace
that was the source of this inexplicable light occupied the far side of the
mountain.

In the midst of the stone mazes furrowing this Atlantic seafloor, Captain
Nemo moved forward without hesitation. He knew this dark path. No doubt he
had often traveled it and was incapable of losing his way. I followed him with
unshakeable confidence. He seemed like some Spirit of the Sea, and as he
walked ahead of me, I marveled at his tall figure, which stood out in black
against the glowing background of the horizon.

It was one o'clock in the morning. We arrived at the mountain's lower
gradients. But in grappling with them, we had to venture up difficult trails
through a huge thicket.

Yes, a thicket of dead trees! Trees without leaves, without sap, turned to
stone by the action of the waters, and crowned here and there by gigantic pines.
It was like a still-erect coalfield, its roots clutching broken soil, its boughs
clearly outlined against the ceiling of the waters like thin, black, paper cutouts.
Picture a forest clinging to the sides of a peak in the Harz Mountains, but a
submerged forest. The trails were cluttered with algae and fucus plants, hosts of
crustaceans swarming among them. I plunged on, scaling rocks, straddling fallen
tree trunks, snapping marine creepers that swayed from one tree to another,
startling the fish that flitted from branch to branch. Carried away, I didn't feel
exhausted any more. I followed a guide who was immune to exhaustion.

What a sight! How can I describe it! How can I portray these woods and
rocks in this liquid setting, their lower parts dark and sullen, their upper parts
tinted red in this light whose intensity was doubled by the reflecting power of the
waters! We scaled rocks that crumbled behind us, collapsing in enormous
sections with the hollow rumble of an avalanche. To our right and left there were
carved gloomy galleries where the eye lost its way. Huge glades opened up,
seemingly cleared by the hand of man, and I sometimes wondered whether some
residents of these underwater regions would suddenly appear before me.

But Captain Nemo kept climbing. I didn't want to fall behind. I followed him
boldly. My alpenstock was a great help. One wrong step would have been
disastrous on the narrow paths cut into the sides of these chasms, but I walked
along with a firm tread and without the slightest feeling of dizziness. Sometimes
I leaped over a crevasse whose depth would have made me recoil had I been in


the midst of glaciers on shore; sometimes I ventured out on a wobbling tree
trunk fallen across a gorge, without looking down, having eyes only for
marveling at the wild scenery of this region. There, leaning on erratically cut
foundations, monumental rocks seemed to defy the laws of balance. From
between their stony knees, trees sprang up like jets under fearsome pressure,
supporting other trees that supported them in turn. Next, natural towers with
wide, steeply carved battlements leaned at angles that, on dry land, the laws of
gravity would never have authorized.

And I too could feel the difference created by the water's powerful density--
despite my heavy clothing, copper headpiece, and metal soles, I climbed the
most impossibly steep gradients with all the nimbleness, I swear it, of a chamois
or a Pyrenees mountain goat!

As for my account of this excursion under the waters, I'm well aware that it
sounds incredible! I'm the chronicler of deeds seemingly impossible and yet
incontestably real. This was no fantasy. This was what I saw and felt!

Two hours after leaving the Nautilus, we had cleared the timberline, and 100
feet above our heads stood the mountain peak, forming a dark silhouette against
the brilliant glare that came from its far slope. Petrified shrubs rambled here and
there in sprawling zigzags. Fish rose in a body at our feet like birds startled in
tall grass. The rocky mass was gouged with impenetrable crevices, deep caves,
unfathomable holes at whose far ends I could hear fearsome things moving
around. My blood would curdle as I watched some enormous antenna bar my
path, or saw some frightful pincer snap shut in the shadow of some cavity! A
thousand specks of light glittered in the midst of the gloom. They were the eyes
of gigantic crustaceans crouching in their lairs, giant lobsters rearing up like
spear carriers and moving their claws with a scrap-iron clanking, titanic crabs
aiming their bodies like cannons on their carriages, and hideous devilfish
intertwining their tentacles like bushes of writhing snakes.

What was this astounding world that I didn't yet know? In what order did
these articulates belong, these creatures for which the rocks provided a second
carapace? Where had nature learned the secret of their vegetating existence, and
for how many centuries had they lived in the ocean's lower strata?

But I couldn't linger. Captain Nemo, on familiar terms with these dreadful
animals, no longer minded them. We arrived at a preliminary plateau where still
other surprises were waiting for me. There picturesque ruins took shape,
betraying the hand of man, not our Creator. They were huge stacks of stones in
which you could distinguish the indistinct forms of palaces and temples, now
arrayed in hosts of blossoming zoophytes, and over it all, not ivy but a heavy
mantle of algae and fucus plants.


But what part of the globe could this be, this land swallowed by cataclysms?
Who had set up these rocks and stones like the dolmens of prehistoric times?
Where was I, where had Captain Nemo's fancies taken me?

I wanted to ask him. Unable to, I stopped him. I seized his arm. But he shook
his head, pointed to the mountain's topmost peak, and seemed to tell me:

"Come on! Come with me! Come higher!"

I followed him with one last burst of energy, and in a few minutes I had
scaled the peak, which crowned the whole rocky mass by some ten meters.

I looked back down the side we had just cleared. There the mountain rose
only 700 to 800 feet above the plains; but on its far slope it crowned the receding
bottom of this part of the Atlantic by a height twice that. My eyes scanned the
distance and took in a vast area lit by intense flashes of light. In essence, this
mountain was a volcano. Fifty feet below its peak, amid a shower of stones and
slag, a wide crater vomited torrents of lava that were dispersed in fiery cascades
into the heart of the liquid mass. So situated, this volcano was an immense torch
that lit up the lower plains all the way to the horizon.

As I said, this underwater crater spewed lava, but not flames. Flames need
oxygen from the air and are unable to spread underwater; but a lava flow, which
contains in itself the principle of its incandescence, can rise to a white heat,
overpower the liquid element, and turn it into steam on contact. Swift currents
Swept away all this diffuse gas, and torrents of lava slid to the foot of the
mountain, like the disgorgings of a Mt. Vesuvius over the city limits of a second
Torre del Greco.

In fact, there beneath my eyes was a town in ruins, demolished,
overwhelmed, laid low, its roofs caved in, its temples pulled down, its arches
dislocated, its columns stretching over the earth; in these ruins you could still
detect the solid proportions of a sort of Tuscan architecture; farther off, the
remains of a gigantic aqueduct; here, the caked heights of an acropolis along
with the fluid forms of a Parthenon; there, the remnants of a wharf, as if some
bygone port had long ago harbored merchant vessels and triple-tiered war
galleys on the shores of some lost ocean; still farther off, long rows of collapsing
walls, deserted thoroughfares, a whole Pompeii buried under the waters, which
Captain Nemo had resurrected before my eyes!

Where was I? Where was I? I had to find out at all cost, I wanted to speak, I
wanted to rip off the copper sphere imprisoning my head.

But Captain Nemo came over and stopped me with a gesture. Then, picking
up a piece of chalky stone, he advanced to a black basaltic rock and scrawled
this one word:

ATLANTIS


What lightning flashed through my mind! Atlantis, that ancient land of
Meropis mentioned by the historian Theopompus; Plato's Atlantis; the continent
whose very existence has been denied by such philosophers and scientists as
Origen, Porphyry, Iamblichus, d'Anville, Malte-Brun, and Humboldt, who
entered its disappearance in the ledger of myths and folk tales; the country
whose reality has nevertheless been accepted by such other thinkers as
Posidonius, Pliny, Ammianus Marcellinus, ‘Tertullian, Engel, Scherer,
Tournefort, Buffon, and d'Avezac; I had this land right under my eyes, furnishing
its own unimpeachable evidence of the catastrophe that had overtaken it! So this
was the submerged region that had existed outside Europe, Asia, and Libya,
beyond the Pillars of Hercules, home of those powerful Atlantean people against
whom ancient Greece had waged its earliest wars!

The writer whose narratives record the lofty deeds of those heroic times is
Plato himself. His dialogues Timaeus and Critias were drafted with the poet and
legislator Solon as their inspiration, as it were.

One day Solon was conversing with some elderly wise men in the Egyptian
capital of Sais, a town already 8,000 years of age, as documented by the annals
engraved on the sacred walls of its temples. One of these elders related the
history of another town 1,000 years older still. This original city of Athens,
ninety centuries old, had been invaded and partly destroyed by the Atlanteans.
These Atlanteans, he said, resided on an immense continent greater than Africa
and

Asia combined, taking in an area that lay between latitude 12 degrees and 40
degrees north. Their dominion extended even to Egypt. They tried to enforce
their rule as far as Greece, but they had to retreat before the indomitable
resistance of the Hellenic people. Centuries passed. A cataclysm occurred--
floods, earthquakes. A single night and day were enough to obliterate this
Atlantis, whose highest peaks (Madeira, the Azores, the Canaries, the Cape
Verde Islands) still emerge above the waves.

These were the historical memories that Captain Nemo's scrawl sent rushing
through my mind. Thus, led by the strangest of fates, I was treading underfoot
one of the mountains of that continent! My hands were touching ruins many
thousands of years old, contemporary with prehistoric times! I was walking in
the very place where contemporaries of early man had walked! My heavy soles
were crushing the skeletons of animals from the age of fable, animals that used
to take cover in the shade of these trees now turned to stone!

Oh, why was I so short of time! I would have gone down the steep slopes of
this mountain, crossed this entire immense continent, which surely connects
Africa with America, and visited its great prehistoric cities. Under my eyes there


perhaps lay the warlike town of Makhimos or the pious village of Eusebes,
whose gigantic inhabitants lived for whole centuries and had the strength to raise
blocks of stone that still withstood the action of the waters. One day perhaps,
some volcanic phenomenon will bring these sunken ruins back to the surface of
the waves! Numerous underwater volcanoes have been sighted in this part of the
ocean, and many ships have felt terrific tremors when passing over these
turbulent depths. A few have heard hollow noises that announced some struggle
of the elements far below, others have hauled in volcanic ash hurled above the
waves. As far as the equator this whole seafloor is still under construction by
plutonic forces. And in some remote epoch, built up by volcanic disgorgings and
successive layers of lava, who knows whether the peaks of these fire-belching
mountains may reappear above the surface of the Atlantic!

As I mused in this way, trying to establish in my memory every detail of this
impressive landscape, Captain Nemo was leaning his elbows on a moss-covered
monument, motionless as if petrified in some mute trance. Was he dreaming of
those lost generations, asking them for the secret of human destiny? Was it here
that this strange man came to revive himself, basking in historical memories,
reliving that bygone life, he who had no desire for our modern one? I would
have given anything to know his thoughts, to share them, understand them!

We stayed in this place an entire hour, contemplating its vast plains in the
lava's glow, which sometimes took on a startling intensity. Inner boilings sent
quick shivers running through the mountain's crust. Noises from deep
underneath, clearly transmitted by the liquid medium, reverberated with majestic
amplitude.

Just then the moon appeared for an instant through the watery mass, casting a
few pale rays over this submerged continent. It was only a fleeting glimmer, but
its effect was indescribable. The captain stood up and took one last look at these
immense plains; then his hand signaled me to follow him.

We went swiftly down the mountain. Once past the petrified forest, I could
see the Nautilus's beacon twinkling like a star. The captain walked straight
toward it, and we were back on board just as the first glimmers of dawn were
whitening the surface of the ocean.


CHAPTER 10


The Underwater Coalfields


THE NEXT DAY, February 20, I overslept. I was so exhausted from the
night before, I didn't get up until eleven o'clock. I dressed quickly. I hurried to
find out the Nautilus's heading. The instruments indicated that it was running
southward at a speed of twenty miles per hour and a depth of 100 meters.

Conseil entered. I described our nocturnal excursion to him, and since the
panels were open, he could still catch a glimpse of this submerged continent.

In fact, the Nautilus was skimming only ten meters over the soil of these
Atlantis plains. The ship scudded along like an air balloon borne by the wind
over some prairie on land; but it would be more accurate to say that we sat in the
lounge as if we were riding in a coach on an express train. As for the
foregrounds passing before our eyes, they were fantastically carved rocks,
forests of trees that had crossed over from the vegetable kingdom into the
mineral kingdom, their motionless silhouettes sprawling beneath the waves.
There also were stony masses buried beneath carpets of axidia and sea anemone,
bristling with long, vertical water plants, then strangely contoured blocks of lava
that testified to all the fury of those plutonic developments.

While this bizarre scenery was glittering under our electric beams, I told
Conseil the story of the Atlanteans, who had inspired the old French scientist
Jean Bailly to write so many entertaining-- albeit utterly fictitious--pages.* I told
the lad about the wars of these heroic people. I discussed the question of Atlantis
with the fervor of a man who no longer had any doubts. But Conseil was so
distracted he barely heard me, and his lack of interest in any commentary on this
historical topic was soon explained.

*Bailly believed that Atlantis was located at the North Pole! Ed.

In essence, numerous fish had caught his eye, and when fish pass by, Conseil
vanishes into his world of classifying and leaves real life behind. In which case I
could only tag along and resume our ichthyological research.

Even so, these Atlantic fish were not noticeably different from those we had
observed earlier. There were rays of gigantic size, five meters long and with
muscles so powerful they could leap above the waves, sharks of various species
including a fifteen-foot glaucous shark with sharp triangular teeth and so
transparent it was almost invisible amid the waters, brown lantern sharks, prism-
shaped humantin sharks armored with protuberant hides, sturgeons resembling


their relatives in the Mediterranean, trumpet-snouted pipefish a foot and a half
long, yellowish brown with small gray fins and no teeth or tongue, unreeling like
slim, supple snakes.

Among bony fish, Conseil noticed some blackish marlin three meters long
with a sharp sword jutting from the upper jaw, bright-colored weevers known in
Aristotle's day as sea dragons and whose dorsal stingers make them quite
dangerous to pick up, then dolphinfish with brown backs striped in blue and
edged in gold, handsome dorados, moonlike opahs that look like azure disks but
which the sun's rays turn into spots of silver, finally eight-meter swordfish from
the genus Xiphias, swimming in schools, sporting yellowish sickle-shaped fins
and six-foot broadswords, stalwart animals, plant eaters rather than fish eaters,
obeying the tiniest signals from their females like henpecked husbands.

But while observing these different specimens of marine fauna, I didn't stop
examining the long plains of Atlantis. Sometimes an unpredictable irregularity in
the seafloor would force the Nautilus to slow down, and then it would glide into
the narrow channels between the hills with a cetacean's dexterity. If the labyrinth
became hopelessly tangled, the submersible would rise above it like an airship,
and after clearing the obstacle, it would resume its speedy course just a few
meters above the ocean floor. It was an enjoyable and impressive way of
navigating that did indeed recall the maneuvers of an airship ride, with the major
difference that the Nautilus faithfully obeyed the hands of its helmsman.

The terrain consisted mostly of thick slime mixed with petrified branches,
but it changed little by little near four o'clock in the afternoon; it grew rockier
and seemed to be strewn with pudding stones and a basaltic gravel called "tuff,"
together with bits of lava and sulfurous obsidian. I expected these long plains to
change into mountain regions, and in fact, as the Nautilus was executing certain
turns, I noticed that the southerly horizon was blocked by a high wall that
seemed to close off every exit. Its summit obviously poked above the level of the
ocean. It had to be a continent or at least an island, either one of the Canaries or
one of the Cape Verde Islands. Our bearings hadn't been marked on the chart--
perhaps deliberately--and I had no idea what our position was. In any case this
wall seemed to signal the end of Atlantis, of which, all in all, we had crossed
only a small part.

Nightfall didn't interrupt my observations. I was left to myself. Conseil had
repaired to his cabin. The Nautilus slowed down, hovering above the muddled
masses on the seafloor, sometimes grazing them as if wanting to come to rest,
sometimes rising unpredictably to the surface of the waves. Then I glimpsed a
few bright constellations through the crystal waters, specifically five or six of
those zodiacal stars trailing from the tail end of Orion.


I would have stayed longer at my window, marveling at these beauties of sea
and sky, but the panels closed. Just then the Nautilus had arrived at the
perpendicular face of that high wall. How the ship would maneuver I hadn't a
guess. I repaired to my stateroom. The Nautilus did not stir. I fell asleep with the
firm intention of waking up in just a few hours.

But it was eight o'clock the next day when I returned to the lounge. I stared
at the pressure gauge. It told me that the Nautilus was afloat on the surface of the
ocean. Furthermore, I heard the sound of footsteps on the platform. Yet there
were no rolling movements to indicate the presence of waves undulating above
me.

I climbed as far as the hatch. It was open. But instead of the broad daylight I
was expecting, I found that I was surrounded by total darkness. Where were we?
Had I been mistaken? Was it still night? No! Not one star was twinkling, and
nighttime is never so utterly black.

I wasn't sure what to think, when a voice said to me:

"Is that you, professor?"

"Ah, Captain Nemo!" I replied. "Where are we?"

"Underground, professor."

"Underground!" I exclaimed. "And the Nautilus is still floating?"

"Tt always floats."

"But I don't understand!"

"Wait a little while. Our beacon is about to go on, and if you want some light
on the subject, you'll be satisfied."

I set foot on the platform and waited. The darkness was so profound I
couldn't see even Captain Nemo. However, looking at the zenith directly
overhead, I thought I caught sight of a feeble glimmer, a sort of twilight filtering
through a circular hole. Just then the beacon suddenly went on, and its intense
brightness made that hazy light vanish.

This stream of electricity dazzled my eyes, and after momentarily shutting
them, I looked around. The Nautilus was stationary. It was floating next to an
embankment shaped like a wharf. As for the water now buoying the ship, it was
a lake completely encircled by an inner wall about two miles in diameter, hence
six miles around. Its level--as indicated by the pressure gauge--would be the
same as the outside level, because some connection had to exist between this
lake and the sea. Slanting inward over their base, these high walls converged to
form a vault shaped like an immense upside-down funnel that measured 500 or
600 meters in height. At its summit there gaped the circular opening through
which I had detected that faint glimmer, obviously daylight.

Before more carefully examining the interior features of this enormous


cavern, and before deciding if it was the work of nature or humankind, I went
over to Captain Nemo.

"Where are we?" I said.

"In the very heart of an extinct volcano," the captain answered me, "a
volcano whose interior was invaded by the sea after some convulsion in the
earth. While you were sleeping, professor, the Nautilus entered this lagoon
through a natural channel that opens ten meters below the surface of the ocean.
This is our home port, secure, convenient, secret, and sheltered against winds
from any direction! Along the coasts of your continents or islands, show me any
offshore mooring that can equal this safe refuge for withstanding the fury of
hurricanes."

"Indeed," I replied, "here you're in perfect safety, Captain Nemo. Who could
reach you in the heart of a volcano? But don't I see an opening at its summit?"

"Yes, its crater, a crater formerly filled with lava, steam, and flames, but
which now lets in this life-giving air we're breathing."

"But which volcanic mountain is this?" I asked.

"It's one of the many islets with which this sea is strewn. For ships a mere
reef, for us an immense cavern. I discovered it by chance, and chance served me
well."

"But couldn't someone enter through the mouth of its crater?"

"No more than I could exit through it. You can climb about 100 feet up the
inner base of this mountain, but then the walls overhang, they lean too far in to
be scaled."

"I can see, captain, that nature is your obedient servant, any time or any
place. You're safe on this lake, and nobody else can visit its waters. But what's
the purpose of this refuge? The Nautilus doesn't need a harbor."

"No, professor, but it needs electricity to run, batteries to generate its
electricity, sodium to feed its batteries, coal to make its sodium, and coalfields
from which to dig its coal. Now then, right at this spot the sea covers entire
forests that sank underwater in prehistoric times; today, turned to stone,
transformed into carbon fuel, they offer me inexhaustible coal mines."

"So, captain, your men practice the trade of miners here?"

"Precisely. These mines extend under the waves like the coalfields at
Newcastle. Here, dressed in diving suits, pick and mattock in hand, my men go
out and dig this carbon fuel for which I don't need a single mine on land. When I
bum this combustible to produce sodium, the smoke escaping from the
mountain's crater gives it the appearance of a still-active volcano."

"And will we see your companions at work?"

"No, at least not this time, because I'm eager to continue our underwater tour


W


of the world. Accordingly, I'll rest content with drawing on my reserve stock of
sodium. We'll stay here long enough to load it on board, in other words, a single
workday, then we'll resume our voyage. So, Professor Aronnax, if you'd like to
explore this cavern and circle its lagoon, seize the day."

I thanked the captain and went to look for my two companions, who hadn't
yet left their cabin. I invited them to follow me, not telling them where we were.

They climbed onto the platform. Conseil, whom nothing could startle, saw it
as a perfectly natural thing to fall asleep under the waves and wake up under a
mountain. But Ned Land had no idea in his head other than to see if this cavern
offered some way out.

After breakfast near ten o'clock, we went down onto the embankment.

"So here we are, back on shore," Conseil said.

"I'd hardly call this shore," the Canadian replied. "And besides, we aren't on
it but under it."

A sandy beach unfolded before us, measuring 500 feet at its widest point
between the waters of the lake and the foot of the mountain's walls. Via this
strand you could easily circle the lake. But the base of these high walls consisted
of broken soil over which there lay picturesque piles of volcanic blocks and
enormous pumice stones. All these crumbling masses were covered with an
enamel polished by the action of underground fires, and they glistened under the
stream of electric light from our beacon. Stirred up by our footsteps, the mica-
rich dust on this beach flew into the air like a cloud of sparks.

The ground rose appreciably as it moved away from the sand flats by the
waves, and we soon arrived at some long, winding gradients, genuinely steep
paths that allowed us to climb little by little; but we had to tread cautiously in the
midst of pudding stones that weren't cemented together, and our feet kept
skidding on glassy trachyte, made of feldspar and quartz crystals.

The volcanic nature of this enormous pit was apparent all around us. I
ventured to comment on it to my companions.

"Can you picture," I asked them, "what this funnel must have been like when
it was filled with boiling lava, and the level of that incandescent liquid rose right
to the mountain's mouth, like cast iron up the insides of a furnace?"

"I can picture it perfectly," Conseil replied. "But will master tell me why this
huge smelter suspended operations, and how it is that an oven was replaced by
the tranquil waters of a lake?"

"In all likelihood, Conseil, because some convulsion created an opening
below the surface of the ocean, the opening that serves as a passageway for the
Nautilus. Then the waters of the Atlantic rushed inside the mountain. There
ensued a dreadful struggle between the elements of fire and water, a struggle


ending in King Neptune's favor. But many centuries have passed since then, and
this submerged volcano has changed into a peaceful cavern."

"That's fine," Ned Land answered. "I accept the explanation, but in our
personal interests, I'm sorry this opening the professor mentions wasn't made
above sea level."

"But Ned my friend," Conseil answered, "if it weren't an underwater
passageway, the Nautilus couldn't enter it!"

"And I might add, Mr. Land," I said, "that the waters wouldn't have rushed
under the mountain, and the volcano would still be a volcano. So you have
nothing to be sorry about."

Our climb continued. The gradients got steeper and narrower. Sometimes
they were cut across by deep pits that had to be cleared. Masses of overhanging
rock had to be gotten around. You slid on your knees, you crept on your belly.
But helped by the Canadian's strength and Conseil's dexterity, we overcame
every obstacle.

At an elevation of about thirty meters, the nature of the terrain changed
without becoming any easier. Pudding stones and trachyte gave way to black
basaltic rock: here, lying in slabs all swollen with blisters; there, shaped like
actual prisms and arranged into a series of columns that supported the springings
of this immense vault, a wonderful sample of natural architecture. Then, among
this basaltic rock, there snaked long, hardened lava flows inlaid with veins of
bituminous coal and in places covered by wide carpets of sulfur. The sunshine
coming through the crater had grown stronger, shedding a hazy light over all the
volcanic waste forever buried in the heart of this extinct mountain.

But when we had ascended to an elevation of about 250 feet, we were
stopped by insurmountable obstacles. The converging inside walls changed into
overhangs, and our climb into a circular stroll. At this topmost level the
vegetable kingdom began to challenge the mineral kingdom. Shrubs, and even a
few trees, emerged from crevices in the walls. I recognized some spurges that let
their caustic, purgative sap trickle out. There were heliotropes, very remiss at
living up to their sun-worshipping reputations since no sunlight ever reached
them; their clusters of flowers drooped sadly, their colors and scents were faded.
Here and there chrysanthemums sprouted timidly at the feet of aloes with long,
sad, sickly leaves. But between these lava flows I spotted little violets that still
gave off a subtle fragrance, and I confess that I inhaled it with delight. The soul
of a flower is its scent, and those splendid water plants, flowers of the sea, have
no souls!

We had arrived at the foot of a sturdy clump of dragon trees, which were
splitting the rocks with exertions of their muscular roots, when Ned Land


exclaimed:

"Oh, sir, a hive!"

"A hive?" I answered, with a gesture of utter disbelief.

"Yes, a hive," the Canadian repeated, "with bees buzzing around!"

I went closer and was forced to recognize the obvious. At the mouth of a
hole cut in the trunk of a dragon tree, there swarmed thousands of these
ingenious insects so common to all the Canary Islands, where their output is
especially prized.

Naturally enough, the Canadian wanted to lay in a supply of honey, and it
would have been ill-mannered of me to say no. He mixed sulfur with some dry
leaves, set them on fire with a spark from his tinderbox, and proceeded to smoke
the bees out. Little by little the buzzing died down and the disemboweled hive
yielded several pounds of sweet honey. Ned Land stuffed his haversack with it.

"When I've mixed this honey with our breadfruit batter," he told us, "T'll be
ready to serve you a delectable piece of cake."

"But of course," Conseil put in, "it will be gingerbread!"

"T'm all for gingerbread," I said, "but let's resume this fascinating stroll."

At certain turns in the trail we were going along, the lake appeared in its full
expanse. The ship's beacon lit up that whole placid surface, which experienced
neither ripples nor undulations. The Nautilus lay perfectly still. On its platform
and on the embankment, crewmen were bustling around, black shadows that
stood out clearly in the midst of the luminous air.

Just then we went around the highest ridge of these rocky foothills that
supported the vault. Then I saw that bees weren't the animal kingdom's only
representatives inside this volcano. Here and in the shadows, birds of prey
soared and whirled, flying away from nests perched on tips of rock. There were
sparrow hawks with white bellies, and screeching kestrels. With all the speed
their stiltlike legs could muster, fine fat bustards scampered over the slopes. I'll
let the reader decide whether the Canadian's appetite was aroused by the sight of
this tasty game, and whether he regretted having no rifle in his hands. He tried to
make stones do the work of bullets, and after several fruitless attempts, he
managed to wound one of these magnificent bustards. To say he risked his life
twenty times in order to capture this bird is simply the unadulterated truth; but he
fared so well, the animal went into his sack to join the honeycombs.

By then we were forced to go back down to the beach because the ridge had
become impossible. Above us, the yawning crater looked like the wide mouth of
a well. From where we stood, the sky was pretty easy to see, and I watched
clouds race by, disheveled by the west wind, letting tatters of mist trail over the
mountain's summit. Proof positive that those clouds kept at a moderate altitude,


because this volcano didn't rise more than 1,800 feet above the level of the
ocean.

Half an hour after the Canadian's latest exploits, we were back on the inner
beach. There the local flora was represented by a wide carpet of samphire, a
small umbelliferous plant that keeps quite nicely, which also boasts the names
glasswort, saxifrage, and sea fennel. Conseil picked a couple bunches. As for the
local fauna, it included thousands of crustaceans of every type: lobsters, hermit
crabs, prawns, mysid shrimps, daddy longlegs, rock crabs, and a prodigious
number of seashells, such as cowries, murex snails, and limpets.

In this locality there gaped the mouth of a magnificent cave. My companions
and I took great pleasure in stretching out on its fine-grained sand. Fire had
polished the sparkling enamel of its inner walls, sprinkled all over with mica-
rich dust. Ned Land tapped these walls and tried to probe their thickness. I
couldn't help smiling. Our conversation then turned to his everlasting escape
plans, and without going too far, I felt I could offer him this hope: Captain Nemo
had gone down south only to replenish his sodium supplies. So I hoped he would
now hug the coasts of Europe and America, which would allow the Canadian to
try again with a greater chance of success.

We were stretched out in this delightful cave for an hour. Our conversation,
lively at the outset, then languished. A definite drowsiness overcame us. Since I
saw no good reason to resist the call of sleep, I fell into a heavy doze. I dreamed-
-one doesn't choose his dreams--that my life had been reduced to the vegetating
existence of a simple mollusk. It seemed to me that this cave made up my
double-valved shell. . . .

Suddenly Conseil's voice startled me awake.

"Get up! Get up!" shouted the fine lad.

"What is it?" I asked, in a sitting position.

"The water's coming up to us!"

I got back on my feet. Like a torrent the sea was rushing into our retreat, and
since we definitely were not mollusks, we had to clear out.

In a few seconds we were Safe on top of the cave.

"What happened?" Conseil asked. "Some new phenomenon?"

"Not quite, my friends!" I replied. "It was the tide, merely the tide, which
wellnigh caught us by surprise just as it did Sir Walter Scott's hero! The ocean
outside is rising, and by a perfectly natural law of balance, the level of this lake
is also rising. We've gotten off with a mild dunking. Let's go change clothes on
the Nautilus."

Three-quarters of an hour later, we had completed our circular stroll and
were back on board. Just then the crewmen finished loading the sodium supplies,


and the Nautilus could have departed immediately.

But Captain Nemo gave no orders. Would he wait for nightfall and exit
through his underwater passageway in secrecy? Perhaps.

Be that as it may, by the next day the Nautilus had left its home port and was
navigating well out from any shore, a few meters beneath the waves of the
Atlantic.


CHAPTER 11


The Sargasso Sea


THE NAUTILUS didn't change direction. For the time being, then, we had
to set aside any hope of returning to European seas. Captain Nemo kept his prow
pointing south. Where was he taking us? I was afraid to guess.

That day the Nautilus crossed an odd part of the Atlantic Ocean. No one is
unaware of the existence of that great warm-water current known by name as the
Gulf Stream. After emerging from channels off Florida, it heads toward
Spitzbergen. But before entering the Gulf of Mexico near latitude 44 degrees
north, this current divides into two arms; its chief arm makes for the shores of
Ireland and Norway while the second flexes southward at the level of the
Azores; then it hits the coast of Africa, sweeps in a long oval, and returns to the
Caribbean Sea.

Now then, this second arm--more accurately, a collar--forms a ring of warm
water around a section of cool, tranquil, motionless ocean called the Sargasso
Sea. This is an actual lake in the open Atlantic, and the great current's waters
take at least three years to circle it.

Properly speaking, the Sargasso Sea covers every submerged part of Atlantis.
Certain authors have even held that the many weeds strewn over this sea were
torn loose from the prairies of that ancient continent. But it's more likely that
these grasses, algae, and fucus plants were carried off from the beaches of
Europe and America, then taken as far as this zone by the Gulf Stream. This is
one of the reasons why Christopher Columbus assumed the existence of a New
World. When the ships of that bold investigator arrived in the Sargasso Sea, they
had great difficulty navigating in the midst of these weeds, which, much to their
crews' dismay, slowed them down to a halt; and they wasted three long weeks
crossing this sector.

Such was the region our Nautilus was visiting just then: a genuine prairie, a
tightly woven carpet of algae, gulfweed, and bladder wrack so dense and
compact a craft's stempost couldn't tear through it without difficulty.
Accordingly, not wanting to entangle his propeller in this weed-choked mass,
Captain Nemo stayed at a depth some meters below the surface of the waves.

The name Sargasso comes from the Spanish word "sargazo," meaning
gulfweed. This gulfweed, the swimming gulfweed or berry carrier, is the chief
substance making up this immense shoal. And here's why these water plants


collect in this placid Atlantic basin, according to the expert on the subject,
Commander Maury, author of The Physical Geography of the Sea.

The explanation he gives seems to entail a set of conditions that everybody
knows: "Now," Maury says, "if bits of cork or chaff, or any floating substance,
be put into a basin, and a circular motion be given to the water, all the light
substances will be found crowding together near the center of the pool, where
there is the least motion. Just such a basin is the Atlantic Ocean to the Gulf
Stream, and the Sargasso Sea is the center of the whirl."

I share Maury's view, and I was able to study the phenomenon in this
exclusive setting where ships rarely go. Above us, huddled among the brown
weeds, there floated objects originating from all over: tree trunks ripped from the
Rocky Mountains or the Andes and sent floating down the Amazon or the
Mississippi, numerous pieces of wreckage, remnants of keels or undersides,
bulwarks staved in and so weighed down with seashells and barnacles, they
couldn't rise to the surface of the ocean. And the passing years will someday
bear out Maury's other view that by collecting in this way over the centuries,
these substances will be turned to stone by the action of the waters and will then
form inexhaustible coalfields. Valuable reserves prepared by farseeing nature for
that time when man will have exhausted his mines on the continents.

In the midst of this hopelessly tangled fabric of weeds and fucus plants, I
noted some delightful pink-colored, star-shaped alcyon coral, sea anemone
trailing the long tresses of their tentacles, some green, red, and blue jellyfish, and
especially those big rhizostome jellyfish that Cuvier described, whose bluish
parasols are trimmed with violet festoons.

We spent the whole day of February 22 in the Sargasso Sea, where fish that
dote on marine plants and crustaceans find plenty to eat. The next day the ocean
resumed its usual appearance.

From this moment on, for nineteen days from February 23 to March 12, the
Nautilus stayed in the middle of the Atlantic, hustling us along at a constant
speed of 100 leagues every twenty-four hours. It was obvious that Captain Nemo
wanted to carry out his underwater program, and I had no doubt that he intended,
after doubling Cape Horn, to return to the Pacific South Seas.

So Ned Land had good reason to worry. In these wide seas empty of islands,
it was no longer feasible to jump ship. Nor did we have any way to counter
Captain Nemo's whims. We had no choice but to acquiesce; but if we couldn't
attain our end through force or cunning, I liked to think we might achieve it
through persuasion. Once this voyage was over, might not Captain Nemo
consent to set us free in return for our promise never to reveal his existence? Our
word of honor, which we sincerely would have kept. However, this delicate


question would have to be negotiated with the captain. But how would he
receive our demands for freedom? At the very outset and in no uncertain terms,
hadn't he declared that the secret of his life required that we be permanently
imprisoned on board the Nautilus? Wouldn't he see my four-month silence as a
tacit acceptance of this situation? Would my returning to this subject arouse
suspicions that could jeopardize our escape plans, if we had promising
circumstances for trying again later on? I weighed all these considerations,
turned them over in my mind, submitted them to Conseil, but he was as baffled
as I was. In short, although I'm not easily discouraged, I realized that my chances
of ever seeing my fellow men again were shrinking by the day, especially at a
time when Captain Nemo was recklessly racing toward the south Atlantic!

During those nineteen days just mentioned, no unique incidents distinguished
our voyage. I saw little of the captain. He was at work. In the library I often
found books he had left open, especially books on natural history. He had
thumbed through my work on the great ocean depths, and the margins were
covered with his notes, which sometimes contradicted my theories and
formulations. But the captain remained content with this method of refining my
work, and he rarely discussed it with me. Sometimes I heard melancholy sounds
reverberating from the organ, which he played very expressively, but only at
night in the midst of the most secretive darkness, while the Nautilus slumbered
in the wilderness of the ocean.

During this part of our voyage, we navigated on the surface of the waves for
entire days. The sea was nearly deserted. A few sailing ships, laden for the East
Indies, were heading toward the Cape of Good Hope. One day we were chased
by the longboats of a whaling vessel, which undoubtedly viewed us as some
enormous baleen whale of great value. But Captain Nemo didn't want these
gallant gentlemen wasting their time and energy, so he ended the hunt by diving
beneath the waters. This incident seemed to fascinate Ned Land intensely. I'm
sure the Canadian was sorry that these fishermen couldn't harpoon our sheet-iron
cetacean and mortally wound it.

During this period the fish Conseil and I observed differed little from those
we had already studied in other latitudes. Chief among them were specimens of
that dreadful cartilaginous genus that's divided into three subgenera numbering
at least thirty-two species: striped sharks five meters long, the head squat and
wider than the body, the caudal fin curved, the back with seven big, black,
parallel lines running lengthwise; then perlon sharks, ash gray, pierced with
seven gill openings, furnished with a single dorsal fin placed almost exactly in
the middle of the body.

Some big dogfish also passed by, a voracious species of shark if there ever


was one. With some justice, fishermen's yarns aren't to be trusted, but here's
what a few of them relate. Inside the corpse of one of these animals there were
found a buffalo head and a whole calf; in another, two tuna and a sailor in
uniform; in yet another, a soldier with his saber; in another, finally, a horse with
its rider. In candor, none of these sounds like divinely inspired truth. But the fact
remains that not a single dogfish let itself get caught in the Nautilus's nets, so I
can't vouch for their voracity.

Schools of elegant, playful dolphin swam alongside for entire days. They
went in groups of five or six, hunting in packs like wolves over the countryside;
moreover, they're just as voracious as dogfish, if I can believe a certain
Copenhagen professor who says that from one dolphin's stomach, he removed
thirteen porpoises and fifteen seals. True, it was a killer whale, belonging to the
biggest known species, whose length sometimes exceeds twenty-four feet. The
family Delphinia numbers ten genera, and the dolphins I saw were akin to the
genus Delphinorhynchus, remarkable for an extremely narrow muzzle four times
as long as the cranium. Measuring three meters, their bodies were black on top,
underneath a pinkish white strewn with small, very scattered spots.

From these seas I'll also mention some unusual specimens of croakers, fish
from the order Acanthopterygia, family Scienidea. Some authors-- more artistic
than scientific--claim that these fish are melodious singers, that their voices in
unison put on concerts unmatched by human choristers. I don't say nay, but to
my regret these croakers didn't serenade us as we passed.

Finally, to conclude, Conseil classified a large number of flying fish. Nothing
could have made a more unusual sight than the marvelous timing with which
dolphins hunt these fish. Whatever the range of its flight, however evasive its
trajectory (even up and over the Nautilus), the hapless flying fish always found a
dolphin to welcome it with open mouth. These were either flying gumards or
kitelike sea robins, whose lips glowed in the dark, at night scrawling fiery
streaks in the air before plunging into the murky waters like so many shooting
stars.

Our navigating continued under these conditions until March 13. That day
the Nautilus was put to work in some depth-sounding experiments that
fascinated me deeply.

By then we had fared nearly 13,000 leagues from our starting point in the
Pacific high seas. Our position fix placed us in latitude 45 degrees 37' south and
longitude 37 degrees 53' west. These were the same waterways where Captain
Denham, aboard the Herald, payed out 14,000 meters of sounding line without
finding bottom. It was here too that Lieutenant Parker, aboard the American
frigate Congress, was unable to reach the underwater soil at 15,149 meters.


Captain Nemo decided to take his Nautilus down to the lowest depths in
order to double-check these different soundings. I got ready to record the results
of this experiment. The panels in the lounge opened, and maneuvers began for
reaching those strata so prodigiously far removed.

It was apparently considered out of the question to dive by filling the ballast
tanks. Perhaps they wouldn't sufficiently increase the Nautilus's specific gravity.
Moreover, in order to come back up, it would be necessary to expel the excess
water, and our pumps might not have been strong enough to overcome the
outside pressure.

Captain Nemo decided to make for the ocean floor by submerging on an
appropriately gradual diagonal with the help of his side fins, which were set at a
45 degrees angle to the Nautilus's waterline. Then the propeller was brought to
its maximum speed, and its four blades churned the waves with indescribable
violence.

Under this powerful thrust the Nautilus's hull quivered like a resonating
chord, and the ship sank steadily under the waters. Stationed in the lounge, the
captain and I watched the needle swerving swiftly over the pressure gauge. Soon
we had gone below the livable zone where most fish reside. Some of these
animals can thrive only at the surface of seas or rivers, but a minority can dwell
at fairly great depths. Among the latter I observed a species of dogfish called the
cow shark that's equipped with six respiratory slits, the telescope fish with its
enormous eyes, the armored gurnard with gray thoracic fins plus black pectoral
fins and a breastplate protected by pale red slabs of bone, then finally the
grenadier, living at a depth of 1,200 meters, by that point tolerating a pressure of
120 atmospheres.

I asked Captain Nemo if he had observed any fish at more considerable
depths.

"Fish? Rarely!" he answered me. "But given the current state of marine
science, who are we to presume, what do we really know of these depths?"

"Just this, captain. In going toward the ocean's lower strata, we know that
vegetable life disappears more quickly than animal life. We know that moving
creatures can still be encountered where water plants no longer grow. We know
that oysters and pilgrim scallops live in 2,000 meters of water, and that Admiral
McClintock, England's hero of the polar seas, pulled in a live sea star from a
depth of 2,500 meters. We know that the crew of the Royal Navy's Bulldog
fished up a starfish from 2,620 fathoms, hence from a depth of more than one
vertical league. Would you still say, Captain Nemo, that we really know
nothing?"

"No, professor," the captain replied, "I wouldn't be so discourteous. Yet I'll


ask you to explain how these creatures can live at such depths?"

"I explain it on two grounds," I replied. "In the first place, because vertical
currents, which are caused by differences in the water's salinity and density, can
produce enough motion to sustain the rudimentary lifestyles of sea lilies and
starfish."

"True," the captain put in.

"In the second place, because oxygen is the basis of life, and we know that
the amount of oxygen dissolved in salt water increases rather than decreases with
depth, that the pressure in these lower strata helps to concentrate their oxygen
content."

"Oho! We know that, do we?" Captain Nemo replied in a tone of mild
surprise. "Well, professor, we have good reason to know it because it's the truth.
I might add, in fact, that the air bladders of fish contain more nitrogen than
oxygen when these animals are caught at the surface of the water, and
conversely, more oxygen than nitrogen when they're pulled up from the lower
depths. Which bears out your formulation. But let's continue our observations."

My eyes flew back to the pressure gauge. The instrument indicated a depth
of 6,000 meters. Our submergence had been going on for an hour. The Nautilus
slid downward on its slanting fins, still sinking. These deserted waters were
wonderfully clear, with a transparency impossible to convey. An hour later we
were at 13,000 meters-- about three and a quarter vertical leagues--and the ocean
floor was nowhere in sight.

However, at 14,000 meters I saw blackish peaks rising in the midst of the
waters. But these summits could have belonged to mountains as high or even
higher than the Himalayas or Mt. Blanc, and the extent of these depths remained
incalculable.

Despite the powerful pressures it was undergoing, the Nautilus sank still
deeper. I could feel its sheet-iron plates trembling down to their riveted joins;
metal bars arched; bulkheads groaned; the lounge windows seemed to be
warping inward under the water's pressure. And this whole sturdy mechanism
would surely have given way, if, as its captain had said, it weren't capable of
resisting like a solid block.

While grazing these rocky slopes lost under the waters, I still spotted some
seashells, tube worms, lively annelid worms from the genus Spirorbis, and
certain starfish specimens.

But soon these last representatives of animal life vanished, and three vertical
leagues down, the Nautilus passed below the limits of underwater existence just
as an air balloon rises above the breathable zones in the sky. We reached a depth
of 16,000 meters-- four vertical leagues--and by then the Nautilus's plating was


tolerating a pressure of 1,600 atmospheres, in other words, 1,600 kilograms per
each square centimeter on its surface!

"What an experience!" I exclaimed. "Traveling these deep regions where no
man has ever ventured before! Look, captain! Look at these magnificent rocks,
these uninhabited caves, these last global haunts where life is no longer possible!
What unheard-of scenery, and why are we reduced to preserving it only as a
memory?"

"Would you like," Captain Nemo asked me, "to bring back more than just a
memory?"

"What do you mean?"

"I mean that nothing could be easier than taking a photograph of this
underwater region!"

Before I had time to express the surprise this new proposition caused me, a
camera was carried into the lounge at Captain Nemo's request. The liquid setting,
electrically lit, unfolded with perfect clarity through the wide-open panels. No
shadows, no blurs, thanks to our artificial light. Not even sunshine could have
been better for our purposes. With the thrust of its propeller curbed by the slant
of its fins, the Nautilus stood still. The camera was aimed at the scenery on the
ocean floor, and in a few seconds we had a perfect negative.

I attach a print of the positive. In it you can view these primordial rocks that
have never seen the light of day, this nether granite that forms the powerful
foundation of our globe, the deep caves cut into the stony mass, the outlines of
incomparable distinctness whose far edges stand out in black as if from the brush
of certain Flemish painters. In the distance is a mountainous horizon, a
wondrously undulating line that makes up the background of this landscape. The
general effect of these smooth rocks is indescribable: black, polished, without
moss or other blemish, carved into strange shapes, sitting firmly on a carpet of
sand that sparkled beneath our streams of electric light.

Meanwhile, his photographic operations over, Captain Nemo told me:

"Let's go back up, professor. We mustn't push our luck and expose the
Nautilus too long to these pressures."

"Let's go back up!" I replied.

"Hold on tight."

Before I had time to realize why the captain made this recommendation, I
was hurled to the carpet.

Its fins set vertically, its propeller thrown in gear at the captain's signal, the
Nautilus rose with lightning speed, shooting upward like an air balloon into the
sky. Vibrating resonantly, it knifed through the watery mass. Not a single detail
was Visible. In four minutes it had cleared the four vertical leagues separating it


from the surface of the ocean, and after emerging like a flying fish, it fell back
into the sea, making the waves leap to prodigious heights.


CHAPTER 12


Sperm Whales and Baleen Whales


DURING THE NIGHT of March 13-14, the Nautilus resumed its southward
heading. Once it was abreast of Cape Horn, I thought it would strike west of the
cape, make for Pacific seas, and complete its tour of the world. It did nothing of
the sort and kept moving toward the southernmost regions. So where was it
bound? The pole? That was insanity. I was beginning to think that the captain's
recklessness more than justified Ned Land's worst fears.

For a good while the Canadian had said nothing more to me about his escape
plans. He had become less sociable, almost sullen. I could see how heavily this
protracted imprisonment was weighing on him. I could feel the anger building in
him. Whenever he encountered the captain, his eyes would flicker with dark fire,
and I was in constant dread that his natural vehemence would cause him to do
something rash.

That day, March 14, he and Conseil managed to find me in my stateroom. I
asked them the purpose of their visit.

"To put a simple question to you, sir," the Canadian answered me.

"Go on, Ned."

"How many men do you think are on board the Nautilus?"

"I'm unable to say, my friend."

"It seems to me," Ned Land went on, "that it wouldn't take much of a crew to
run a ship like this one."

"Correct," I replied. "Under existing conditions some ten men at the most
should be enough to operate it."

"All right," the Canadian said, "then why should there be any more than
that?"

"Why?" I answered.

I stared at Ned Land, whose motives were easy to guess.

"Because," I said, "if I can trust my hunches, if I truly understand the
captain's way of life, his Nautilus isn't simply a ship. It's meant to be a refuge for
people like its commander, people who have severed all ties with the shore."

"Perhaps," Conseil said, "but in a nutshell, the Nautilus can hold only a
certain number of men, so couldn't master estimate their maximum?"

"How, Conseil?"

"By calculating it. Master is familiar with the ship's capacity, hence the


amount of air it contains; on the other hand, master knows how much air each
man consumes in the act of breathing, and he can compare this data with the fact
that the Nautilus must rise to the surface every twenty-four hours . . ."

Conseil didn't finish his sentence, but I could easily see what he was driving
at.

"I follow you," I said. "But while they're simple to do, such calculations can
give only a very uncertain figure."

"No problem," the Canadian went on insistently.

"Then here's how to calculate it," I replied. "In one hour each man consumes
the oxygen contained in 100 liters of air, hence during twenty-four hours the
oxygen contained in 2,400 liters. Therefore, we must look for the multiple of
2,400 liters of air that gives us the amount found in the Nautilus."

"Precisely," Conseil said.

"Now then," I went on, "the Nautilus's capacity is 1,500 metric tons, and that
of a ton is 1,000 liters, so the Nautilus holds 1,500,000 liters of air, which,
divided by 2,400..."

I did a quick pencil calculation.

"... gives us the quotient of 625. Which is tantamount to saying that the air
contained in the Nautilus would be exactly enough for 625 men over twenty-four
hours."

"625!" Ned repeated.

"But rest assured," I added, "that between passengers, seamen, or officers,
we don't total one-tenth of that figure."

"Which is still too many for three men!" Conseil muttered.

"So, my poor Ned, I can only counsel patience."

"And," Conseil replied, "even more than patience, resignation."

Conseil had said the true word.

"Even so," he went on, "Captain Nemo can't go south forever! He'll surely
have to stop, if only at the Ice Bank, and he'll return to the seas of civilization!
Then it will be time to resume Ned Land's plans."

The Canadian shook his head, passed his hand over his brow, made no reply,
and left us.

"With master's permission, I'll make an observation to him," Conseil then
told me. "Our poor Ned broods about all the things he can't have. He's haunted
by his former life. He seems to miss everything that's denied us. He's obsessed
by his old memories and it's breaking his heart. We must understand him. What
does he have to occupy him here? Nothing. He isn't a scientist like master, and
he doesn't share our enthusiasm for the sea's wonders. He would risk anything
just to enter a tavern in his own country!"


To be sure, the monotony of life on board must have seemed unbearable to
the Canadian, who was accustomed to freedom and activity. It was a rare event
that could excite him. That day, however, a development occurred that reminded
him of his happy years as a harpooner.

Near eleven o'clock in the morming, while on the surface of the ocean, the
Nautilus fell in with a herd of baleen whales. This encounter didn't surprise me,
because I knew these animals were being hunted so relentlessly that they took
refuge in the ocean basins of the high latitudes.

In the maritime world and in the realm of geographic exploration, whales
have played a major role. This is the animal that first dragged the Basques in its
wake, then Asturian Spaniards, Englishmen, and Dutchmen, emboldening them
against the ocean's perils, and leading them to the ends of the earth. Baleen
whales like to frequent the southernmost and northernmost seas. Old legends
even claim that these cetaceans led fishermen to within a mere seven leagues of
the North Pole. Although this feat is fictitious, it will someday come true,
because it's likely that by hunting whales in the Arctic or Antarctic regions, man
will finally reach this unknown spot on the globe.

We were seated on the platform next to a tranquil sea. The month of March,
since it's the equivalent of October in these latitudes, was giving us some fine
autumn days. It was the Canadian-- on this topic he was never mistaken--who
sighted a baleen whale on the eastern horizon. If you looked carefully, you could
see its blackish back alternately rise and fall above the waves, five miles from
the Nautilus.

"Wow!" Ned Land exclaimed. "If I were on board a whaler, there's an
encounter that would be great fun! That's one big animal! Look how high its
blowholes are spouting all that air and steam! Damnation! Why am I chained to
this hunk of sheet iron!"

"Why, Ned!" I replied. "You still aren't over your old fishing urges?"

"How could a whale fisherman forget his old trade, sir? Who could ever get
tired of such exciting hunting?"

"You've never fished these seas, Ned?"

"Never, sir. Just the northernmost seas, equally in the Bering Strait and the
Davis Strait."

"So the southern right whale is still unknown to you. Until now it's the
bowhead whale you've hunted, and it won't risk going past the warm waters of
the equator."

"Oh, professor, what are you feeding me?" the Canadian answered in a
tolerably skeptical tone.

"I'm feeding you the facts."


"By thunder! In '65, just two and a half years ago, I to whom you speak, I
myself stepped onto the carcass of a whale near Greenland, and its flank still
carried the marked harpoon of a whaling ship from the Bering Sea. Now I ask
you, after it had been wounded west of America, how could this animal be killed
in the east, unless it had cleared the equator and doubled Cape Horn or the Cape
of Good Hope?"

"I agree with our friend Ned," Conseil said, "and I'm waiting to hear how
master will reply to him."

"Master will reply, my friends, that baleen whales are localized, according to
species, within certain seas that they never leave. And if one of these animals
went from the Bering Strait to the Davis Strait, it's quite simply because there's
some passageway from the one sea to the other, either along the coasts of
Canada or Siberia."

"You expect us to fall for that?" the Canadian asked, tipping me a wink.

"If master says so," Conseil replied.

"Which means," the Canadian went on, "since I've never fished these
waterways, I don't know the whales that frequent them?"

"That's what I've been telling you, Ned."

"All the more reason to get to know them," Conseil answered.

"Look! Look!" the Canadian exclaimed, his voice full of excitement. "It's
approaching! It's coming toward us! It's thumbing its nose at me! It knows I can't
do a blessed thing to it!"

Ned stamped his foot. Brandishing an imaginary harpoon, his hands
positively trembled.

"These cetaceans,” he asked, "are they as big as the ones in the northernmost
seas?"

"Pretty nearly, Ned."

"Because I've seen big baleen whales, sir, whales measuring up to 100 feet
long! I've even heard that those rorqual whales off the Aleutian Islands
sometimes get over 150 feet."

"That strikes me as exaggerated,” I replied. "Those animals are only
members of the genus Balaenoptera furnished with dorsal fins, and like sperm
whales, they're generally smaller than the bowhead whale.”

"Oh!" exclaimed the Canadian, whose eyes hadn't left the ocean. "It's getting
closer, it's coming into the Nautilus's waters!"

Then, going on with his conversation:

"You talk about sperm whales," he said, "as if they were little beasts! But
there are stories of gigantic sperm whales. They're shrewd cetaceans. I hear that
some will cover themselves with algae and fucus plants. People mistake them for


islets. They pitch camp on top, make themselves at home, light a fire--"

"Build houses," Conseil said.

"Yes, funny man," Ned Land replied. "Then one fine day the animal dives
and drags all its occupants down into the depths."

"Like in the voyages of Sinbad the Sailor," I answered, laughing. "Oh, Mr.
Land, you're addicted to tall tales! What sperm whales you're handing us! I hope
you don't really believe in them!"

"Mr. Naturalist," the Canadian replied in all seriousness, "when it comes to
whales, you can believe anything! (Look at that one move! Look at it stealing
away!) People claim these animals can circle around the world in just fifteen
days."

"T don't say nay."

"But what you undoubtedly don't know, Professor Aronnax, is that at the
beginning of the world, whales traveled even quicker."

"Oh really, Ned! And why so?"

"Because in those days their tails moved side to side, like those on fish, in
other words, their tails were straight up, thrashing the water from left to right,
right to left. But spotting that they swam too fast, our Creator twisted their tails,
and ever since they've been thrashing the waves up and down, at the expense of
their speed."

"Fine, Ned," I said, then resurrected one of the Canadian's expressions. "You
expect us to fall for that?"

"Not too terribly," Ned Land replied, "and no more than if I told you there
are whales that are 300 feet long and weigh 1,000,000 pounds."

"That's indeed considerable," I said. "But you must admit that certain
cetaceans do grow to significant size, since they're said to supply as much as 120
metric tons of oil."

"That I've seen," the Canadian said.

"I can easily believe it, Ned, just as I can believe that certain baleen whales
equal 100 elephants in bulk. Imagine the impact of such a mass if it were
launched at full speed!"

"Is it true," Conseil asked, "that they can sink ships?"

"Ships? I doubt it,” I replied. "However, they say that in 1820, right in these
southern seas, a baleen whale rushed at the Essex and pushed it backward at a
speed of four meters per second. Its stern was flooded, and the Essex went down
fast."

Ned looked at me with a bantering expression.

"Speaking for myself," he said, "I once got walloped by a whale's tail-- in my
longboat, needless to say. My companions and I were launched to an altitude of


six meters. But next to the professor's whale, mine was just a baby."

"Do these animals live a long time?" Conseil asked.

"A thousand years," the Canadian replied without hesitation.

"And how, Ned," I asked, "do you know that's so?"

"Because people say so."

"And why do people say so?"

"Because people know so."

"No, Ned! People don't know so, they suppose so, and here's the logic with
which they back up their beliefs. When fishermen first hunted whales 400 years
ago, these animals grew to bigger sizes than they do today. Reasonably enough,
it's assumed that today's whales are smaller because they haven't had time to
reach their full growth. That's why the Count de Buffon's encyclopedia says that
cetaceans can live, and even must live, for a thousand years. You understand?"

Ned Land didn't understand. He no longer even heard me. That baleen whale
kept coming closer. His eyes devoured it.

"Oh!" he exclaimed. "It's not just one whale, it's ten, twenty, a whole gam!
And I can't do a thing! I'm tied hand and foot!"

"But Ned my friend," Conseil said, "why not ask Captain Nemo for
permission to hunt--"

Before Conseil could finish his sentence, Ned Land scooted down the hatch
and ran to look for the captain. A few moments later, the two of them reappeared
on the platform.

Captain Nemo observed the herd of cetaceans cavorting on the waters a mile
from the Nautilus.

"They're southern right whales," he said. "There goes the fortune of a whole
whaling fleet."

"Well, sir," the Canadian asked, "couldn't I hunt them, just so I don't forget
my old harpooning trade?"

"Hunt them? What for?" Captain Nemo replied. "Simply to destroy them?
We have no use for whale oil on this ship."

"But, sir," the Canadian went on, "in the Red Sea you authorized us to chase
a dugong!"

"There it was an issue of obtaining fresh meat for my crew. Here it would be
killing for the sake of killing. I'm well aware that's a privilege reserved for
mankind, but I don't allow such murderous pastimes. When your peers, Mr.
Land, destroy decent, harmless creatures like the southern right whale or the
bowhead whale, they commit a reprehensible offense. Thus they've already
depopulated all of Baffin Bay, and they'll wipe out a whole class of useful
animals. So leave these poor cetaceans alone. They have quite enough natural


enemies, such as sperm whales, swordfish, and sawfish, without you meddling
with them."

I'll let the reader decide what faces the Canadian made during this lecture on
hunting ethics. Furnishing such arguments to a professional harpooner was a
waste of words. Ned Land stared at Captain Nemo and obviously missed his
meaning. But the captain was right. Thanks to the mindless, barbaric
bloodthirstiness of fishermen, the last baleen whale will someday disappear from
the ocean.

Ned Land whistled "Yankee Doodle" between his teeth, stuffed his hands in
his pockets, and turned his back on us.

Meanwhile Captain Nemo studied the herd of cetaceans, then addressed me:

"I was right to claim that baleen whales have enough natural enemies without
counting man. These specimens will soon have to deal with mighty opponents.
Eight miles to leeward, Professor Aronnax, can you see those blackish specks
moving about?"

"Yes, captain,” I replied.

"Those are sperm whales, dreadful animals that I've sometimes encountered
in herds of 200 or 300! As for them, they're cruel, destructive beasts, and they
deserve to be exterminated."

The Canadian turned swiftly at these last words.

"Well, captain,” I said, "on behalf of the baleen whales, there's still time--"

"It's pointless to run any risks, professor. The Nautilus will suffice to disperse
these sperm whales. It's armed with a steel spur quite equal to Mr. Land's
harpoon, I imagine."

The Canadian didn't even bother shrugging his shoulders. Attacking
cetaceans with thrusts from a spur! Who ever heard of such malarkey!

"Wait and see, Professor Aronnax," Captain Nemo said. "We'll show you a
style of hunting with which you aren't yet familiar. We'll take no pity on these
ferocious cetaceans. They're merely mouth and teeth!"

Mouth and teeth! There's no better way to describe the long-skulled sperm
whale, whose length sometimes exceeds twenty-five meters. The enormous head
of this cetacean occupies about a third of its body. Better armed than a baleen
whale, whose upper jaw is adorned solely with whalebone, the sperm whale is
equipped with twenty-five huge teeth that are twenty centimeters high, have
cylindrical, conical summits, and weigh two pounds each. In the top part of this
enormous head, inside big cavities separated by cartilage, you'll find 300 to 400
kilograms of that valuable oil called "spermaceti." The sperm whale is an
awkward animal, more tadpole than fish, as Professor Frédol has noted. It's
poorly constructed, being "defective," so to speak, over the whole left side of its


frame, with good eyesight only in its right eye.

Meanwhile that monstrous herd kept coming closer. It had seen the baleen
whales and was preparing to attack. You could tell in advance that the sperm
whales would be victorious, not only because they were better built for fighting
than their harmless adversaries, but also because they could stay longer
underwater before returning to breathe at the surface.

There was just time to run to the rescue of the baleen whales. The Nautilus
proceeded to midwater. Conseil, Ned, and I sat in front of the lounge windows.
Captain Nemo made his way to the helmsman's side to operate his submersible
as an engine of destruction. Soon I felt the beats of our propeller getting faster,
and we picked up speed.

The battle between sperm whales and baleen whales had already begun when
the Nautilus arrived. It maneuvered to cut into the herd of long-skulled
predators. At first the latter showed little concern at the sight of this new monster
meddling in the battle. But they soon had to sidestep its thrusts.

What a struggle! Ned Land quickly grew enthusiastic and even ended up
applauding. Brandished in its captain's hands, the Nautilus was simply a
fearsome harpoon. He hurled it at those fleshy masses and ran them clean
through, leaving behind two squirming animal halves. As for those daunting
strokes of the tail hitting our sides, the ship never felt them. No more than the
collisions it caused. One sperm whale exterminated, it ran at another, tacked on
the spot so as not to miss its prey, went ahead or astern, obeyed its rudder, dived
when the cetacean sank to deeper strata, rose with it when it returned to the
surface, struck it head-on or slantwise, hacked at it or tore it, and from every
direction and at any speed, skewered it with its dreadful spur.

What bloodshed! What a hubbub on the surface of the waves! What sharp
hisses and snorts unique to these frightened animals! Their tails chumed the
normally peaceful strata into actual billows.

This Homeric slaughter dragged on for an hour, and the long-skulled
predators couldn't get away. Several times ten or twelve of them teamed up,
trying to crush the Nautilus with their sheer mass. Through the windows you
could see their enormous mouths paved with teeth, their fearsome eyes. Losing
all self-control, Ned Land hurled threats and insults at them. You could feel them
clinging to the submersible like hounds atop a wild boar in the underbrush. But
by forcing the pace of its propeller, the Nautilus carried them off, dragged them
under, or brought them back to the upper level of the waters, untroubled by their
enormous weight or their powerful grip.

Finally this mass of sperm whales thinned out. The waves grew tranquil
again. I felt us rising to the surface of the ocean. The hatch opened and we


rushed onto the platform.

The sea was covered with mutilated corpses. A fearsome explosion couldn't
have slashed, torn, or shredded these fleshy masses with greater violence. We
were floating in the midst of gigantic bodies, bluish on the back, whitish on the
belly, and all deformed by enormous protuberances. A few frightened sperm
whales were fleeing toward the horizon. The waves were dyed red over an area
of several miles, and the Nautilus was floating in the middle of a sea of blood.

Captain Nemo rejoined us.

"Well, Mr. Land?" he said.

"Well, sir," replied the Canadian, whose enthusiasm had subsided, "it's a
dreadful sight for sure. But I'm a hunter not a butcher, and this is plain butchery."

"It was a slaughter of destructive animals," the captain replied, "and the
Nautilus is no butcher knife."

"I prefer my harpoon," the Canadian answered.

"To each his own," the captain replied, staring intently at Ned Land.

I was in dread the latter would give way to some violent outburst that might
have had deplorable consequences. But his anger was diverted by the sight of a
baleen whale that the Nautilus had pulled alongside of just then.

This animal had been unable to escape the teeth of those sperm whales. I
recognized the southern right whale, its head squat, its body dark all over.
Anatomically, it's distinguished from the white whale and the black right whale
by the fusion of its seven cervical vertebrae, and it numbers two more ribs than
its relatives. Floating on its side, its belly riddled with bites, the poor cetacean
was dead. Still hanging from the tip of its mutilated fin was a little baby whale
that it had been unable to rescue from the slaughter. Its open mouth let water
flow through its whalebone like a murmuring surf.

Captain Nemo guided the Nautilus next to the animal's corpse. Two of his
men climbed onto the whale's flank, and to my astonishment, I saw them draw
from its udders all the milk they held, in other words, enough to fill two or three
casks.

The captain offered me a cup of this still-warm milk. I couldn't help showing
my distaste for such a beverage. He assured me that this milk was excellent, no
different from cow's milk.

I sampled it and agreed. So this milk was a worthwhile reserve ration for us,
because in the form of salt butter or cheese, it would provide a pleasant change
of pace from our standard fare.

From that day on, I noted with some uneasiness that Ned Land's attitudes
toward Captain Nemo grew worse and worse, and I decided to keep a close
watch on the Canadian's movements and activities.


CHAPTER 13


The Ice Bank


THE NAUTILUS resumed its unruffled southbound heading. It went along
the 50th meridian with considerable speed. Would it go to the pole? I didn't think
so, because every previous attempt to reach this spot on the globe had failed.
Besides, the season was already quite advanced, since March 13 on Antarctic
shores corresponds with September 13 in the northernmost regions, which marks
the beginning of the equinoctial period.

On March 14 at latitude 55 degrees, I spotted floating ice, plain pale bits of
rubble twenty to twenty-five feet long, which formed reefs over which the sea
burst into foam. The Nautilus stayed on the surface of the ocean. Having fished
in the Arctic seas, Ned Land was already familiar with the sight of icebergs.
Conseil and I were marveling at them for the first time.

In the sky toward the southern horizon, there stretched a dazzling white
band. English whalers have given this the name "ice blink." No matter how
heavy the clouds may be, they can't obscure this phenomenon. It announces the
presence of a pack, or shoal, of ice.

Indeed, larger blocks of ice soon appeared, their brilliance varying at the
whim of the mists. Some of these masses displayed green veins, as if scrawled
with undulating lines of copper sulfate. Others looked like enormous amethysts,
letting the light penetrate their insides. The latter reflected the sun's rays from the
thousand facets of their crystals. The former, tinted with a bright limestone
sheen, would have supplied enough building material to make a whole marble
town.

The farther down south we went, the more these floating islands grew in
numbers and prominence. Polar birds nested on them by the thousands. These
were petrels, cape pigeons, or puffins, and their calls were deafening. Mistaking
the Nautilus for the corpse of a whale, some of them alighted on it and prodded
its resonant sheet iron with pecks of their beaks.

During this navigating in the midst of the ice, Captain Nemo often stayed on
the platform. He observed these deserted waterways carefully. I saw his calm
eyes sometimes perk up. In these polar seas forbidden to man, did he feel right at
home, the lord of these unreachable regions? Perhaps. But he didn't say. He
stood still, reviving only when his pilot's instincts took over. Then, steering his
Nautilus with consummate dexterity, he skillfully dodged the masses of ice,


some of which measured several miles in length, their heights varying from
seventy to eighty meters. Often the horizon seemed completely closed off.
Abreast of latitude 60 degrees, every passageway had disappeared. Searching
with care, Captain Nemo soon found a narrow opening into which he brazenly
slipped, well aware, however, that it would close behind him.

Guided by his skillful hands, the Nautilus passed by all these different
masses of ice, which are classified by size and shape with a precision that
enraptured Conseil: "icebergs," or mountains; "ice fields," or smooth, limitless
tracts; "drift ice," or floating floes; "packs," or broken tracts, called "patches"
when they're circular and "streams" when they form long strips.

The temperature was fairly low. Exposed to the outside air, the thermometer
marked -2 degrees to

-3 degrees centigrade. But we were warmly dressed in furs, for which seals
and aquatic bears had paid the price. Evenly heated by all its electric equipment,
the Nautilus's interior defied the most intense cold. Moreover, to find a bearable
temperature, the ship had only to sink just a few meters beneath the waves.

Two months earlier we would have enjoyed perpetual daylight in this
latitude; but night already fell for three or four hours, and later it would cast six
months of shadow over these circumpolar regions.

On March 15 we passed beyond the latitude of the South Shetland and South
Orkney Islands. The captain told me that many tribes of seals used to inhabit
these shores; but English and American whalers, in a frenzy of destruction,
slaughtered all the adults, including pregnant females, and where life and
activity once existed, those fishermen left behind only silence and death.

Going along the 55th meridian, the Nautilus cut the Antarctic Circle on
March 16 near eight o'clock in the morning. Ice completely surrounded us and
closed off the horizon. Nevertheless, Captain Nemo went from passageway to
passageway, always proceeding south.

"But where's he going?" I asked.

"Straight ahead," Conseil replied. "Ultimately, when he can't go any farther,
he'll stop."

"T wouldn't bet on it!" I replied.

And in all honesty, I confess that this venturesome excursion was far from
displeasing to me. I can't express the intensity of my amazement at the beauties
of these new regions. The ice struck superb poses. Here, its general effect
suggested an oriental town with countless minarets and mosques. There, a city in
ruins, flung to the ground by convulsions in the earth. These views were varied
continuously by the sun's oblique rays, or were completely swallowed up by
gray mists in the middle of blizzards. Then explosions, cave-ins, and great


iceberg somersaults would occur all around us, altering the scenery like the
changing landscape in a diorama.

If the Nautilus was submerged during these losses of balance, we heard the
resulting noises spread under the waters with frightful intensity, and the collapse
of these masses created daunting eddies down to the ocean's lower strata. The
Nautilus then rolled and pitched like a ship left to the fury of the elements.

Often, no longer seeing any way out, I thought we were imprisoned for good,
but Captain Nemo, guided by his instincts, discovered new passageways from
the tiniest indications. He was never wrong when he observed slender threads of
bluish water streaking through these ice fields. Accordingly, I was sure that he
had already risked his Nautilus in the midst of the Antarctic seas.

However, during the day of March 16, these tracts of ice completely barred
our path. It wasn't the Ice Bank as yet, just huge ice fields cemented together by
the cold. This obstacle couldn't stop Captain Nemo, and he launched his ship
against the ice fields with hideous violence. The Nautilus went into these brittle
masses like a wedge, splitting them with dreadful cracklings. It was an old-
fashioned battering ram propelled with infinite power. Hurled aloft, ice rubble
fell back around us like hail. Through brute force alone, the submersible carved
out a channel for itself. Carried away by its momentum, the ship sometimes
mounted on top of these tracts of ice and crushed them with its weight, or at
other times, when cooped up beneath the ice fields, it split them with simple
pitching movements, creating wide punctures.

Violent squalls assaulted us during the daytime. Thanks to certain heavy
mists, we couldn't see from one end of the platform to the other. The wind
shifted abruptly to every point on the compass. The snow was piling up in such
packed layers, it had to be chipped loose with blows from picks. Even in a
temperature of merely -5 degrees centigrade, every outside part of the Nautilus
was covered with ice. A ship's rigging would have been unusable, because all its
tackle would have jammed in the grooves of the pulleys. Only a craft without
sails, driven by an electric motor that needed no coal, could face such high
latitudes.

Under these conditions the barometer generally stayed quite low. It fell as far
as 73.5 centimeters. Our compass indications no longer offered any guarantees.
The deranged needles would mark contradictory directions as we approached the
southern magnetic pole, which doesn't coincide with the South Pole proper. In
fact, according to the astronomer Hansteen, this magnetic pole is located fairly
close to latitude 70 degrees and longitude 130 degrees, or abiding by the
observations of Louis-Isidore Duperrey, in longitude 135 degrees and latitude 70
degrees 30'. Hence we had to transport compasses to different parts of the ship,


take many readings, and strike an average. Often we could chart our course only
by guesswork, a less than satisfactory method in the midst of these winding
passageways whose landmarks change continuously.

At last on March 18, after twenty futile assaults, the Nautilus was decisively
held in check. No longer was it an ice stream, patch, or field--it was an endless,
immovable barrier formed by ice mountains fused to each other.

"The Ice Bank!" the Canadian told me.

For Ned Land, as well as for every navigator before us, I knew that this was
the great insurmountable obstacle. When the sun appeared for an instant near
noon, Captain Nemo took a reasonably accurate sight that gave our position as
longitude 51 degrees 30' and latitude 67 degrees 39' south. This was a position
already well along in these Antarctic regions.

As for the liquid surface of the sea, there was no longer any semblance of it
before our eyes. Before the Nautilus's spur there lay vast broken plains, a tangle
of confused chunks with all the helter-skelter unpredictability typical of a river's
surface a short while before its ice breakup; but in this case the proportions were
gigantic. Here and there stood sharp peaks, lean spires that rose as high as 200
feet; farther off, a succession of steeply cut cliffs sporting a grayish tint, huge
mirrors that reflected the sparse rays of a sun half drowned in mist. Beyond, a
stark silence reigned in this desolate natural setting, a silence barely broken by
the flapping wings of petrels or puffins. By this point everything was frozen,
even sound.

So the Nautilus had to halt in its venturesome course among these tracts of
ice.

"Sir," Ned Land told me that day, "if your captain goes any farther .. ."

"Yes?"

"He'll be a superman."

"How so, Ned?"

"Because nobody can clear the Ice Bank. Your captain's a powerful man, but
damnation, he isn't more powerful than nature. If she draws a boundary line,
there you stop, like it or not!"

"Correct, Ned Land, but I still want to know what's behind this Ice Bank!
Behold my greatest source of irritation--a wall!"

"Master is right," Conseil said. "Walls were invented simply to frustrate
scientists. All walls should be banned."

"Fine!" the Canadian put in. "But we already know what's behind this Ice
Bank."

"What?" I asked.

"Ice, ice, and more ice."


"You may be sure of that, Ned," I answered, "but I'm not. That's why I want
to see for myself."

"Well, professor," the Canadian replied, "you can just drop that idea! You've
made it to the Ice Bank, which is already far enough, but you won't get any
farther, neither your Captain Nemo or his Nautilus. And whether he wants to or
not, we'll head north again, in other words, to the land of sensible people."

I had to agree that Ned Land was right, and until ships are built to navigate
over tracts of ice, they'll have to stop at the Ice Bank.

Indeed, despite its efforts, despite the powerful methods it used to split this
ice, the Nautilus was reduced to immobility. Ordinarily, when someone can't go
any farther, he still has the option of returning in his tracks. But here it was just
as impossible to turn back as to go forward, because every passageway had
closed behind us, and if our submersible remained even slightly stationary, it
would be frozen in without delay. Which is exactly what happened near two
o'clock in the afternoon, and fresh ice kept forming over the ship's sides with
astonishing speed. I had to admit that Captain Nemo's leadership had been most
injudicious.

Just then I was on the platform. Observing the situation for some while, the
captain said to me:

"Well, professor! What think you?"

"T think we're trapped, captain."

"Trapped! What do you mean?"

"I mean we can't go forward, backward, or sideways. I think that's the
standard definition of ‘trapped,’ at least in the civilized world."

"So, Professor Aronnax, you think the Nautilus won't be able to float clear?"

"Only with the greatest difficulty, captain, since the season is already too
advanced for you to depend on an ice breakup."

"Oh, professor," Captain Nemo replied in an ironic tone, "you never change!
You see only impediments and obstacles! I promise you, not only will the
Nautilus float clear, it will go farther still!"

"Farther south?" I asked, gaping at the captain.

"Yes, sir, it will go to the pole."

"To the pole!" I exclaimed, unable to keep back a movement of disbelief.

"Yes," the captain replied coolly, "the Antarctic pole, that unknown spot
crossed by every meridian on the globe. As you know, I do whatever I like with
my Nautilus."

Yes, I did know that! I knew this man was daring to the point of being
foolhardy. But to overcome all the obstacles around the South Pole--even more
unattainable than the North Pole, which still hadn't been reached by the boldest


navigators-- wasn't this an absolutely insane undertaking, one that could occur
only in the brain of a madman?

It then dawned on me to ask Captain Nemo if he had already discovered this
pole, which no human being had ever trod underfoot.

"No, sir," he answered me, "but we'll discover it together. Where others have
failed, I'll succeed. Never before has my Nautilus cruised so far into these
southernmost seas, but I repeat: it will go farther still."

"T'd like to believe you, captain," I went on in a tone of some sarcasm. "Oh I
do believe you! Let's forge ahead! There are no obstacles for us! Let's shatter this
Ice Bank! Let's blow it up, and if it still resists, let's put wings on the Nautilus
and fly over it!"

"Over it, professor?" Captain Nemo replied serenely. "No, not over it, but
under it."

"Under it!" I exclaimed.

A sudden insight into Captain Nemo's plans had just flashed through my
mind. I understood. The marvelous talents of his Nautilus would be put to work
once again in this superhuman undertaking!

"I can see we're starting to understand each other, professor," Captain Nemo
told me with a half smile. "You already glimpse the potential--myself, I'd say the
success--of this attempt. Maneuvers that aren't feasible for an ordinary ship are
easy for the Nautilus. If a continent emerges at the pole, we'll stop at that
continent. But on the other hand, if open sea washes the pole, we'll go to that
very place!"

"Right," I said, carried away by the captain's logic. "Even though the surface
of the sea has solidified into ice, its lower strata are still open, thanks to that
divine justice that puts the maximum density of salt water one degree above its
freezing point. And if I'm not mistaken, the submerged part of this Ice Bank is in
a four-to-one ratio to its emerging part."

"Very nearly, professor. For each foot of iceberg above the sea, there are
three more below. Now then, since these ice mountains don't exceed a height of
100 meters, they sink only to a depth of 300 meters. And what are 300 meters to
the Nautilus?"

"A mere nothing, sir."

"We could even go to greater depths and find that temperature layer common
to all ocean water, and there we'd brave with impunity the -30 degrees or -40
degrees cold on the surface."

"True, sir, very true," I replied with growing excitement.

"Our sole difficulty," Captain Nemo went on, "lies in our staying submerged
for several days without renewing our air supply."


"That's all?" I answered. "The Nautilus has huge air tanks; we'll fill them up
and they'll supply all the oxygen we need."

"Good thinking, Professor Aronnax," the captain replied with a smile. "But
since I don't want to be accused of foolhardiness, I'm giving you all my
objections in advance."

"You have more?"

"Just one. If a sea exists at the South Pole, it's possible this sea may be
completely frozen over, so we couldn't come up to the surface!"

"My dear sir, have you forgotten that the Nautilus is armed with a fearsome
spur? Couldn't it be launched diagonally against those tracts of ice, which would
break open from the impact?"

"Ah, professor, you're full of ideas today!"

"Besides, captain," I added with still greater enthusiasm, "why wouldn't we
find open sea at the South Pole just as at the North Pole? The cold-temperature
poles and the geographical poles don't coincide in either the northern or southern
hemispheres, and until proof to the contrary, we can assume these two spots on
the earth feature either a continent or an ice-free ocean."

"I think as you do, Professor Aronnax," Captain Nemo replied. "I'll only
point out that after raising so many objections against my plan, you're now
crushing me under arguments in its favor."

Captain Nemo was right. I was outdoing him in daring! It was I who was
sweeping him to the pole. I was leading the way, I was out in front. . . but no,
you silly fool! Captain Nemo already knew the pros and cons of this question,
and it amused him to see you flying off into impossible fantasies!

Nevertheless, he didn't waste an instant. At his signal, the chief officer
appeared. The two men held a quick exchange in their incomprehensible
language, and either the chief officer had been alerted previously or he found the
plan feasible, because he showed no surprise.

But as unemotional as he was, he couldn't have been more impeccably
emotionless than Conseil when I told the fine lad our intention of pushing on to
the South Pole. He greeted my announcement with the usual "As master wishes,"
and I had to be content with that. As for Ned Land, no human shoulders ever
executed a higher shrug than the pair belonging to our Canadian.

"Honestly, sir," he told me. "You and your Captain Nemo, I pity you both!"

"But we will go to the pole, Mr. Land."

"Maybe, but you won't come back!"

And Ned Land reentered his cabin, "to keep from doing something
desperate," he said as he left me.

Meanwhile preparations for this daring attempt were getting under way. The


Nautilus's powerful pumps forced air down into the tanks and stored it under
high pressure. Near four o'clock Captain Nemo informed me that the platform
hatches were about to be closed. I took a last look at the dense Ice Bank we were
going to conquer. The weather was fair, the skies reasonably clear, the cold quite
brisk, namely -12 degrees centigrade; but after the wind had lulled, this
temperature didn't seem too unbearable.

Equipped with picks, some ten men climbed onto the Nautilus's sides and
cracked loose the ice around the ship's lower plating, which was soon set free.
This operation was swiftly executed because the fresh ice was still thin. We all
reentered the interior. The main ballast tanks were filled with the water that
hadn't yet congealed at our line of flotation. The Nautilus submerged without
delay.

I took a seat in the lounge with Conseil. Through the open window we stared
at the lower strata of this southernmost ocean. The thermometer rose again. The
needle on the pressure gauge swerved over its dial.

About 300 meters down, just as Captain Nemo had predicted, we cruised
beneath the undulating surface of the Ice Bank. But the Nautilus sank deeper
still. It reached a depth of 800 meters. At the surface this water gave a
temperature of -12 degrees centigrade, but now it gave no more than -10
degrees. Two degrees had already been gained. Thanks to its heating equipment,
the Nautilus's temperature, needless to say, stayed at a much higher degree.
Every maneuver was accomplished with extraordinary precision.

"With all due respect to master," Conseil told me, "we'll pass it by."

"I fully expect to!" I replied in a tone of deep conviction.

Now in open water, the Nautilus took a direct course to the pole without
veering from the 52nd meridian. From 67 degrees 30' to 90 degrees, twenty-two
and a half degrees of latitude were left to cross, in other words, slightly more
than 500 leagues. The Nautilus adopted an average speed of twenty-six miles per
hour, the speed of an express train. If it kept up this pace, forty hours would do it
for reaching the pole.

For part of the night, the novelty of our circumstances kept Conseil and me
at the lounge window. The sea was lit by our beacon's electric rays. But the
depths were deserted. Fish didn't linger in these imprisoned waters. Here they
found merely a passageway for going from the Antarctic Ocean to open sea at
the pole. Our progress was swift. You could feel it in the vibrations of the long
steel hull.

Near two o'clock in the morning, I went to snatch a few hours of sleep.
Conseil did likewise. I didn't encounter Captain Nemo while going down the
gangways. I assumed that he was keeping to the pilothouse.


The next day, March 19, at five o'clock in the morning, I was back at my post
in the lounge. The electric log indicated that the Nautilus had reduced speed. By
then it was rising to the surface, but cautiously, while slowly emptying its ballast
tanks.

My heart was pounding. Would we emerge into the open and find the polar
air again?

No. A jolt told me that the Nautilus had bumped the underbelly of the Ice
Bank, still quite thick to judge from the hollowness of the accompanying noise.
Indeed, we had "struck bottom," to use nautical terminology, but in the opposite
direction and at a depth of 3,000 feet. That gave us 4,000 feet of ice overhead, of
which 1,000 feet emerged above water. So the Ice Bank was higher here than we
had found it on the outskirts. A circumstance less than encouraging.

Several times that day, the Nautilus repeated the same experiment and
always it bumped against this surface that formed a ceiling above it. At certain
moments the ship encountered ice at a depth of 900 meters, denoting a thickness
of 1,200 meters, of which 300 meters rose above the level of the ocean. This
height had tripled since the moment the Nautilus had dived beneath the waves.

I meticulously noted these different depths, obtaining the underwater profile
of this upside-down mountain chain that stretched beneath the sea.

By evening there was still no improvement in our situation. The ice stayed
between 400 and 500 meters deep. It was obviously shrinking, but what a barrier
still lay between us and the surface of the ocean!

By then it was eight o'clock. The air inside the Nautilus should have been
renewed four hours earlier, following daily practice on board. But I didn't suffer
very much, although Captain Nemo hadn't yet made demands on the
supplementary oxygen in his air tanks.

That night my sleep was fitful. Hope and fear besieged me by turns. I got up
several times. The Nautilus continued groping. Near three o'clock in the
morning, I observed that we encountered the Ice Bank's underbelly at a depth of
only fifty meters. So only 150 feet separated us from the surface of the water.
Little by little the Ice Bank was turning into an ice field again. The mountains
were changing back into plains.

My eyes didn't leave the pressure gauge. We kept rising on a diagonal, going
along this shiny surface that sparkled beneath our electric rays. Above and
below, the Ice Bank was subsiding in long gradients. Mile after mile it was
growing thinner.

Finally, at six o'clock in the morning on that memorable day of March 19, the
lounge door opened. Captain Nemo appeared.

"Open sea!" he told me.


CHAPTER 14


The South Pole


I RUSHED UP onto the platform. Yes, open sea! Barely a few sparse floes,
some moving

icebergs; a sea stretching into the distance; hosts of birds in the air and
myriads of fish under the waters, which varied from intense blue to olive green
depending on the depth. The thermometer marked 3 degrees centigrade. It was as
if a comparative springtime had been locked up behind that Ice Bank, whose
distant masses were outlined on the northern horizon.

"Are we at the pole?" I asked the captain, my heart pounding.

"T've no idea," he answered me. "At noon we'll fix our position."

"But will the sun show through this mist?" I said, staring at the grayish sky.

"No matter how faintly it shines, it will be enough for me," the captain
replied.

To the south, ten miles from the Nautilus, a solitary islet rose to a height of
200 meters. We proceeded toward it, but cautiously, because this sea could have
been strewn with reefs.

In an hour we had reached the islet. Two hours later we had completed a full
circle around it. It measured four to five miles in circumference. A narrow
channel separated it from a considerable shore, perhaps a continent whose limits
we couldn't see. The existence of this shore seemed to bear out Commander
Maury's hypotheses. In essence, this ingenious American has noted that between
the South Pole and the 60th parallel, the sea is covered with floating ice of
dimensions much greater than any found in the north Atlantic. From this fact he
drew the conclusion that the Antarctic Circle must contain considerable shores,
since icebergs can't form on the high seas but only along coastlines. According
to his calculations, this frozen mass enclosing the southernmost pole forms a
vast ice cap whose width must reach 4,000 kilometers.

Meanwhile, to avoid running aground, the Nautilus halted three cable lengths
from a strand crowned by superb piles of rocks. The skiff was launched to sea.
Two crewmen carrying instruments, the captain, Conseil, and I were on board. It
was ten o'clock in the morning. I hadn't seen Ned Land. No doubt, in the
presence of the South Pole, the Canadian hated having to eat his words.

A few strokes of the oar brought the skiff to the sand, where it ran aground.
Just as Conseil was about to jump ashore, I held him back.


"Sir," I told Captain Nemo, "to you belongs the honor of first setting foot on
this shore."

"Yes, sir," the captain replied, "and if I have no hesitation in treading this
polar soil, it's because no human being until now has left a footprint here."

So saying, he leaped lightly onto the sand. His heart must have been
throbbing with intense excitement. He scaled an overhanging rock that ended in
a small promontory and there, mute and motionless, with crossed arms and
blazing eyes, he seemed to be laying claim to these southernmost regions. After
spending five minutes in this trance, he turned to us.

"Whenever you're ready, sir," he called to me.

I got out, Conseil at my heels, leaving the two men in the skiff.

Over an extensive area, the soil consisted of that igneous gravel called "tuff,"
reddish in color as if made from crushed bricks. The ground was covered with
slag, lava flows, and pumice stones. Its volcanic origin was unmistakable. In
certain localities thin smoke holes gave off a sulfurous odor, showing that the
inner fires still kept their wide-ranging power. Nevertheless, when I scaled a
high escarpment, I could see no volcanoes within a radius of several miles. In
these Antarctic districts, as is well known, Sir James Clark Ross had found the
craters of Mt. Erebus and Mt. Terror in fully active condition on the 167th
meridian at latitude 77 degrees 32’.

The vegetation on this desolate continent struck me as quite limited. A few
lichens of the species Usnea melanoxanthra sprawled over the black rocks. The
whole meager flora of this region consisted of certain microscopic buds,
rudimentary diatoms made up of a type of cell positioned between two quartz-
rich shells, plus long purple and crimson fucus plants, buoyed by small air
bladders and washed up on the coast by the surf.

The beach was strewn with mollusks: small mussels, limpets, smooth heart-
shaped cockles, and especially some sea butterflies with oblong, membrane-
filled bodies whose heads are formed from two rounded lobes. I also saw
myriads of those northernmost sea butterflies three centimeters long, which a
baleen whale can swallow by the thousands in one gulp. The open waters at the
shoreline were alive with these delightful pteropods, true butterflies of the sea.

Among other zoophytes present in these shallows, there were a few coral tree
forms that, according to Sir James Clark Ross, live in these Antarctic seas at
depths as great as 1,000 meters; then small alcyon coral belonging to the species
Procellaria pelagica, also a large number of starfish unique to these climes, plus
some feather stars spangling the sand.

But it was in the air that life was superabundant. There various species of
birds flew and fluttered by the thousands, deafening us with their calls.


Crowding the rocks, other fowl watched without fear as we passed and pressed
familiarly against our feet. These were auks, as agile and supple in water, where
they are sometimes mistaken for fast bonito, as they are clumsy and heavy on
land. They uttered outlandish calls and participated in numerous public
assemblies that featured much noise but little action.

Among other fowl I noted some sheathbills from the wading-bird family, the
size of pigeons, white in color, the beak short and conical, the eyes framed by
red circles. Conseil laid in a supply of them, because when they're properly
cooked, these winged creatures make a pleasant dish. In the air there passed
sooty albatross with four-meter wingspans, birds aptly dubbed "vultures of the
ocean," also gigantic petrels including several with arching wings, enthusiastic
eaters of seal that are known as quebrantahuesos,* and cape pigeons, a sort of
small duck, the tops of their bodies black and white--in short, a whole series of
petrels, some whitish with wings trimmed in brown, others blue and exclusive to
these Antarctic seas, the former "so oily," I told Conseil, "that inhabitants of the
Faroe Islands simply fit the bird with a wick, then light it up."

*Spanish: "ospreys." Ed.

"With that minor addition," Conseil replied, "these fowl would make perfect
lamps! After this, we should insist that nature equip them with wicks in
advance!"

Half a mile farther on, the ground was completely riddled with penguin
nests, egg-laying burrows from which numerous birds emerged. Later Captain
Nemo had hundreds of them hunted because their black flesh is highly edible.
They brayed like donkeys. The size of a goose with slate-colored bodies, white
undersides, and lemon-colored neck bands, these animals let themselves be
stoned to death without making any effort to get away.

Meanwhile the mists didn't clear, and by eleven o'clock the sun still hadn't
made an appearance. Its absence disturbed me. Without it, no sights were
possible. Then how could we tell whether we had reached the pole?

When I rejoined Captain Nemo, I found him leaning silently against a piece
of rock and staring at the sky. He seemed impatient, baffled. But what could we
do? This daring and powerful man couldn't control the sun as he did the sea.

Noon arrived without the orb of day appearing for a single instant. You
couldn't even find its hiding place behind the curtain of mist. And soon this mist
began to condense into snow.

"Until tomorrow," the captain said simply; and we went back to the Nautilus,
amid flurries in the air.

During our absence the nets had been spread, and I observed with fascination
the fish just hauled on board. The Antarctic seas serve as a refuge for an


extremely large number of migratory fish that flee from storms in the subpolar
zones, in truth only to slide down the gullets of porpoises and seals. I noted some
one-decimeter southern bullhead, a species of whitish cartilaginous fish overrun
with bluish gray stripes and armed with stings, then some Antarctic rabbitfish
three feet long, the body very slender, the skin a smooth silver white, the head
rounded, the topside furnished with three fins, the snout ending in a trunk that
curved back toward the mouth. I sampled its flesh but found it tasteless, despite
Conseil's views, which were largely approving.

The blizzard lasted until the next day. It was impossible to stay on the
platform. From the lounge, where I was writing up the incidents of this
excursion to the polar continent, I could hear the calls of petrel and albatross
cavorting in the midst of the turmoil. The Nautilus didn't stay idle, and cruising
along the coast, it advanced some ten miles farther south amid the half light left
by the sun as it skimmed the edge of the horizon.

The next day, March 20, it stopped snowing. The cold was a little more brisk.
The thermometer marked -2 degrees centigrade. The mist had cleared, and on
that day I hoped our noon sights could be accomplished.

Since Captain Nemo hadn't yet appeared, only Conseil and I were taken
ashore by the skiff. The soil's nature was still the same: volcanic. Traces of lava,
slag, and basaltic rock were everywhere, but I couldn't find the crater that had
vomited them up. There as yonder, myriads of birds enlivened this part of the
polar continent. But they had to share their dominion with huge herds of marine
mammals that looked at us with gentle eyes. These were seals of various species,
some stretched out on the ground, others lying on drifting ice floes, several
leaving or reentering the sea. Having never dealt with man, they didn't run off at
our approach, and I counted enough of them thereabouts to provision a couple
hundred ships.

"Ye gods," Conseil said, "it's fortunate that Ned Land didn't come with us!"

"Why so, Conseil?"

"Because that madcap hunter would kill every animal here."

"Every animal may be overstating it, but in truth I doubt we could keep our
Canadian friend from harpooning some of these magnificent cetaceans. Which
would be an affront to Captain Nemo, since he hates to slay harmless beasts
needlessly."

"He's right."

"Certainly, Conseil. But tell me, haven't you finished classifying these superb
specimens of marine fauna?"

"Master is well aware," Conseil replied, "that I'm not seasoned in practical
application. When master has told me these animals' names. . ."


"They're seals and walruses."

"Two genera,” our scholarly Conseil hastened to say, "that belong to the
family Pinnipedia, order Carnivora, group Unguiculata, subclass Monodelphia,
class Mammalia, branch Vertebrata."

"Very nice, Conseil," I replied, "but these two genera of seals and walruses
are each divided into species, and if I'm not mistaken, we now have a chance to
actually look at them. Let's."

It was eight o'clock in the morning. We had four hours to ourselves before
the sun could be productively observed. I guided our steps toward a huge bay
that made a crescent-shaped incision in the granite cliffs along the beach.

There, all about us, I swear that the shores and ice floes were crowded with
marine mammals as far as the eye could see, and I involuntarily looked around
for old Proteus, that mythological shepherd who guarded King Neptune's
immense flocks. To be specific, these were seals. They formed distinct male-
and-female groups, the father watching over his family, the mother suckling her
little ones, the stronger youngsters emancipated a few paces away. When these
mammals wanted to relocate, they moved in little jumps made by contracting
their bodies, clumsily helped by their imperfectly developed flippers, which, as
with their manatee relatives, form actual forearms. In the water, their ideal
element, I must say these animals swim wonderfully thanks to their flexible
backbones, narrow pelvises, close-cropped hair, and webbed feet. Resting on
shore, they assumed extremely graceful positions. Consequently, their gentle
features, their sensitive expressions equal to those of the loveliest women, their
soft, limpid eyes, their charming poses, led the ancients to glorify them by
metamorphosing the males into sea gods and the females into mermaids.

I drew Conseil's attention to the considerable growth of the cerebral lobes
found in these intelligent cetaceans. No mammal except man has more abundant
cerebral matter. Accordingly, seals are quite capable of being educated; they
make good pets, and together with certain other naturalists, I think these animals
can be properly trained to perform yeoman service as hunting dogs for
fishermen.

Most of these seals were sleeping on the rocks or the sand. Among those
properly termed seals--which have no external ears, unlike sea lions whose ears
protrude--I observed several varieties of the species stenorhynchus, three meters
long, with white hair, bulldog heads, and armed with ten teeth in each jaw: four
incisors in both the upper and lower, plus two big canines shaped like the fleur-
de-lis. Among them slithered some sea elephants, a type of seal with a short,
flexible trunk; these are the giants of the species, with a circumference of twenty
feet and a length of ten meters. They didn't move as we approached.


"Are these animals dangerous?" Conseil asked me.

"Only if they're attacked," I replied. "But when these giant seals defend their
little ones, their fury is dreadful, and it isn't rare for them to smash a fisherman's
longboat to bits."

"They're within their rights," Conseil answered.

"T don't say nay."

Two miles farther on, we were stopped by a promontory that screened the
bay from southerly winds. It dropped straight down to the sea, and surf foamed
against it. From beyond this ridge there came fearsome bellows, such as a herd
of cattle might produce.

"Gracious," Conseil put in, "a choir of bulls?"

"No," I said, "a choir of walruses."

"Are they fighting with each other?"

"Either fighting or playing."

"With all due respect to master, this we must see."

"Then see it we must, Conseil."

And there we were, climbing these blackish rocks amid sudden landslides
and over stones slippery with ice. More than once I took a tumble at the expense
of my backside. Conseil, more cautious or more stable, barely faltered and
would help me up, saying:

"If master's legs would kindly adopt a wider stance, master will keep his
balance."

Arriving at the topmost ridge of this promontory, I could see vast white
plains covered with walruses. These animals were playing among themselves.
They were howling not in anger but in glee.

Walruses resemble seals in the shape of their bodies and the arrangement of
their limbs. But their lower jaws lack canines and incisors, and as for their upper
canines, they consist of two tusks eighty centimeters long with a circumference
of thirty-three centimeters at the socket. Made of solid ivory, without striations,
harder than elephant tusks, and less prone to yellowing, these teeth are in great
demand. Accordingly, walruses are the victims of a mindless hunting that soon
will destroy them all, since their hunters indiscriminately slaughter pregnant
females and youngsters, and over 4,000 individuals are destroyed annually.

Passing near these unusual animals, I could examine them at my leisure since
they didn't stir. Their hides were rough and heavy, a tan color leaning toward a
reddish brown; their coats were short and less than abundant. Some were four
meters long. More tranquil and less fearful than their northern relatives, they
posted no sentinels on guard duty at the approaches to their campsite.

After examining this community of walruses, I decided to return in my


tracks. It was eleven o'clock, and if Captain Nemo found conditions favorable
for taking his sights, I wanted to be present at the operation. But I held no hopes
that the sun would make an appearance that day. It was hidden from our eyes by
clouds squeezed together on the horizon. Apparently the jealous orb didn't want
to reveal this inaccessible spot on the globe to any human being.

Yet I decided to return to the Nautilus. We went along a steep, narrow path
that ran over the cliff's summit. By 11:30 we had arrived at our landing place.
The beached skiff had brought the captain ashore. I spotted him standing on a
chunk of basalt. His instruments were beside him. His eyes were focused on the
northern horizon, along which the sun was sweeping in its extended arc.

I found a place near him and waited without speaking. Noon arrived, and just
as on the day before, the sun didn't put in an appearance.

It was sheer bad luck. Our noon sights were still lacking. If we couldn't
obtain them tomorrow, we would finally have to give up any hope of fixing our
position.

In essence, it was precisely March 20. Tomorrow, the 21st, was the day of
the equinox; the sun would disappear below the horizon for six months not
counting refraction, and after its disappearance the long polar night would begin.
Following the September equinox, the sun had emerged above the northerly
horizon, rising in long spirals until December 21. At that time, the summer
solstice of these southernmost districts, the sun had started back down, and
tomorrow it would cast its last rays.

I shared my thoughts and fears with Captain Nemo.

"You're right, Professor Aronnax," he told me. "If I can't take the sun's
altitude tomorrow, I won't be able to try again for another six months. But
precisely because sailors' luck has led me into these seas on March 21, it will be
easy to get our bearings if the noonday sun does appear before our eyes."

"Why easy, captain?”

"Because when the orb of day sweeps in such long spirals, it's difficult to
measure its exact altitude above the horizon, and our instruments are open to
committing serious errors."

"Then what can you do?"

"I use only my chronometer," Captain Nemo answered me. "At noon
tomorrow, March 21, if, after accounting for refraction, the sun's disk is cut
exactly in half by the northern horizon, that will mean I'm at the South Pole."

"Right," I said. "Nevertheless, it isn't mathematically exact proof, because
the equinox needn't fall precisely at noon."

"No doubt, sir, but the error will be under 100 meters, and that's close
enough for us. Until tomorrow then."


Captain Nemo went back on board. Conseil and I stayed behind until five
o'clock, surveying the beach, observing and studying. The only unusual object I
picked up was an auk's egg of remarkable size, for which a collector would have
paid more than 1,000 francs. Its cream-colored tint, plus the streaks and
markings that decorated it like so many hieroglyphics, made it a rare trinket. I
placed it in Conseil's hands, and holding it like precious porcelain from China,
that cautious, sure-footed lad got it back to the Nautilus in one piece.

There I put this rare egg inside one of the glass cases in the museum. I ate
supper, feasting with appetite on an excellent piece of seal liver whose flavor
reminded me of pork. Then I went to bed; but not without praying, like a good
Hindu, for the favors of the radiant orb.

The next day, March 21, bright and early at five o'clock in the morning, I
climbed onto the platform. I found Captain Nemo there.

"The weather is clearing a bit," he told me. "I have high hopes. After
breakfast we'll make our way ashore and choose an observation post."

This issue settled, I went to find Ned Land. I wanted to take him with me.
The obstinate Canadian refused, and I could clearly see that his tight-lipped
mood and his bad temper were growing by the day. Under the circumstances I
ultimately wasn't sorry that he refused. In truth, there were too many seals
ashore, and it would never do to expose this impulsive fisherman to such
temptations.

Breakfast over, I made my way ashore. The Nautilus had gone a few more
miles during the night. It lay well out, a good league from the coast, which was
crowned by a sharp peak 400 to 500 meters high. In addition to me, the skiff
carried Captain Nemo, two crewmen, and the instruments--in other words, a
chronometer, a spyglass, and a barometer.

During our crossing I saw numerous baleen whales belonging to the three
species unique to these southernmost seas: the bowhead whale (or "right whale,"
according to the English), which has no dorsal fin; the humpback whale from the
genus Balaenoptera (in other words, "winged whales"), beasts with wrinkled
bellies and huge whitish fins that, genus name regardless, do not yet form wings;
and the finback whale, yellowish brown, the swiftest of all cetaceans. This
powerful animal is audible from far away when it sends up towering spouts of
air and steam that resemble swirls of smoke. Herds of these different mammals
were playing about in the tranquil waters, and I could easily see that this
Antarctic polar basin now served as a refuge for those cetaceans too relentlessly
pursued by hunters.

I also noted long, whitish strings of salps, a type of mollusk found in
clusters, and some jellyfish of large size that swayed in the eddies of the billows.


By nine o'clock we had pulled up to shore. The sky was growing brighter.
Clouds were fleeing to the south. Mists were rising from the cold surface of the
water. Captain Nemo headed toward the peak, which he no doubt planned to
make his observatory. It was an arduous climb over sharp lava and pumice
stones in the midst of air often reeking with sulfurous fumes from the smoke
holes. For a man out of practice at treading land, the captain scaled the steepest
slopes with a supple agility I couldn't equal, and which would have been envied
by hunters of Pyrenees mountain goats.

It took us two hours to reach the summit of this half-crystal, half-basalt peak.
From there our eyes scanned a vast sea, which scrawled its boundary line firmly
against the background of the northern sky. At our feet: dazzling tracts of white.
Over our heads: a pale azure, clear of mists. North of us: the sun's disk, like a
ball of fire already cut into by the edge of the horizon. From the heart of the
waters: jets of liquid rising like hundreds of magnificent bouquets. Far off, like a
sleeping cetacean: the Nautilus. Behind us to the south and east: an immense
shore, a chaotic heap of rocks and ice whose limits we couldn't see.

Arriving at the summit of this peak, Captain Nemo carefully determined its
elevation by means of his barometer, since he had to take this factor into account
in his noon sights.

At 11:45 the sun, by then seen only by refraction, looked like a golden disk,
dispersing its last rays over this deserted continent and down to these seas not
yet plowed by the ships of man.

Captain Nemo had brought a spyglass with a reticular eyepiece, which
corrected the sun's refraction by means of a mirror, and he used it to observe the
orb sinking little by little along a very extended diagonal that reached below the
horizon. I held the chronometer. My heart was pounding mightily. If the lower
half of the sun's disk disappeared just as the chronometer said noon, we were
right at the pole.

"Noon!" I called.

"The South Pole!" Captain Nemo replied in a solemn voice, handing me the
spyglass, which showed the orb of day cut into two exactly equal parts by the
horizon.

I stared at the last rays wreathing this peak, while shadows were gradually
climbing its gradients.

Just then, resting his hand on my shoulder, Captain Nemo said to me:

"In 1600, sir, the Dutchman Gheritk was swept by storms and currents,
reaching latitude 64 degrees south and discovering the South Shetland Islands.
On January 17, 1773, the famous Captain Cook went along the 38th meridian,
arriving at latitude 67 degrees 30'; and on January 30, 1774, along the 109th


meridian, he reached latitude 71 degrees 15'. In 1819 the Russian Bellinghausen
lay on the 69th parallel, and in 1821 on the 66th at longitude 111 degrees west.
In 1820 the Englishman Bransfield stopped at 65 degrees. That same year the
American Morrel, whose reports are dubious, went along the 42nd meridian,
finding open sea at latitude 70 degrees 14'. In 1825 the Englishman Powell was
unable to get beyond 62 degrees. That same year a humble seal fisherman, the
Englishman Weddell, went as far as latitude 72 degrees 14' on the 35th meridian,
and as far as 74 degrees 15' on the 36th. In 1829 the Englishman Forster,
commander of the Chanticleer, laid claim to the Antarctic continent in latitude
63 degrees 26' and longitude 66 degrees 26'. On February 1, 1831, the
Englishman Biscoe discovered Enderby Land at latitude 68 degrees 50’,
Adelaide Land at latitude 67 degrees on February 5, 1832, and Graham Land at
latitude 64 degrees 45' on February 21. In 1838 the Frenchman Dumont d'Urville
stopped at the Ice Bank in latitude 62 degrees 57', sighting the Louis-Philippe
Peninsula; on January 21 two years later, at a new southerly position of 66
degrees 30', he named the Adélie Coast and eight days later, the Clarie Coast at
64 degrees 40'. In 1838 the American Wilkes advanced as far as the 69th parallel
on the 100th meridian. In 1839 the Englishman Balleny discovered the Sabrina
Coast at the edge of the polar circle. Lastly, on January 12, 1842, with his ships,
the Erebus and the Terror, the Englishman Sir James Clark Ross found Victoria
Land in latitude 70 degrees 56' and longitude 171 degrees 7' east; on the 23rd of
that same month, he reached the 74th parallel, a position denoting the Farthest
South attained until then; on the 27th he lay at 76 degrees 8'; on the 28th at 77
degrees 32'; on February 2 at 78 degrees 4'; and late in 1842 he returned to 71
degrees but couldn't get beyond it. Well now! In 1868, on this 21st day of March,
I myself, Captain Nemo, have reached the South Pole at 90 degrees, and I hereby
claim this entire part of the globe, equal to one-sixth of the known continents."

"In the name of which sovereign, captain?"

"In my own name, sir!"

So saying, Captain Nemo unfurled a black flag bearing a gold "N" on its
quartered bunting. Then, turning toward the orb of day, whose last rays were
licking at the sea's horizon:

"Farewell, O sun!" he called. "Disappear, O radiant orb! Retire beneath this
open sea, and let six months of night spread their shadows over my new
domains!"


CHAPTER 15


Accident or Incident?


THE NEXT DAY, March 22, at six o'clock in the morning, preparations for
departure began. The last gleams of twilight were melting into night. The cold
was brisk. The constellations were glittering with startling intensity. The
wonderful Southern Cross, polar star of the Antarctic regions, twinkled at its
zenith.

The thermometer marked -12 degrees centigrade, and a fresh breeze left a
sharp nip in the air. Ice floes were increasing over the open water. The sea was
starting to congeal everywhere. Numerous blackish patches were spreading over
its surface, announcing the imminent formation of fresh ice. Obviously this
southernmost basin froze over during its six-month winter and became utterly
inaccessible. What happened to the whales during this period? No doubt they
went beneath the Ice Bank to find more feasible seas. As for seals and walruses,
they were accustomed to living in the harshest climates and stayed on in these
icy waterways. These animals know by instinct how to gouge holes in the ice
fields and keep them continually open; they go to these holes to breathe. Once
the birds have migrated northward to escape the cold, these marine mammals
remain as sole lords of the polar continent.

Meanwhile the ballast tanks filled with water and the Nautilus sank slowly.
At a depth of 1,000 feet, it stopped. Its propeller churned the waves and it
headed due north at a speed of fifteen miles per hour. Near the afternoon it was
already cruising under the immense frozen carapace of the Ice Bank.

As a precaution, the panels in the lounge stayed closed, because the
Nautilus's hull could run afoul of some submerged block of ice. So I spent the
day putting my notes into final form. My mind was completely wrapped up in
my memories of the pole. We had reached that inaccessible spot without facing
exhaustion or danger, as if our seagoing passenger carriage had glided there on
railroad tracks. And now we had actually started our return journey. Did it still
have comparable surprises in store for me? I felt sure it did, so inexhaustible is
this series of underwater wonders! As it was, in the five and a half months since
fate had brought us on board, we had cleared 14,000 leagues, and over this track
longer than the earth's equator, so many fascinating or frightening incidents had
beguiled our voyage: that hunting trip in the Crespo forests, our running aground
in the Torres Strait, the coral cemetery, the pearl fisheries of Ceylon, the Arabic


tunnel, the fires of Santorini, those millions in the Bay of Vigo, Atlantis, the
South Pole! During the night all these memories crossed over from one dream to
the next, not giving my brain a moment's rest.

At three o'clock in the moming, I was awakened by a violent collision. I sat
up in bed, listening in the darkness, and then was suddenly hurled into the
middle of my stateroom. Apparently the Nautilus had gone aground, then heeled
over sharply.

Leaning against the walls, I dragged myself down the gangways to the
lounge, whose ceiling lights were on. The furniture had been knocked over.
Fortunately the glass cases were solidly secured at the base and had stood fast.
Since we were no longer vertical, the starboard pictures were glued to the
tapestries, while those to port had their lower edges hanging a foot away from
the wall. So the Nautilus was lying on its starboard side, completely stationary to
boot.

In its interior I heard the sound of footsteps and muffled voices. But Captain
Nemo didn't appear. Just as I was about to leave the lounge, Ned Land and
Conseil entered.

"What happened?" I instantly said to them.

"I came to ask master that," Conseil replied.

"Damnation!" the Canadian exclaimed. "I know full well what happened!
The Nautilus has gone aground, and judging from the way it's listing, I don't
think it'll pull through like that first time in the Torres Strait."

"But," I asked, "are we at least back on the surface of the sea?"

"We have no idea," Conseil replied.

"It's easy to find out," I answered.

I consulted the pressure gauge. Much to my surprise, it indicated a depth of
360 meters.

"What's the meaning of this?" I exclaimed.

"We must confer with Captain Nemo," Conseil said.

"But where do we find him?" Ned Land asked.

"Follow me," I told my two companions.

We left the lounge. Nobody in the library. Nobody by the central
companionway or the crew's quarters. I assumed that Captain Nemo was
stationed in the pilothouse. Best to wait. The three of us returned to the lounge.

I'll skip over the Canadian's complaints. He had good grounds for an
outburst. I didn't answer him back, letting him blow off all the steam he wanted.

We had been left to ourselves for twenty minutes, trying to detect the tiniest
noises inside the Nautilus, when Captain Nemo entered. He didn't seem to see
us. His facial features, usually so emotionless, revealed a certain uneasiness. He


studied the compass and pressure gauge in silence, then went and put his finger
on the world map at a spot in the sector depicting the southernmost seas.

I hesitated to interrupt him. But some moments later, when he turned to me, I
threw back at him a phrase he had used in the Torres Strait:

"An incident, captain?"

"No, sir," he replied, "this time an accident."

"Serious?"

"Perhaps."

"Is there any immediate danger?"

"No."

"The Nautilus has run aground?"

"Yes."

"And this accident came about. . . ?'

"Through nature's unpredictability not man's incapacity. No errors were
committed in our maneuvers. Nevertheless, we can't prevent a loss of balance
from taking its toll. One may defy human laws, but no one can withstand the
laws of nature."

Captain Nemo had picked an odd time to philosophize. All in all, this reply
told me nothing.

"May I learn, sir," I asked him, "what caused this accident?"

"An enormous block of ice, an entire mountain, has toppled over," he
answered me. "When an iceberg is eroded at the base by warmer waters or by
repeated collisions, its center of gravity rises. Then it somersaults, it turns
completely upside down. That's what happened here. When it overturned, one of
these blocks hit the Nautilus as it was cruising under the waters. Sliding under
our hull, this block then raised us with irresistible power, lifting us into less
congested strata where we now lie on our side."

"But can't we float the Nautilus clear by emptying its ballast tanks, to regain
our balance?"

"That, sir, is being done right now. You can hear the pumps working. Look at
the needle on the pressure gauge. It indicates that the Nautilus is rising, but this
block of ice is rising with us, and until some obstacle halts its upward
movement, our position won't change."

Indeed, the Nautilus kept the same heel to starboard. No doubt it would
straighten up once the block came to a halt. But before that happened, who knew
if we might not hit the underbelly of the Ice Bank and be hideously squeezed
between two frozen surfaces?

I mused on all the consequences of this situation. Captain Nemo didn't stop
studying the pressure gauge. Since the toppling of this iceberg, the Nautilus had


'


risen about 150 feet, but it still stayed at the same angle to the perpendicular.

Suddenly a slight movement could be felt over the hull. Obviously the
Nautilus was straightening a bit. Objects hanging in the lounge were visibly
returning to their normal positions. The walls were approaching the vertical.
Nobody said a word. Hearts pounding, we could see and feel the ship righting
itself. The floor was becoming horizontal beneath our feet. Ten minutes went by.

"Finally, we're upright!" I exclaimed.

"Yes," Captain Nemo said, heading to the lounge door.

"But will we float off?" I asked him.

"Certainly," he replied, "since the ballast tanks aren't yet empty, and when
they are, the Nautilus must rise to the surface of the sea."

The captain went out, and soon I saw that at his orders, the Nautilus had
halted its upward movement. In fact, it soon would have hit the underbelly of the
Ice Bank, but it had stopped in time and was floating in midwater.

"That was a close call!" Conseil then said.

"Yes. We could have been crushed between these masses of ice, or at least
imprisoned between them. And then, with no way to renew our air supply... .
Yes, that was a close call!"

"If it's over with!" Ned Land muttered.

I was unwilling to get into a pointless argument with the Canadian and didn't
reply. Moreover, the panels opened just then, and the outside light burst through
the uncovered windows.

We were fully afloat, as I have said; but on both sides of the Nautilus, about
ten meters away, there rose dazzling walls of ice. There also were walls above
and below. Above, because the Ice Bank's underbelly spread over us like an
immense ceiling. Below, because the somersaulting block, shifting little by little,
had found points of purchase on both side walls and had gotten jammed between
them. The Nautilus was imprisoned in a genuine tunnel of ice about twenty
meters wide and filled with quiet water. So the ship could easily exit by going
either ahead or astern, sinking a few hundred meters deeper, and then taking an
open passageway beneath the Ice Bank.

The ceiling lights were off, yet the lounge was still brightly lit. This was due
to the reflecting power of the walls of ice, which threw the beams of our beacon
right back at us. Words cannot describe the effects produced by our galvanic rays
on these huge, whimsically sculpted blocks, whose every angle, ridge, and facet
gave off a different glow depending on the nature of the veins running inside the
ice. It was a dazzling mine of gems, in particular sapphires and emeralds, whose
jets of blue and green crisscrossed. Here and there, opaline hues of infinite
subtlety raced among sparks of light that were like so many fiery diamonds, their


brilliance more than any eye could stand. The power of our beacon was
increased a hundredfold, like a lamp shining through the biconvex lenses of a
world-class lighthouse.

"How beautiful!" Conseil exclaimed.

"Yes," I said, "it's a wonderful sight! Isn't it, Ned?"

"Oh damnation, yes!" Ned Land shot back. "It's superb! I'm furious that I
have to admit it. Nobody has ever seen the like. But this sight could cost us
dearly. And in all honesty, I think we're looking at things God never intended for
human eyes."

Ned was right. It was too beautiful. All at once a yell from Conseil made me
turn around.

"What is it?" I asked.

"Master must close his eyes! Master mustn't look!"

With that, Conseil clapped his hands over his eyes.

"But what's wrong, my boy?"

"T've been dazzled, struck blind!"

Involuntarily my eyes flew to the window, but I couldn't stand the fire
devouring it.

I realized what had happened. The Nautilus had just started off at great
speed. All the tranquil glimmers of the ice walls had then changed into blazing
streaks. The sparkles from these myriads of diamonds were merging with each
other. Swept along by its propeller, the Nautilus was traveling through a sheath
of flashing light.

Then the panels in the lounge closed. We kept our hands over our eyes,
which were utterly saturated with those concentric gleams that swirl before the
retina when sunlight strikes it too intensely. It took some time to calm our
troubled vision.

Finally we lowered our hands.

"Ye gods, I never would have believed it," Conseil said.

"And I still don't believe it!" the Canadian shot back.

"When we return to shore, jaded from all these natural wonders," Conseil
added, "think how we'll look down on those pitiful land masses, those puny
works of man! No, the civilized world won't be good enough for us!"

Such words from the lips of this emotionless Flemish boy showed that our
enthusiasm was near the boiling point. But the Canadian didn't fail to throw his
dram of cold water over us.

"The civilized world!" he said, shaking his head. "Don't worry, Conseil my
friend, we're never going back to that world!"

By this point it was five o'clock in the morning. Just then there was a


collision in the Nautilus's bow. I realized that its spur had just bumped a block of
ice. It must have been a faulty maneuver because this underwater tunnel was
obstructed by such blocks and didn't make for easy navigating. So I had assumed
that Captain Nemo, in adjusting his course, would go around each obstacle or
would hug the walls and follow the windings of the tunnel. In either case our
forward motion wouldn't receive an absolute check. Nevertheless, contrary to my
expectations, the Nautilus definitely began to move backward.

"We're going astern?" Conseil said.

"Yes," I replied. "Apparently the tunnel has no way out at this end."

"Andso...?"

"So," I said, "our maneuvers are quite simple. We'll return in our tracks and
go out the southern opening. That's all."

As I spoke, I tried to sound more confident than I really felt. Meanwhile the
Nautilus accelerated its backward movement, and running with propeller in
reverse, it swept us along at great speed.

"This'll mean a delay," Ned said.

"What are a few hours more or less, so long as we get out."

"Yes," Ned Land repeated, "so long as we get out!"

I strolled for a little while from the lounge into the library. My companions
kept their seats and didn't move. Soon I threw myself down on a couch and
picked up a book, which my eyes skimmed mechanically.

A quarter of an hour later, Conseil approached me, saying:

"Is it deeply fascinating, this volume master is reading?"

"Tremendously fascinating," I replied.

"I believe it. Master is reading his own book!"

"My own book?"

Indeed, my hands were holding my own work on the great ocean depths. I
hadn't even suspected. I closed the book and resumed my strolling. Ned and
Conseil stood up to leave.

"Stay here, my friends," I said, stopping them. "Let's stay together until we're
out of this blind alley."

"As master wishes," Conseil replied.


The hours passed. I often studied the instruments hanging on the lounge wall.
The pressure gauge indicated that the Nautilus stayed at a constant depth of 300
meters, the compass that it kept heading south, the log that it was traveling at a
speed of twenty miles per hour, an excessive speed in such a cramped area. But
Captain Nemo knew that by this point there was no such thing as too fast, since
minutes were now worth centuries.

At 8:25 a second collision took place. This time astern. I grew pale. My
companions came over. I clutched Conseil's hand. Our eyes questioned each
other, and more directly than if our thoughts had been translated into words.

Just then the captain entered the lounge. I went to him.

"Our path is barred to the south?" I asked him.

"Yes, sir. When it overturned, that iceberg closed off every exit."

"We're boxed in?"

"Yes."


CHAPTER 16


Shortage of Air


CONSEQUENTLY, above, below, and around the Nautilus, there were
impenetrable frozen walls. We were the Ice Bank's prisoners! The Canadian
banged a table with his fearsome fist. Conseil kept still. I stared at the captain.
His face had resumed its usual emotionlessness. He crossed his arms. He
pondered. The Nautilus did not stir.

The captain then broke into speech:

"Gentlemen," he said in a calm voice, "there are two ways of dying under the
conditions in which we're placed."

This inexplicable individual acted like a mathematics professor working out
a problem for his pupils.

"The first way," he went on, "is death by crushing. The second is death by
asphyxiation. I don't mention the possibility of death by starvation because the
Nautilus's provisions will certainly last longer than we will. Therefore, let's
concentrate on our chances of being crushed or asphyxiated."

"As for asphyxiation, captain," I replied, "that isn't a cause for alarm, because
the air tanks are full."

"True," Captain Nemo went on, "but they'll supply air for only two days.
Now then, we've been buried beneath the waters for thirty-six hours, and the
Nautilus's heavy atmosphere already needs renewing. In another forty-eight
hours, our reserve air will be used up."

"Well then, captain, let's free ourselves within forty-eight hours!"

"We'll try to at least, by cutting through one of these walls surrounding us."

"Which one?" I asked.

"Borings will tell us that. I'm going to ground the Nautilus on the lower
shelf, then my men will put on their diving suits and attack the thinnest of these
ice walls."

"Can the panels in the lounge be left open?"

"Without ill effect. We're no longer in motion."

Captain Nemo went out. Hissing sounds soon told me that water was being
admitted into the ballast tanks. The Nautilus slowly settled and rested on the icy
bottom at a depth of 350 meters, the depth at which the lower shelf of ice lay
submerged.

"My friends," I said, "we're in a serious predicament, but I'm counting on


your courage and energy."

"Sir," the Canadian replied, "this is no time to bore you with my complaints.
I'm ready to do anything I can for the common good."

"Excellent, Ned," I said, extending my hand to the Canadian.

"I might add," he went on, "that I'm as handy with a pick as a harpoon. If I
can be helpful to the captain, he can use me any way he wants."

"He won't turn down your assistance. Come along, Ned."

I led the Canadian to the room where the Nautilus's men were putting on
their diving suits. I informed the captain of Ned's proposition, which was
promptly accepted. The Canadian got into his underwater costume and was
ready as soon as his fellow workers. Each of them carried on his back a
Rouquayrol device that the air tanks had supplied with a generous allowance of
fresh oxygen. A considerable but necessary drain on the Nautilus's reserves. As
for the Ruhmkorff lamps, they were unnecessary in the midst of these brilliant
waters saturated with our electric rays.

After Ned was dressed, I reentered the lounge, whose windows had been
uncovered; stationed next to Conseil, I examined the strata surrounding and
supporting the Nautilus.

Some moments later, we saw a dozen crewmen set foot on the shelf of ice,
among them Ned Land, easily recognized by his tall figure. Captain Nemo was
with them.

Before digging into the ice, the captain had to obtain borings, to insure
working in the best direction. Long bores were driven into the side walls; but
after fifteen meters, the instruments were still impeded by the thickness of those
walls. It was futile to attack the ceiling since that surface was the Ice Bank itself,
more than 400 meters high. Captain Nemo then bored into the lower surface.
There we were separated from the sea by a ten-meter barrier. That's how thick
the iceberg was. From this point on, it was an issue of cutting out a piece equal
in surface area to the Nautilus's waterline. This meant detaching about 6,500
cubic meters, to dig a hole through which the ship could descend below this tract
of ice.

Work began immediately and was carried on with tireless tenacity. Instead of
digging all around the Nautilus, which would have entailed even greater
difficulties, Captain Nemo had an immense trench outlined on the ice, eight
meters from our port quarter. Then his men simultaneously staked it off at
several points around its circumference. Soon their picks were vigorously
attacking this compact matter, and huge chunks were loosened from its mass.
These chunks weighed less than the water, and by an unusual effect of specific
gravity, each chunk took wing, as it were, to the roof of the tunnel, which


thickened above by as much as it diminished below. But this hardly mattered so
long as the lower surface kept growing thinner.

After two hours of energetic work, Ned Land reentered, exhausted. He and
his companions were replaced by new workmen, including Conseil and me. The
Nautilus's chief officer supervised us.

The water struck me as unusually cold, but I warmed up promptly while
wielding my pick. My movements were quite free, although they were executed
under a pressure of thirty atmospheres.

After two hours of work, reentering to snatch some food and rest, I found a
noticeable difference between the clean elastic fluid supplied me by the
Rouquayrol device and the Nautilus's atmosphere, which was already charged
with carbon dioxide. The air hadn't been renewed in forty-eight hours, and its
life-giving qualities were considerably weakened. Meanwhile, after twelve hours
had gone by, we had removed from the outlined surface area a slice of ice only
one meter thick, hence about 600 cubic meters. Assuming the same work would
be accomplished every twelve hours, it would still take five nights and four days
to see the undertaking through to completion.

"Five nights and four days!" I told my companions. "And we have oxygen in
the air tanks for only two days."

"Without taking into account," Ned answered, "that once we're out of this
damned prison, we'll still be cooped up beneath the Ice Bank, without any
possible contact with the open air!"

An apt remark. For who could predict the minimum time we would need to
free ourselves? Before the Nautilus could return to the surface of the waves,
couldn't we all die of asphyxiation? Were this ship and everyone on board
doomed to perish in this tomb of ice? It was a dreadful state of affairs. But we
faced it head-on, each one of us determined to do his duty to the end.

During the night, in line with my forecasts, a new one-meter slice was
removed from this immense socket. But in the morning, wearing my diving suit,
I was crossing through the liquid mass in a temperature of -6 degrees to -7
degrees centigrade, when I noted that little by little the side walls were closing in
on each other. The liquid strata farthest from the trench, not warmed by the
movements of workmen and tools, were showing a tendency to solidify. In the
face of this imminent new danger, what would happen to our chances for
salvation, and how could we prevent this liquid medium from solidifying, then
cracking the Nautilus's hull like glass?

I didn't tell my two companions about this new danger. There was no point in
dampening the energy they were putting into our arduous rescue work. But when
I returned on board, I mentioned this serious complication to Captain Nemo.


"IT know," he told me in that calm tone the most dreadful outlook couldn't
change. "It's one more danger, but I don't know any way of warding it off. Our
sole chance for salvation is to work faster than the water solidifies. We've got to
get there first, that's all."

Get there first! By then I should have been used to this type of talk!

For several hours that day, I wielded my pick doggedly. The work kept me
going. Besides, working meant leaving the Nautilus, which meant breathing the
clean oxygen drawn from the air tanks and supplied by our equipment, which
meant leaving the thin, foul air behind.

Near evening one more meter had been dug from the trench. When I returned
on board, I was wellnigh asphyxiated by the carbon dioxide saturating the air.
Oh, if only we had the chemical methods that would enable us to drive out this
noxious gas! There was no lack of oxygen. All this water contained a
considerable amount, and after it was decomposed by our powerful batteries, this
life-giving elastic fluid could have been restored to us. I had thought it all out,
but to no avail because the carbon dioxide produced by our breathing permeated
every part of the ship. To absorb it, we would need to fill containers with
potassium hydroxide and shake them continually. But this substance was missing
on board and nothing else could replace it.

That evening Captain Nemo was forced to open the spigots of his air tanks
and shoot a few spouts of fresh oxygen through the Nautilus's interior. Without
this precaution we wouldn't have awakened the following morning.

The next day, March 26, I returned to my miner's trade, working to remove
the fifth meter. The Ice Bank's side walls and underbelly had visibly thickened.
Obviously they would come together before the Nautilus could break free. For
an instant I was gripped by despair. My pick nearly slipped from my hands.
What was the point of this digging if I was to die smothered and crushed by this
water turning to stone, a torture undreamed of by even the wildest savages! I felt
like I was lying in the jaws of a fearsome monster, jaws irresistibly closing.

Supervising our work, working himself, Captain Nemo passed near me just
then. I touched him with my hand and pointed to the walls of our prison. The
starboard wall had moved forward to a point less than four meters from the
Nautilus's hull.

The captain understood and gave me a signal to follow him. We returned on
board. My diving suit removed, I went with him to the lounge.

"Professor Aronnax," he told me, "this calls for heroic measures, or we'll be
sealed up in this solidified water as if it were cement."

"Yes!" I said. "But what can we do?"

"Oh," he exclaimed, "if only my Nautilus were strong enough to stand that


much pressure without being crushed!"

"Well?" I asked, not catching the captain's meaning.

"Don't you understand," he went on, "that the congealing of this water could
come to our rescue? Don't you see that by solidifying, it could burst these tracts
of ice imprisoning us, just as its freezing can burst the hardest stones? Aren't you
aware that this force could be the instrument of our salvation rather than our
destruction?"

"Yes, captain, maybe so. But whatever resistance to crushing the Nautilus
may have, it still couldn't stand such dreadful pressures, and it would be
squashed as flat as a piece of sheet iron."

"I know it, sir. So we can't rely on nature to rescue us, only our own efforts.
We must counteract this solidification. We must hold it in check. Not only are
the side walls closing in, but there aren't ten feet of water ahead or astern of the
Nautilus. All around us, this freeze is gaining fast."

"How long," I asked, "will the oxygen in the air tanks enable us to breathe on
board?"

The captain looked me straight in the eye.

"After tomorrow,” he said, "the air tanks will be empty!"

I broke out in a cold sweat. But why should I have been startled by this
reply? On March 22 the Nautilus had dived under the open waters at the pole. It
was now the 26th. We had lived off the ship's stores for five days! And all
remaining breathable air had to be saved for the workmen. Even today as I write
these lines, my sensations are so intense that an involuntary terror sweeps over
me, and my lungs still seem short of air!

Meanwhile, motionless and silent, Captain Nemo stood lost in thought. An
idea visibly crossed his mind. But he seemed to brush it aside. He told himself
no. At last these words escaped his lips:

"Boiling water!" he muttered.

"Boiling water?" I exclaimed.

"Yes, sir. We're shut up in a relatively confined area. If the Nautilus's pumps
continually injected streams of boiling water into this space, wouldn't that raise
its temperature and delay its freezing?"

"It's worth trying!" I said resolutely.

"So let's try it, professor."

By then the thermometer gave -7 degrees centigrade outside. Captain Nemo
led me to the galley where a huge distilling mechanism was at work, supplying
drinking water via evaporation. The mechanism was loaded with water, and the
full electric heat of our batteries was thrown into coils awash in liquid. In a few
minutes the water reached 100 degrees centigrade. It was sent to the pumps


while new water replaced it in the process. The heat generated by our batteries
was So intense that after simply going through the mechanism, water drawn cold
from the sea arrived boiling hot at the body of the pump.

The steaming water was injected into the icy water outside, and after three
hours had passed, the thermometer gave the exterior temperature as -6 degrees
centigrade. That was one degree gained. Two hours later the thermometer gave
only -4 degrees.

After I monitored the operation's progress, double-checking it with many
inspections, I told the captain, "It's working."

"T think so," he answered me. "We've escaped being crushed. Now we have
only asphyxiation to fear."

During the night the water temperature rose to -1 degrees centigrade. The
injections couldn't get it to go a single degree higher. But since salt water freezes
only at -2 degrees, I was finally assured that there was no danger of it
solidifying.

By the next day, March 27, six meters of ice had been torn from the socket.
Only four meters were left to be removed. That still meant forty-eight hours of
work. The air couldn't be renewed in the Nautilus's interior. Accordingly, that
day it kept getting worse.

An unbearable heaviness weighed me down. Near three o'clock in the
afternoon, this agonizing sensation affected me to an intense degree. Yawns
dislocated my jaws. My lungs were gasping in their quest for that enkindling
elastic fluid required for breathing, now growing scarcer and scarcer. My mind
was in a daze. I lay outstretched, strength gone, nearly unconscious. My gallant
Conseil felt the same symptoms, suffered the same sufferings, yet never left my
side. He held my hand, he kept encouraging me, and I even heard him mutter:

"Oh, if only I didn't have to breathe, to leave more air for master!"

It brought tears to my eyes to hear him say these words.

Since conditions inside were universally unbearable, how eagerly, how
happily, we put on our diving suits to take our turns working! Picks rang out on
that bed of ice. Arms grew weary, hands were rubbed raw, but who cared about
exhaustion, what difference were wounds? Life-sustaining air reached our lungs!
We could breathe! We could breathe!

And yet nobody prolonged his underwater work beyond the time allotted
him. His shift over, each man surrendered to a gasping companion the air tank
that would revive him. Captain Nemo set the example and was foremost in
submitting to this strict discipline. When his time was up, he yielded his
equipment to another and reentered the foul air on board, always calm,
unflinching, and uncomplaining.


That day the usual work was accomplished with even greater energy. Over
the whole surface area, only two meters were left to be removed. Only two
meters separated us from the open sea. But the ship's air tanks were nearly
empty. The little air that remained had to be saved for the workmen. Not an atom
for the Nautilus!

When I returned on board, I felt half suffocated. What a night! I'm unable to
depict it. Such sufferings are indescribable. The next day I was short-winded.
Headaches and staggering fits of dizziness made me reel like a drunk. My
companions were experiencing the same symptoms. Some crewmen were at
their last gasp.

That day, the sixth of our imprisonment, Captain Nemo concluded that picks
and mattocks were too slow to deal with the ice layer still separating us from
open water--and he decided to crush this layer. The man had kept his energy and
composure. He had subdued physical pain with moral strength. He could still
think, plan, and act.

At his orders the craft was eased off, in other words, it was raised from its
icy bed by a change in its specific gravity. When it was afloat, the crew towed it,
leading it right above the immense trench outlined to match the ship's waterline.
Next the ballast tanks filled with water, the boat sank, and was fitted into its
socket.

Just then the whole crew returned on board, and the double outside door was
closed. By this point the Nautilus was resting on a bed of ice only one meter
thick and drilled by bores in a thousand places.

The stopcocks of the ballast tanks were then opened wide, and 100 cubic
meters of water rushed in, increasing the Nautilus's weight by 100,000
kilograms.

We waited, we listened, we forgot our sufferings, we hoped once more. We
had staked our salvation on this one last gamble.

Despite the buzzing in my head, I soon could hear vibrations under the
Nautilus's hull. We tilted. The ice cracked with an odd ripping sound, like paper
tearing, and the Nautilus began settling downward.

"We're going through!" Conseil muttered in my ear.

I couldn't answer him. I clutched his hand. I squeezed it in an involuntary
convulsion.

All at once, carried away by its frightful excess load, the Nautilus sank into
the waters like a cannonball, in other words, dropping as if in a vacuum!

Our full electric power was then put on the pumps, which instantly began to
expel water from the ballast tanks. After a few minutes we had checked our fall.
The pressure gauge soon indicated an ascending movement. Brought to full


speed, the propeller made the sheet-iron hull tremble down to its rivets, and we
sped northward.

But how long would it take to navigate under the Ice Bank to the open sea?
Another day? I would be dead first!

Half lying on a couch in the library, I was suffocating. My face was purple,
my lips blue, my faculties in abeyance. I could no longer see or hear. I had lost
all sense of time. My muscles had no power to contract.

I'm unable to estimate the hours that passed in this way. But I was aware that
my death throes had begun. I realized that I was about to die...

Suddenly I regained consciousness. A few whiffs of air had entered my
lungs. Had we risen to the surface of the waves? Had we cleared the Ice Bank?

No! Ned and Conseil, my two gallant friends, were sacrificing themselves to
save me. A few atoms of air were still left in the depths of one Rouquayrol
device. Instead of breathing it themselves, they had saved it for me, and while
they were suffocating, they poured life into me drop by drop! I tried to push the
device away. They held my hands, and for a few moments I could breathe
luxuriously.

My eyes flew toward the clock. It was eleven in the morning. It had to be
March 28. The Nautilus was traveling at the frightful speed of forty miles per
hour. It was writhing in the waters.

Where was Captain Nemo? Had he perished? Had his companions died with
him?

Just then the pressure gauge indicated we were no more than twenty feet
from the surface. Separating us from the open air was a mere tract of ice. Could
we break through it?

Perhaps! In any event the Nautilus was going to try. In fact, I could feel it
assuming an oblique position, lowering its stern and raising its spur. The
admission of additional water was enough to shift its balance. Then, driven by its
powerful propeller, it attacked this ice field from below like a fearsome battering
ram. It split the barrier little by little, backing up, then putting on full speed
against the punctured tract of ice; and finally, carried away by its supreme
momentum, it lunged through and onto this frozen surface, crushing the ice
beneath its weight.

The hatches were opened--or torn off, if you prefer--and waves of clean air
were admitted into every part of the Nautilus.


CHAPTER 17


From Cape Horn to the Amazon


HOW I GOT ONTO the platform I'm unable to say. Perhaps the Canadian
transferred me there. But I could breathe, I could inhale the life-giving sea air.
Next to me my two companions were getting tipsy on the fresh oxygen particles.
Poor souls who have suffered from long starvation mustn't pounce heedlessly on
the first food given them. We, on the other hand, didn't have to practice such
moderation: we could suck the atoms from the air by the lungful, and it was the
breeze, the breeze itself, that poured into us this luxurious intoxication!

"Ahhh!" Conseil was putting in. "What fine oxygen! Let master have no
fears about breathing. There's enough for everyone."

As for Ned Land, he didn't say a word, but his wide-open jaws would have
scared off a shark. And what powerful inhalations! The Canadian "drew" like a
furnace going full blast.

Our strength returned promptly, and when I looked around, I saw that we
were alone on the platform. No crewmen. Not even Captain Nemo. Those
strange seamen on the Nautilus were content with the oxygen circulating inside.
Not one of them had come up to enjoy the open air.

The first words I pronounced were words of appreciation and gratitude to my
two companions. Ned and Conseil had kept me alive during the final hours of
our long death throes. But no expression of thanks could repay them fully for
such devotion.

"Good lord, professor," Ned Land answered me, "don't mention it! What did
we do that's so praiseworthy? Not a thing. It was a question of simple arithmetic.
Your life is worth more than ours. So we had to save it."

"No, Ned," I replied, "it isn't worth more. Nobody could be better than a kind
and generous man like yourself!"

"All right, all right!" the Canadian repeated in embarrassment.

"And you, my gallant Conseil, you suffered a great deal."

"Not too much, to be candid with master. I was lacking a few throatfuls of
air, but I would have gotten by. Besides, when I saw master fainting, it left me
without the slightest desire to breathe. It took my breath away, in a manner of . .

Confounded by this lapse into banality, Conseil left his sentence hanging.

"My friends," I replied, very moved, "we're bound to each other forever, and


I'm deeply indebted to you--"

"Which I'll take advantage of," the Canadian shot back.

"Eh?" Conseil put in.

"Yes," Ned Land went on. "You can repay your debt by coming with me
when I leave this infernal Nautilus."

"By the way," Conseil said, "are we going in a favorable direction?"

"Yes," I replied, "because we're going in the direction of the sun, and here the
sun is due north."

"Sure," Ned Land went on, "but it remains to be seen whether we'll make for
the Atlantic or the Pacific, in other words, whether we'll end up in well-traveled
or deserted seas."

I had no reply to this, and I feared that Captain Nemo wouldn't take us
homeward but rather into that huge ocean washing the shores of both Asia and
America. In this way he would complete his underwater tour of the world, going
back to those seas where the Nautilus enjoyed the greatest freedom. But if we
returned to the Pacific, far from every populated shore, what would happen to
Ned Land's plans?

We would soon settle this important point. The Nautilus traveled swiftly.
Soon we had cleared the Antarctic Circle plus the promontory of Cape Horn. We
were abreast of the tip of South America by March 31 at seven o'clock in the
evening.

By then all our past sufferings were forgotten. The memory of that
imprisonment under the ice faded from our minds. We had thoughts only of the
future. Captain Nemo no longer appeared, neither in the lounge nor on the
platform. The positions reported each day on the world map were put there by
the chief officer, and they enabled me to determine the Nautilus's exact heading.
Now then, that evening it became obvious, much to my satisfaction, that we
were returning north by the Atlantic route.

I shared the results of my observations with the Canadian and Conseil.

"That's good news," the Canadian replied, "but where's the Nautilus going?"

"I'm unable to say, Ned."

"After the South Pole, does our captain want to tackle the North Pole, then
go back to the Pacific by the notorious Northwest Passage?"

"I wouldn't double dare him," Conseil replied.

"Oh well,” the Canadian said, "we'll give him the slip long before then."

"In any event,” Conseil added, "he's a superman, that Captain Nemo, and
we'll never regret having known him."

"Especially once we've left him," Ned Land shot back.

The next day, April 1, when the Nautilus rose to the surface of the waves a


few minutes before noon, we raised land to the west. It was Tierra del Fuego, the
Land of Fire, a name given it by early navigators after they saw numerous curls
of smoke rising from the natives' huts. This Land of Fire forms a huge cluster of
islands over thirty leagues long and eighty leagues wide, extending between
latitude 53 degrees and 56 degrees south, and between longitude 67 degrees 50'
and 77 degrees 15' west. Its coastline looked flat, but high mountains rose in the
distance. I even thought I glimpsed Mt. Sarmiento, whose elevation is 2,070
meters above sea level: a pyramid-shaped block of shale with a very sharp
summit, which, depending on whether it's clear or veiled in vapor, "predicts fair
weather or foul," as Ned Land told me.

"A first-class barometer, my friend."

"Yes, sir, a natural barometer that didn't let me down when I navigated the
narrows of the Strait of Magellan."

Just then its peak appeared before us, standing out distinctly against the
background of the skies. This forecast fair weather. And so it proved.

Going back under the waters, the Nautilus drew near the coast, cruising
along it for only a few miles. Through the lounge windows I could see long
creepers and gigantic fucus plants, bulb-bearing seaweed of which the open sea
at the pole had revealed a few specimens; with their smooth, viscous filaments,
they measured as much as 300 meters long; genuine cables more than an inch
thick and very tough, they're often used as mooring lines for ships. Another
weed, known by the name velp and boasting four-foot leaves, was crammed into
the coral concretions and carpeted the ocean floor. It served as both nest and
nourishment for myriads of crustaceans and mollusks, for crabs and cuttlefish.
Here seals and otters could indulge in a sumptuous meal, mixing meat from fish
with vegetables from the sea, like the English with their Irish stews.

The Nautilus passed over these lush, luxuriant depths with tremendous
speed. Near evening it approached the Falkland Islands, whose rugged summits I
recognized the next day. The sea was of moderate depth. So not without good
reason, I assumed that these two islands, plus the many islets surrounding them,
used to be part of the Magellan coastline. The Falkland Islands were probably
discovered by the famous navigator John Davis, who gave them the name Davis
Southern Islands. Later Sir Richard Hawkins called them the Maidenland, after
the Blessed Virgin. Subsequently, at the beginning of the 18th century, they were
named the Malouines by fishermen from Saint-Malo in Brittany, then finally
dubbed the Falklands by the English, to whom they belong today.

In these waterways our nets brought up fine samples of algae, in particular
certain fucus plants whose roots were laden with the world's best mussels. Geese
and duck alighted by the dozens on the platform and soon took their places in the


ship's pantry. As for fish, I specifically observed some bony fish belonging to the
goby genus, especially some gudgeon two decimeters long, sprinkled with
whitish and yellow spots.

I likewise marveled at the numerous medusas, including the most beautiful
of their breed, the compass jellyfish, unique to the Falkland seas. Some of these
jellyfish were shaped like very smooth, semispheric parasols with russet stripes
and fringes of twelve neat festoons. Others looked like upside-down baskets
from which wide leaves and long red twigs were gracefully trailing. They swam
with quiverings of their four leaflike arms, letting the opulent tresses of their
tentacles dangle in the drift. I wanted to preserve a few specimens of these
delicate zoophytes, but they were merely clouds, shadows, illusions, melting and
evaporating outside their native element.

When the last tips of the Falkland Islands had disappeared below the
horizon, the Nautilus submerged to a depth between twenty and twenty-five
meters and went along the South American coast. Captain Nemo didn't put in an
appearance.

We didn't leave these Patagonian waterways until April 3, sometimes
cruising under the ocean, sometimes on its surface. The Nautilus passed the wide
estuary formed by the mouth of the Rio de la Plata, and on April 4 we lay abreast
of Uruguay, albeit fifty miles out. Keeping to its northerly heading, it followed
the long windings of South America. By then we had fared 16,000 leagues since
coming on board in the seas of Japan.

Near eleven o'clock in the morning, we cut the Tropic of Capricorn on the
37th meridian, passing well out from Cape Frio. Much to Ned Land's
displeasure, Captain Nemo had no liking for the neighborhood of Brazil's
populous shores, because he shot by with dizzying speed. Not even the swiftest
fish or birds could keep up with us, and the natural curiosities in these seas
completely eluded our observation.

This speed was maintained for several days, and on the evening of April 9,
we raised South America's easternmost tip, Cape Sado Roque. But then the
Nautilus veered away again and went looking for the lowest depths of an
underwater valley gouged between this cape and Sierra Leone on the coast of
Africa. Abreast of the West Indies, this valley forks into two arms, and to the
north it ends in an enormous depression 9,000 meters deep. From this locality to
the Lesser Antilles, the ocean's geologic profile features a steeply cut cliff six
kilometers high, and abreast of the Cape Verde Islands, there's another wall just
as imposing; together these two barricades confine the whole submerged
continent of Atlantis. The floor of this immense valley is made picturesque by
mountains that furnish these underwater depths with scenic views. This


description is based mostly on certain hand-drawn charts kept in the Nautilus's
library, charts obviously rendered by Captain Nemo himself from his own
personal observations.

For two days we visited these deep and deserted waters by means of our
slanting fins. The Nautilus would do long, diagonal dives that took us to every
level. But on April 11 it rose suddenly, and the shore reappeared at the mouth of
the Amazon River, a huge estuary whose outflow is so considerable, it desalts
the sea over an area of several leagues.

We cut the Equator. Twenty miles to the west lay Guiana, French territory
where we could easily have taken refuge. But the wind was blowing a strong
gust, and the furious billows would not allow us to face them in a mere skiff. No
doubt Ned Land understood this because he said nothing to me. For my part, I
made no allusion to his escape plans because I didn't want to push him into an
attempt that was certain to misfire.

I was readily compensated for this delay by fascinating research. During
those two days of April 11-12, the Nautilus didn't leave the surface of the sea,
and its trawl brought up a simply miraculous catch of zoophytes, fish, and
reptiles.

Some zoophytes were dredged up by the chain of our trawl. Most were
lovely sea anemone belonging to the family Actinidia, including among other
species, the Phyctalis protexta, native to this part of the ocean: a small
cylindrical trunk adorned with vertical lines, mottled with red spots, and
crowned by a wondrous blossoming of tentacles. As for mollusks, they consisted
of exhibits I had already observed: turret snails, olive shells of the "tent olive"
species with neatly intersecting lines and russet spots standing out sharply
against a flesh-colored background, fanciful spider conchs that looked like
petrified scorpions, transparent glass snails, argonauts, some highly edible
cuttlefish, and certain species of squid that the naturalists of antiquity classified
with the flying fish, which are used chiefly as bait for catching cod.

As for the fish in these waterways, I noted various species that I hadn't yet
had the opportunity to study. Among cartilaginous fish: some brook lamprey, a
type of eel fifteen inches long, head greenish, fins violet, back bluish gray, belly
a silvery brown strewn with bright spots, iris of the eye encircled in gold,
unusual animals that the Amazon's current must have swept out to sea because
their natural habitat is fresh water; sting rays, the snout pointed, the tail long,
slender, and armed with an extensive jagged sting; small one-meter sharks with
gray and whitish hides, their teeth arranged in several backward-curving rows,
fish commonly known by the name carpet shark; batfish, a sort of reddish
isosceles triangle half a meter long, whose pectoral fins are attached by fleshy


extensions that make these fish look like bats, although an appendage made of
horn, located near the nostrils, earns them the nickname of sea unicorns; lastly, a
couple species of triggerfish, the cucuyo whose stippled flanks glitter with a
sparkling gold color, and the bright purple leatherjacket whose hues glisten like a
pigeon's throat.

I'll finish up this catalog, a little dry but quite accurate, with the series of
bony fish I observed: eels belonging to the genus Apteronotus whose snow-
white snout is very blunt, the body painted a handsome black and armed with a
very long, slender, fleshy whip; long sardines from the genus Odontognathus,
like three-decimeter pike, shining with a bright silver glow; Guaranian mackerel
furnished with two anal fins; black-tinted rudderfish that you catch by using
torches, fish measuring two meters and boasting white, firm, plump meat that,
when fresh, tastes like eel, when dried, like smoked salmon; semired wrasse
sporting scales only at the bases of their dorsal and anal fins; grunts on which
gold and silver mingle their luster with that of ruby and topaz; yellow-tailed
gilthead whose flesh is extremely dainty and whose phosphorescent properties
give them away in the midst of the waters; porgies tinted orange, with slender
tongues; croakers with gold caudal fins; black surgeonfish; four-eyed fish from
Surinam, etc.

This "et cetera" won't keep me from mentioning one more fish that Conseil,
with good reason, will long remember.

One of our nets had hauled up a type of very flat ray that weighed some
twenty kilograms; with its tail cut off, it would have formed a perfect disk. It was
white underneath and reddish on top, with big round spots of deep blue encircled
in black, its hide quite smooth and ending in a double-lobed fin. Laid out on the
platform, it kept struggling with convulsive movements, trying to turn over,
making such efforts that its final lunge was about to flip it into the sea. But
Conseil, being very possessive of his fish, rushed at it, and before I could stop
him, he seized it with both hands.

Instantly there he was, thrown on his back, legs in the air, his body half
paralyzed, and yelling:

"Oh, sir, sir! Will you help me!"

For once in his life, the poor lad didn't address me "in the third person."

The Canadian and I sat him up; we massaged his contracted arms, and when
he regained his five senses, that eternal classifier mumbled in a broken voice:

"Class of cartilaginous fish, order Chondropterygia with fixed gills, suborder
Selacia, family Rajiiforma, genus electric ray."

"Yes, my friend," I answered, "it was an electric ray that put you in this
deplorable state."


"Oh, master can trust me on this," Conseil shot back. "I'll be revenged on that
animal!"

"How?"

"T'll eat it."

Which he did that same evening, but strictly as retaliation. Because, frankly,
it tasted like leather.

Poor Conseil had assaulted an electric ray of the most dangerous species, the
cumana. Living in a conducting medium such as water, this bizarre animal can
electrocute other fish from several meters away, so great is the power of its
electric organ, an organ whose two chief surfaces measure at least twenty-seven
square feet.

During the course of the next day, April 12, the Nautilus drew near the coast
of Dutch Guiana, by the mouth of the Maroni River. There several groups of sea
cows were living in family units. These were manatees, which belong to the
order Sirenia, like the dugong and Steller's sea cow. Harmless and unaggressive,
these fine animals were six to seven meters long and must have weighed at least
4,000 kilograms each. I told Ned Land and Conseil that farseeing nature had
given these mammals a major role to play. In essence, manatees, like seals, are
designed to graze the underwater prairies, destroying the clusters of weeds that
obstruct the mouths of tropical rivers.

"And do you know," I added, "what happened since man has almost
completely wiped out these beneficial races? Rotting weeds have poisoned the
air, and this poisoned air causes the yellow fever that devastates these wonderful
countries. This toxic vegetation has increased beneath the seas of the Torrid
Zone, so the disease spreads unchecked from the mouth of the Rio de la Plata to
Florida!"

And if Professor Toussenel is correct, this plague is nothing compared to the
scourge that will strike our descendants once the seas are depopulated of whales
and seals. By then, crowded with jellyfish, squid, and other devilfish, the oceans
will have become huge centers of infection, because their waves will no longer
possess "these huge stomachs that God has entrusted with scouring the surface
of the sea."

Meanwhile, without scorning these theories, the Nautilus's crew captured
half a dozen manatees. In essence, it was an issue of stocking the larder with
excellent red meat, even better than beef or veal. Their hunting was not a
fascinating sport. The manatees let themselves be struck down without offering
any resistance. Several thousand kilos of meat were hauled below, to be dried
and stored.

The same day an odd fishing practice further increased the Nautilus's stores,


so full of game were these seas. Our trawl brought up in its meshes a number of
fish whose heads were topped by little oval slabs with fleshy edges. These were
suckerfish from the third family of the subbrachian Malacopterygia. These flat
disks on their heads consist of crosswise plates of movable cartilage, between
which the animals can create a vacuum, enabling them to stick to objects like
suction cups.

The remoras I had observed in the Mediterranean were related to this
species. But the creature at issue here was an Echeneis osteochara, unique to this
sea. Right after catching them, our seamen dropped them in buckets of water.

Its fishing finished, the Nautilus drew nearer to the coast. In this locality a
number of sea turtles were sleeping on the surface of the waves. It would have
been difficult to capture these valuable reptiles, because they wake up at the
slightest sound, and their solid carapaces are harpoon-proof. But our suckerfish
would effect their capture with extraordinary certainty and precision. In truth,
this animal is a living fishhook, promising wealth and happiness to the greenest
fisherman in the business.

The Nautilus's men attached to each fish's tail a ring that was big enough not
to hamper its movements, and to this ring a long rope whose other end was
moored on board.

Thrown into the sea, the suckerfish immediately began to play their roles,
going and fastening themselves onto the breastplates of the turtles. Their tenacity
was so great, they would rip apart rather than let go. They were hauled in, still
sticking to the turtles that came aboard with them.

In this way we caught several loggerheads, reptiles a meter wide and
weighing 200 kilos. They're extremely valuable because of their carapaces,
which are covered with big slabs of horn, thin, brown, transparent, with white
and yellow markings. Besides, they were excellent from an edible viewpoint,
with an exquisite flavor comparable to the green turtle.

This fishing ended our stay in the waterways of the Amazon, and that
evening the Nautilus took to the high seas once more.


CHAPTER 18


The Devilfish


FOR SOME DAYS the Nautilus kept veering away from the American coast.
It obviously didn't want to frequent the waves of the Gulf of Mexico or the
Caribbean Sea. Yet there was no shortage of water under its keel, since the
average depth of these seas is 1,800 meters; but these waterways, strewn with
islands and plowed by steamers, probably didn't agree with Captain Nemo.

On April 16 we raised Martinique and Guadalupe from a distance of about
thirty miles. For one instant I could see their lofty peaks.

The Canadian was quite disheartened, having counted on putting his plans
into execution in the gulf, either by reaching shore or by pulling alongside one of
the many boats plying a coastal trade from one island to another. An escape
attempt would have been quite feasible, assuming Ned Land managed to seize
the skiff without the captain's knowledge. But in midocean it was unthinkable.

The Canadian, Conseil, and I had a pretty long conversation on this subject.
For six months we had been prisoners aboard the Nautilus. We had fared 17,000
leagues, and as Ned Land put it, there was no end in sight. So he made me a
proposition I hadn't anticipated. We were to ask Captain Nemo this question
straight out: did the captain mean to keep us on board his vessel permanently?

This measure was distasteful to me. To my mind it would lead nowhere. We
could hope for nothing from the Nautilus's commander but could depend only on
ourselves. Besides, for some time now the man had been gloomier, more
withdrawn, less sociable. He seemed to be avoiding me. I encountered him only
at rare intervals. He used to take pleasure in explaining the underwater wonders
to me; now he left me to my research and no longer entered the lounge.

What changes had come over him? From what cause? I had no reason to
blame myself. Was our presence on board perhaps a burden to him? Even so, I
cherished no hopes that the man would set us free.

So I begged Ned to let me think about it before taking action. If this measure
proved fruitless, it could arouse the captain's suspicions, make our circumstances
even more arduous, and jeopardize the Canadian's plans. I might add that I could
hardly use our state of health as an argument. Except for that grueling ordeal
under the Ice Bank at the South Pole, we had never felt better, neither Ned,
Conseil, nor I. The nutritious food, life-giving air, regular routine, and uniform
temperature kept illness at bay; and for a man who didn't miss his past existence


on land, for a Captain Nemo who was at home here, who went where he wished,
who took paths mysterious to others if not himself in attaining his ends, I could
understand such a life. But we ourselves hadn't severed all ties with humanity.
For my part, I didn't want my new and unusual research to be buried with my
bones. I had now earned the right to pen the definitive book on the sea, and
sooner or later I wanted that book to see the light of day.

There once more, through the panels opening into these Caribbean waters ten
meters below the surface of the waves, I found so many fascinating exhibits to
describe in my daily notes! Among other zoophytes there were Portuguese men-
of-war known by the name Physalia pelagica, like big, oblong bladders with a
pearly sheen, spreading their membranes to the wind, letting their blue tentacles
drift like silken threads; to the eye delightful jellyfish, to the touch actual nettles
that ooze a corrosive liquid. Among the articulates there were annelid worms
one and a half meters long, furnished with a pink proboscis, equipped with 1,700
organs of locomotion, snaking through the waters, and as they went, throwing
off every gleam in the solar spectrum. From the fish branch there were manta
rays, enormous cartilaginous fish ten feet long and weighing 600 pounds, their
pectoral fin triangular, their midback slightly arched, their eyes attached to the
edges of the face at the front of the head; they floated like wreckage from a ship,
sometimes fastening onto our windows like opaque shutters. There were
American triggerfish for which nature has ground only black and white
pigments, feather-shaped gobies that were long and plump with yellow fins and
jutting jaws, sixteen-decimeter mackerel with short, sharp teeth, covered with
small scales, and related to the albacore species. Next came swarms of red
mullet corseted in gold stripes from head to tail, their shining fins all aquiver,
genuine masterpieces of jewelry, formerly sacred to the goddess Diana, much in
demand by rich Romans, and about which the old saying goes: "He who catches
them doesn't eat them!" Finally, adorned with emerald ribbons and dressed in
velvet and silk, golden angelfish passed before our eyes like courtiers in the
paintings of Veronese; spurred gilthead stole by with their swift thoracic fins;
thread herring fifteen inches long were wrapped in their phosphorescent
glimmers; gray mullet thrashed the sea with their big fleshy tails; red salmon
seemed to mow the waves with their slicing pectorals; and silver moonfish,
worthy of their name, rose on the horizon of the waters like the whitish
reflections of many moons.

How many other marvelous new specimens I still could have observed if,
little by little, the Nautilus hadn't settled to the lower strata! Its slanting fins drew
it to depths of 2,000 and 3,500 meters. There animal life was represented by
nothing more than sea lilies, starfish, delightful crinoids with bell-shaped heads


like little chalices on straight stems, top-shell snails, blood-red tooth shells, and
fissurella snails, a large species of coastal mollusk.

By April 20 we had risen to an average level of 1,500 meters. The nearest
land was the island group of the Bahamas, scattered like a batch of cobblestones
over the surface of the water. There high underwater cliffs reared up, straight
walls made of craggy chunks arranged like big stone foundations, among which
there gaped black caves so deep our electric rays couldn't light them to the far
ends.

These rocks were hung with huge weeds, immense sea tangle, gigantic
fucus-- a genuine trellis of water plants fit for a world of giants.

In discussing these colossal plants, Conseil, Ned, and I were naturally led
into mentioning the sea's gigantic animals. The former were obviously meant to
feed the latter. However, through the windows of our almost motionless
Nautilus, I could see nothing among these long filaments other than the chief
articulates of the division Brachyura: long-legged spider crabs, violet crabs, and
sponge crabs unique to the waters of the Caribbean.

It was about eleven o'clock when Ned Land drew my attention to a fearsome
commotion out in this huge seaweed.

"Well," I said, "these are real devilfish caverns, and I wouldn't be surprised to
see some of those monsters hereabouts."

"What!" Conseil put in. "Squid, ordinary squid from the class Cephalopoda?"

"No," I said, "devilfish of large dimensions. But friend Land is no doubt
mistaken, because I don't see a thing.”

"That's regrettable," Conseil answered. "I'd like to come face to face with
one of those devilfish I've heard so much about, which can drag ships down into
the depths. Those beasts go by the name of krake--"

"Fake is more like it," the Canadian replied sarcastically.

"Krakens!" Conseil shot back, finishing his word without wincing at his
companion's witticism.

"Nobody will ever make me believe," Ned Land said, "that such animals
exist."

"Why not?" Conseil replied. "We sincerely believed in master's narwhale."

"We were wrong, Conseil."

"No doubt, but there are others with no doubts who believe to this day!"

"Probably, Conseil. But as for me, I'm bound and determined not to accept
the existence of any such monster till I've dissected it with my own two hands."

"Yet," Conseil asked me, "doesn't master believe in gigantic devilfish?"

"Yikes! Who in Hades ever believed in them?" the Canadian exclaimed.

"Many people, Ned my friend," I said.


"No fishermen. Scientists maybe!"

"Pardon me, Ned. Fishermen and scientists!"

"Why, I to whom you speak," Conseil said with the world's straightest face,
"I recall perfectly seeing a large boat dragged under the waves by the arms of a
cephalopod."

"You saw that?" the Canadian asked.

"Yes, Ned."

"With your own two eyes?"

"With my own two eyes."

"Where, may I ask?"

"In Saint-Malo," Conseil returned unflappably.

"In the harbor?" Ned Land said sarcastically.

"No, in a church," Conseil replied.

"In a church!" the Canadian exclaimed.

"Yes, Ned my friend. It had a picture that portrayed the devilfish in
question."

"Oh good!" Ned Land exclaimed with a burst of laughter. "Mr. Conseil put
one over on me!"

"Actually he's right," I said. "I've heard about that picture. But the subject it
portrays is taken from a legend, and you know how to rate legends in matters of
natural history! Besides, when it's an issue of monsters, the human imagination
always tends to run wild. People not only claimed these devilfish could drag
ships under, but a certain Olaus Magnus tells of a cephalopod a mile long that
looked more like an island than an animal. There's also the story of how the
Bishop of Trondheim set up an altar one day on an immense rock. After he
finished saying mass, this rock started moving and went back into the sea. The
rock was a devilfish."

"And that's everything we know?" the Canadian asked.

"No," I replied, "another bishop, Pontoppidan of Bergen, also tells of a
devilfish so large a whole cavalry regiment could maneuver on it."

"They sure did go on, those oldtime bishops!" Ned Land said.

"Finally, the naturalists of antiquity mention some monsters with mouths as
big as a gulf, which were too huge to get through the Strait of Gibraltar."

"Good work, men!" the Canadian put in.

"But in all these stories, is there any truth?" Conseil asked.

"None at all, my friends, at least in those that go beyond the bounds of
credibility and fly off into fable or legend. Yet for the imaginings of these
storytellers there had to be, if not a cause, at least an excuse. It can't be denied
that some species of squid and other devilfish are quite large, though still smaller


than cetaceans. Aristotle put the dimensions of one squid at five cubits, or 3.1
meters. Our fishermen frequently see specimens over 1.8 meters long. The
museums in Trieste and Montpellier have preserved some devilfish carcasses
measuring two meters. Besides, according to the calculations of naturalists, one
of these animals only six feet long would have tentacles as long as twenty-seven.
Which is enough to make a fearsome monster."

"Does anybody fish for 'em nowadays?" the Canadian asked.

"If they don't fish for them, sailors at least sight them. A friend of mine,
Captain Paul Bos of Le Havre, has often sworn to me that he encountered one of
these monsters of colossal size in the seas of the East Indies. But the most
astonishing event, which proves that these gigantic animals undeniably exist,
took place a few years ago in 1861."

"What event was that?" Ned Land asked.

"Just this. In 1861, to the northeast of Tenerife and fairly near the latitude
where we are right now, the crew of the gunboat Alecto spotted a monstrous
squid swimming in their waters. Commander Bouguer approached the animal
and attacked it with blows from harpoons and blasts from rifles, but without
much success because bullets and harpoons crossed its soft flesh as if it were
semiliquid jelly. After several fruitless attempts, the crew managed to slip a
noose around the mollusk's body. This noose slid as far as the caudal fins and
came to a halt. Then they tried to haul the monster on board, but its weight was
so considerable that when they tugged on the rope, the animal parted company
with its tail; and deprived of this adornment, it disappeared beneath the waters."

"Finally, an actual event," Ned Land said.

"An indisputable event, my gallant Ned. Accordingly, people have proposed
naming this devilfish Bouguer's Squid."

"And how long was it?" the Canadian asked.

"Didn't it measure about six meters?" said Conseil, who was stationed at the
window and examining anew the crevices in the cliff.

"Precisely," I replied.

"Wasn't its head," Conseil went on, "crowned by eight tentacles that quivered
in the water like a nest of snakes?"

"Precisely."

"Weren't its eyes prominently placed and considerably enlarged?"

"Yes, Conseil."

"And wasn't its mouth a real parrot's beak but of fearsome size?"

"Correct, Conseil."

"Well, with all due respect to master," Conseil replied serenely, "if this isn't
Bouguer's Squid, it's at least one of his close relatives!"


I stared at Conseil. Ned Land rushed to the window.

"What an awful animal!" he exclaimed.

I stared in my turn and couldn't keep back a movement of revulsion. Before
my eyes there quivered a horrible monster worthy of a place among the most
farfetched teratological legends.

It was a squid of colossal dimensions, fully eight meters long. It was
traveling backward with tremendous speed in the same direction as the Nautilus.
It gazed with enormous, staring eyes that were tinted sea green. Its eight arms (or
more accurately, feet) were rooted in its head, which has earned these animals
the name cephalopod; its arms stretched a distance twice the length of its body
and were writhing like the serpentine hair of the Furies. You could plainly see its
250 suckers, arranged over the inner sides of its tentacles and shaped like
semispheric capsules. Sometimes these suckers fastened onto the lounge window
by creating vacuums against it. The monster's mouth--a beak made of horn and
shaped like that of a parrot--opened and closed vertically. Its tongue, also of horn
substance and armed with several rows of sharp teeth, would flicker out from
between these genuine shears. What a freak of nature! A bird's beak on a
mollusk! Its body was spindle-shaped and swollen in the middle, a fleshy mass
that must have weighed 20,000 to 25,000 kilograms. Its unstable color would
change with tremendous speed as the animal grew irritated, passing successively
from bluish gray to reddish brown.

What was irritating this mollusk? No doubt the presence of the Nautilus,
even more fearsome than itself, and which it couldn't grip with its mandibles or
the suckers on its arms. And yet what monsters these devilfish are, what vitality
our Creator has given them, what vigor in their movements, thanks to their
owning a triple heart!

Sheer chance had placed us in the presence of this squid, and I didn't want to
lose this opportunity to meticulously study such a cephalopod specimen. I
overcame the horror that its appearance inspired in me, picked up a pencil, and
began to sketch it.

"Perhaps this is the same as the Alecto's," Conseil said.

"Can't be," the Canadian replied, "because this one's complete while the
other one lost its tail!"

"That doesn't necessarily follow," I said. "The arms and tails of these animals
grow back through regeneration, and in seven years the tail on Bouguer's Squid
has surely had time to sprout again."

"Anyhow," Ned shot back, "if it isn't this fellow, maybe it's one of those!"

Indeed, other devilfish had appeared at the starboard window. I counted
seven of them. They provided the Nautilus with an escort, and I could hear their


beaks gnashing on the sheet-iron hull. We couldn't have asked for a more
devoted following.

I continued sketching. These monsters kept pace in our waters with such
precision, they seemed to be standing still, and I could have traced their outlines
in miniature on the window. But we were moving at a moderate speed.

All at once the Nautilus stopped. A jolt made it tremble through its entire
framework.

"Did we strike bottom?" I asked.

"In any event we're already clear," the Canadian replied, "because we're
afloat."

The Nautilus was certainly afloat, but it was no longer in motion. The blades
of its propeller weren't churning the waves. A minute passed. Followed by his
chief officer, Captain Nemo entered the lounge.

I hadn't seen him for a good while. He looked gloomy to me. Without
speaking to us, without even seeing us perhaps, he went to the panel, stared at
the devilfish, and said a few words to his chief officer.

The latter went out. Soon the panels closed. The ceiling lit up.

I went over to the captain.

"An unusual assortment of devilfish," I told him, as carefree as a collector in
front of an aquarium.

"Correct, Mr. Naturalist," he answered me, "and we're going to fight them at
close quarters."

I gaped at the captain. I thought my hearing had gone bad.

"At close quarters?" I repeated.

"Yes, sir. Our propeller is jammed. I think the horn-covered mandibles of one
of these squid are entangled in the blades. That's why we aren't moving."

"And what are you going to do?"

"Rise to the surface and slaughter the vermin."

"A difficult undertaking."

"Correct. Our electric bullets are ineffective against such soft flesh, where
they don't meet enough resistance to go off. But we'll attack the beasts with
axes."

"And harpoons, sir," the Canadian said, "if you don't turn down my help."

"T accept it, Mr. Land."

"We'll go with you,” I said. And we followed Captain Nemo, heading to the
central companionway.

There some ten men were standing by for the assault, armed with boarding
axes. Conseil and I picked up two more axes. Ned Land seized a harpoon.

By then the Nautilus had returned to the surface of the waves. Stationed on


the top steps, one of the seamen undid the bolts of the hatch. But he had scarcely
unscrewed the nuts when the hatch flew up with tremendous violence, obviously
pulled open by the suckers on a devilfish's arm.

Instantly one of those long arms glided like a snake into the opening, and
twenty others were quivering above. With a sweep of the ax, Captain Nemo
chopped off this fearsome tentacle, which slid writhing down the steps.

Just as we were crowding each other to reach the platform, two more arms
lashed the air, swooped on the seaman stationed in front of Captain Nemo, and
carried the fellow away with irresistible violence.

Captain Nemo gave a shout and leaped outside. We rushed after him.

What a scene! Seized by the tentacle and glued to its suckers, the unfortunate
man was swinging in the air at the mercy of this enormous appendage. He
gasped, he choked, he yelled: "Help! Help!" These words, pronounced in French,
left me deeply stunned! So I had a fellow countryman on board, perhaps several!
I'll hear his harrowing plea the rest of my life!

The poor fellow was done for. Who could tear him from such a powerful
grip? Even so, Captain Nemo rushed at the devilfish and with a sweep of the ax
hewed one more of its arms. His chief officer struggled furiously with other
monsters crawling up the Nautilus's sides. The crew battled with flailing axes.
The Canadian, Conseil, and I sank our weapons into these fleshy masses. An
intense, musky odor filled the air. It was horrible.

For an instant I thought the poor man entwined by the devilfish might be torn
loose from its powerful suction. Seven arms out of eight had been chopped off.
Brandishing its victim like a feather, one lone tentacle was writhing in the air.
But just as Captain Nemo and his chief officer rushed at it, the animal shot off a
spout of blackish liquid, secreted by a pouch located in its abdomen. It blinded
us. When this cloud had dispersed, the squid was gone, and so was my poor
fellow countryman!

What rage then drove us against these monsters! We lost all self-control. Ten
or twelve devilfish had overrun the Nautilus's platform and sides. We piled
helter-skelter into the thick of these sawed-off snakes, which darted over the
platform amid waves of blood and sepia ink. It seemed as if these viscous
tentacles grew back like the many heads of Hydra. At every thrust Ned Land's
harpoon would plunge into a squid's sea-green eye and burst it. But my daring
companion was suddenly toppled by the tentacles of a monster he could not
avoid.

Oh, my heart nearly exploded with excitement and horror! The squid's
fearsome beak was wide open over Ned Land. The poor man was about to be cut
in half. I ran to his rescue. But Captain Nemo got there first. His ax disappeared


between the two enormous mandibles, and the Canadian, miraculously saved,
stood and plunged his harpoon all the way into the devilfish's triple heart.

"Tit for tat," Captain Nemo told the Canadian. "I owed it to myself!"

Ned bowed without answering him.

This struggle had lasted a quarter of an hour. Defeated, mutilated, battered to
death, the monsters finally yielded to us and disappeared beneath the waves.

Red with blood, motionless by the beacon, Captain Nemo stared at the sea


that had swallowed one of his companions, and large tears streamed from his
eyes.


CHAPTER 19


The Gulf Stream


THIS DREADFUL SCENE on April 20 none of us will ever be able to
forget. I wrote it up in a state of intense excitement. Later I reviewed my
narrative. I read it to Conseil and the Canadian. They found it accurate in detail
but deficient in impact. To convey such sights, it would take the pen of our most
famous poet, Victor Hugo, author of The Toilers of the Sea.

As I said, Captain Nemo wept while staring at the waves. His grief was
immense. This was the second companion he had lost since we had come
aboard. And what a way to die! Smashed, strangled, crushed by the fearsome
arms of a devilfish, ground between its iron mandibles, this friend would never
rest with his companions in the placid waters of their coral cemetery!

As for me, what had harrowed my heart in the thick of this struggle was the
despairing yell given by this unfortunate man. Forgetting his regulation
language, this poor Frenchman had reverted to speaking his own mother tongue
to fling out one supreme plea! Among the Nautilus's crew, allied body and soul
with Captain Nemo and likewise fleeing from human contact, I had found a
fellow countryman! Was he the only representative of France in this mysterious
alliance, obviously made up of individuals from different nationalities? This was
just one more of those insoluble problems that kept welling up in my mind!

Captain Nemo reentered his stateroom, and I saw no more of him for a good
while. But how sad, despairing, and irresolute he must have felt, to judge from
this ship whose soul he was, which reflected his every mood! The Nautilus no
longer kept to a fixed heading. It drifted back and forth, riding with the waves
like a corpse. Its propeller had been disentangled but was barely put to use. It
was navigating at random. It couldn't tear itself away from the setting of this last
struggle, from this sea that had devoured one of its own!

Ten days went by in this way. It was only on May 1 that the Nautilus openly
resumed its northbound course, after raising the Bahamas at the mouth of Old
Bahama Channel. We then went with the current of the sea's greatest river, which
has its own banks, fish, and temperature. I mean the Gulf Stream.

It is indeed a river that runs independently through the middle of the
Atlantic, its waters never mixing with the ocean's waters. It's a salty river, saltier
than the sea surrounding it. Its average depth is 3,000 feet, its average width
sixty miles. In certain localities its current moves at a speed of four kilometers


per hour. The unchanging volume of its waters is greater than that of all the
world's rivers combined.

As discovered by Commander Maury, the true source of the Gulf Stream, its
Starting point, if you prefer, is located in the Bay of Biscay. There its waters, still
weak in temperature and color, begin to form. It goes down south, skirts
equatorial Africa, warms its waves in the rays of the Torrid Zone, crosses the
Atlantic, reaches Cape Sado Roque on the coast of Brazil, and forks into two
branches, one going to the Caribbean Sea for further saturation with heat
particles. Then, entrusted with restoring the balance between hot and cold
temperatures and with mixing tropical and northern waters, the Gulf Stream
begins to play its stabilizing role. Attaining a white heat in the Gulf of Mexico, it
heads north up the American coast, advances as far as Newfoundland, swerves
away under the thrust of a cold current from the Davis Strait, and resumes its
ocean course by going along a great circle of the earth on a rhumb line; it then
divides into two arms near the 43rd parallel; one, helped by the northeast trade
winds, returns to the Bay of Biscay and the Azores; the other washes the shores
of Ireland and Norway with lukewarm water, goes beyond Spitzbergen, where its
temperature falls to 4 degrees centigrade, and fashions the open sea at the pole.

It was on this oceanic river that the Nautilus was then navigating. Leaving
Old Bahama Channel, which is fourteen leagues wide by 350 meters deep, the
Gulf Stream moves at the rate of eight kilometers per hour. Its speed steadily
decreases as it advances northward, and we must pray that this steadiness
continues, because, as experts agree, if its speed and direction were to change,
the climates of Europe would undergo disturbances whose consequences are
incalculable.

Near noon I was on the platform with Conseil. I shared with him the relevant
details on the Gulf Stream. When my explanation was over, I invited him to dip
his hands into its current.

Conseil did so, and he was quite astonished to experience no sensation of
either hot or cold.

"That comes," I told him, "from the water temperature of the Gulf Stream,
which, as it leaves the Gulf of Mexico, is barely different from your blood
temperature. This Gulf Stream is a huge heat generator that enables the coasts of
Europe to be decked in eternal greenery. And if Commander Maury is correct,
were one to harness the full warmth of this current, it would supply enough heat
to keep molten a river of iron solder as big as the Amazon or the Missouri."

Just then the Gulf Stream's speed was 2.25 meters per second. So distinct is
its current from the surrounding sea, its confined waters stand out against the
ocean and operate on a different level from the colder waters. Murky as well,


and very rich in saline material, their pure indigo contrasts with the green waves
surrounding them. Moreover, their line of demarcation is so clear that abreast of
the Carolinas, the Nautilus's spur cut the waves of the Gulf Stream while its
propeller was still churning those belonging to the ocean.

This current swept along with it a whole host of moving creatures.
Argonauts, so common in the Mediterranean, voyaged here in schools of large
numbers. Among cartilaginous fish, the most remarkable were rays whose ultra
slender tails made up nearly a third of the body, which was shaped like a huge
diamond twenty-five feet long; then little one-meter sharks, the head large, the
snout short and rounded, the teeth sharp and arranged in several rows, the body
seemingly covered with scales.

Among bony fish, I noted grizzled wrasse unique to these seas, deep-water
gilthead whose iris has a fiery gleam, one-meter croakers whose large mouths
bristle with small teeth and which let out thin cries, black rudderfish like those
I've already discussed, blue dorados accented with gold and silver, rainbow-hued
parrotfish that can rival the loveliest tropical birds in coloring, banded blennies
with triangular heads, bluish flounder without scales, toadfish covered with a
crosswise yellow band in the shape of a Greek t, swarms of little freckled gobies
stippled with brown spots, lungfish with silver heads and yellow tails, various
specimens of salmon, mullet with slim figures and a softly glowing radiance that
Lacépeéde dedicated to the memory of his wife, and finally the American cavalla,
a handsome fish decorated by every honorary order, bedizened with their every
ribbon, frequenting the shores of this great nation where ribbons and orders are
held in such low esteem.

I might add that during the night, the Gulf Stream's phosphorescent waters
rivaled the electric glow of our beacon, especially in the stormy weather that
frequently threatened us.

On May 8, while abreast of North Carolina, we were across from Cape
Hatteras once more. There the Gulf Stream is seventy-five miles wide and 210
meters deep. The Nautilus continued to wander at random. Seemingly, all
supervision had been jettisoned. Under these conditions I admit that we could
easily have gotten away. In fact, the populous shores offered ready refuge
everywhere. The sea was plowed continuously by the many steamers providing
service between the Gulf of Mexico and New York or Boston, and it was crossed
night and day by little schooners engaged in coastal trade over various points on
the American shore. We could hope to be picked up. So it was a promising
opportunity, despite the thirty miles that separated the Nautilus from these Union
coasts.

But one distressing circumstance totally thwarted the Canadian's plans. The


weather was thoroughly foul. We were approaching waterways where storms are
commonplace, the very homeland of tornadoes and cyclones specifically
engendered by the Gulf Stream's current. To face a frequently raging sea in a
frail skiff was a race to certain disaster. Ned Land conceded this himself. So he
champed at the bit, in the grip of an intense homesickness that could be cured
only by our escape.

"Sir," he told me that day, "it's got to stop. I want to get to the bottom of this.
Your Nemo's veering away from shore and heading up north. But believe you
me, I had my fill at the South Pole and I'm not going with him to the North
Pole."

"What can we do, Ned, since it isn't feasible to escape right now?"

"I keep coming back to my idea. We've got to talk to the captain. When we
were in your own country's seas, you didn't say a word. Now that we're in mine,
I intend to speak up. Before a few days are out, I figure the Nautilus will lie
abreast of Nova Scotia, and from there to Newfoundland is the mouth of a large
gulf, and the St. Lawrence empties into that gulf, and the St. Lawrence is my
own river, the river running by Quebec, my hometown-- and when I think about
all this, my gorge rises and my hair stands on end! Honestly, sir, I'd rather jump
overboard! I can't stay here any longer! I'm suffocating!"

The Canadian was obviously at the end of his patience. His vigorous nature
couldn't adapt to this protracted imprisonment. His facial appearance was
changing by the day. His moods grew gloomier and gloomier. I had a sense of
what he was suffering because I also was gripped by homesickness. Nearly
seven months had gone by without our having any news from shore. Moreover,
Captain Nemo's reclusiveness, his changed disposition, and especially his total
silence since the battle with the devilfish all made me see things in a different
light. I no longer felt the enthusiasm of our first days on board. You needed to be
Flemish like Conseil to accept these circumstances, living in a habitat designed
for cetaceans and other denizens of the deep. Truly, if that gallant lad had owned
gills instead of lungs, I think he would have made an outstanding fish!

"Well, sir?" Ned Land went on, seeing that I hadn't replied.

"Well, Ned, you want me to ask Captain Nemo what he intends to do with
us?"

"Yes, sir."

"Even though he has already made that clear?"

"Yes. I want it settled once and for all. Speak just for me, strictly on my
behalf, if you want."

"But I rarely encounter him. He positively avoids me."

"All the more reason you should go look him up."


"T'll confer with him, Ned."

"When?" the Canadian asked insistently.

"When I encounter him."

"Professor Aronnax, would you like me to go find him myself?"

"No, let me do it. Tomorrow--"

"Today," Ned Land said.

"So be it. I'll see him today," I answered the Canadian, who, if he took action
himself, would certainly have ruined everything.

I was left to myself. His request granted, I decided to dispose of it
immediately. I like things over and done with.

I reentered my stateroom. From there I could hear movements inside Captain
Nemo's quarters. I couldn't pass up this chance for an encounter. I knocked on
his door. I received no reply. I knocked again, then tried the knob. The door
opened.

I entered. The captain was there. He was bending over his worktable and
hadn't heard me. Determined not to leave without questioning him, I drew closer.
He looked up sharply, with a frowning brow, and said in a pretty stern tone:

"Oh, it's you! What do you want?"

"To speak with you, captain."

"But I'm busy, sir, I'm at work. I give you the freedom to enjoy your privacy,
can't I have the same for myself?"

This reception was less than encouraging. But I was determined to give as
good as I got.

"Sir," I said coolly, "I need to speak with you on a matter that simply can't
wait."

"Whatever could that be, sir?" he replied sarcastically. "Have you made some
discovery that has escaped me? Has the sea yielded up some novel secret to
you?"

We were miles apart. But before I could reply, he showed me a manuscript
open on the table and told me in a more serious tone:

"Here, Professor Aronnax, is a manuscript written in several languages. It
contains a summary of my research under the sea, and God willing, it won't
perish with me. Signed with my name, complete with my life story, this
manuscript will be enclosed in a small, unsinkable contrivance. The last
surviving man on the Nautilus will throw this contrivance into the sea, and it will
go wherever the waves carry it."

The man's name! His life story written by himself! So the secret of his
existence might someday be unveiled? But just then I saw this announcement
only as a lead-in to my topic.


"Captain," I replied, "I'm all praise for this idea you're putting into effect.
The fruits of your research must not be lost. But the methods you're using strike
me as primitive. Who knows where the winds will take that contrivance, into
whose hands it may fall? Can't you find something better? Can't you or one of
your men--"

"Never, sir," the captain said, swiftly interrupting me.

"But my companions and I would be willing to safeguard this manuscript,
and if you give us back our freedom--"

"Your freedom!" Captain Nemo put in, standing up.

"Yes, sir, and that's the subject on which I wanted to confer with you. For
seven months we've been aboard your vessel, and I ask you today, in the name of
my companions as well as myself, if you intend to keep us here forever."

"Professor Aronnax," Captain Nemo said, "I'll answer you today just as I did
seven months ago: whoever boards the Nautilus must never leave it."

"What you're inflicting on us is outright slavery!"

"Call it anything you like."

"But every slave has the right to recover his freedom! By any worthwhile,
available means!"

"Who has denied you that right?" Captain Nemo replied. "Did I ever try to
bind you with your word of honor?"

The captain stared at me, crossing his arms.

"Sir," I told him, "to take up this subject a second time would be distasteful
to both of us. So let's finish what we've started. I repeat: it isn't just for myself
that I raise this issue. To me, research is a relief, a potent diversion, an
enticement, a passion that can make me forget everything else. Like you, I'm a
man neglected and unknown, living in the faint hope that someday I can pass on
to future generations the fruits of my labors--figuratively speaking, by means of
some contrivance left to the luck of winds and waves. In short, I can admire you
and comfortably go with you while playing a role I only partly understand; but I
still catch glimpses of other aspects of your life that are surrounded by
involvements and secrets that, alone on board, my companions and I can't share.
And even when our hearts could beat with yours, moved by some of your griefs
or stirred by your deeds of courage and genius, we've had to stifle even the
slightest token of that sympathy that arises at the sight of something fine and
good, whether it comes from friend or enemy. All right then! It's this feeling of
being alien to your deepest concerns that makes our situation unacceptable,
impossible, even impossible for me but especially for Ned Land. Every man, by
virtue of his very humanity, deserves fair treatment. Have you considered how a
love of freedom and hatred of slavery could lead to plans of vengeance in a


temperament like the Canadian's, what he might think, attempt, endeavor... ?"

I fell silent. Captain Nemo stood up.

"Ned Land can think, attempt, or endeavor anything he wants, what
difference is it to me? I didn't go looking for him! I don't keep him on board for
my pleasure! As for you, Professor Aronnax, you're a man able to understand
anything, even silence. I have nothing more to say to you. Let this first time
you've come to discuss this subject also be the last, because a second time I
won't even listen."

I withdrew. From that day forward our position was very strained. I reported
this conversation to my two companions.

"Now we know," Ned said, "that we can't expect a thing from this man. The
Nautilus is nearing Long Island. We'll escape, no matter what the weather."

But the skies became more and more threatening. There were conspicuous
signs of a hurricane on the way. The atmosphere was turning white and milky.
Slender sheaves of cirrus clouds were followed on the horizon by layers of
nimbocumulus. Other low clouds fled swiftly. The sea grew towering, inflated
by long swells. Every bird had disappeared except a few petrels, friends of the
storms. The barometer fell significantly, indicating a tremendous tension in the
surrounding haze. The mixture in our stormglass decomposed under the
influence of the electricity charging the air. A struggle of the elements was
approaching.

The storm burst during the daytime of May 13, just as the Nautilus was
cruising abreast of Long Island, a few miles from the narrows to Upper New
York Bay. I'm able to describe this struggle of the elements because Captain
Nemo didn't flee into the ocean depths; instead, from some inexplicable whim,
he decided to brave it out on the surface.

The wind was blowing from the southwest, initially a stiff breeze, in other
words, with a speed of fifteen meters per second, which built to twenty-five
meters near three o'clock in the afternoon. This is the figure for major storms.

Unshaken by these squalls, Captain Nemo stationed himself on the platform.
He was lashed around the waist to withstand the monstrous breakers foaming
over the deck. I hoisted and attached myself to the same place, dividing my
wonderment between the storm and this incomparable man who faced it head-
on.

The raging sea was swept with huge tattered clouds drenched by the waves. I
saw no more of the small intervening billows that form in the troughs of the big
crests. Just long, soot-colored undulations with crests so compact they didn't
foam. They kept growing taller. They were spurring each other on. The Nautilus,
sometimes lying on its side, sometimes standing on end like a mast, rolled and


pitched frightfully.

Near five o'clock a torrential rain fell, but it lulled neither wind nor sea. The
hurricane was unleashed at a speed of forty-five meters per second, hence almost
forty leagues per hour. Under these conditions houses topple, roof tiles puncture
doors, iron railings snap in two, and twenty-four-pounder cannons relocate. And
yet in the midst of this turmoil, the Nautilus lived up to that saying of an expert
engineer: "A well-constructed hull can defy any sea!" This submersible was no
resisting rock that waves could demolish; it was a steel spindle, obediently in
motion, without rigging or masting, and able to brave their fury with impunity.

Meanwhile I was carefully examining these unleashed breakers. They
measured up to fifteen meters in height over a length of 150 to 175 meters, and
the speed of their propagation (half that of the wind) was fifteen meters per
second. Their volume and power increased with the depth of the waters. I then
understood the role played by these waves, which trap air in their flanks and
release it in the depths of the sea where its oxygen brings life. Their utmost
pressure--it has been calculated-- can build to 3,000 kilograms on every square
foot of surface they strike. It was such waves in the Hebrides that repositioned a
stone block weighing 84,000 pounds. It was their relatives in the tidal wave on
December 23, 1854, that toppled part of the Japanese city of Tokyo, then went
that same day at 700 kilometers per hour to break on the beaches of America.

After nightfall the storm grew in intensity. As in the 1860 cyclone on
Réunion Island, the barometer fell to 710 millimeters. At the close of day, I saw
a big ship passing on the horizon, struggling painfully. It lay to at half steam in
an effort to hold steady on the waves. It must have been a steamer on one of
those lines out of New York to Liverpool or Le Havre. It soon vanished into the
shadows.

At ten o'clock in the evening, the skies caught on fire. The air was streaked
with violent flashes of lightning. I couldn't stand this brightness, but Captain
Nemo stared straight at it, as if to inhale the spirit of the storm. A dreadful noise
filled the air, a complicated noise made up of the roar of crashing breakers, the
howl of the wind, claps of thunder. The wind shifted to every point of the
horizon, and the cyclone left the east to return there after passing through north,
west, and south, moving in the opposite direction of revolving storms in the
southern hemisphere.

Oh, that Gulf Stream! It truly lives up to its nickname, the Lord of Storms!
All by itself it creates these fearsome cyclones through the difference in
temperature between its currents and the superimposed layers of air.

The rain was followed by a downpour of fire. Droplets of water changed into
exploding tufts. You would have thought Captain Nemo was courting a death


worthy of himself, seeking to be struck by lightning. In one hideous pitching
movement, the Nautilus reared its steel spur into the air like a lightning rod, and
I saw long sparks shoot down it.

Shattered, at the end of my strength, I slid flat on my belly to the hatch. I
opened it and went below to the lounge. By then the storm had reached its
maximum intensity. It was impossible to stand upright inside the Nautilus.

Captain Nemo reentered near midnight. I could hear the ballast tanks filling
little by little, and the Nautilus sank gently beneath the surface of the waves.

Through the lounge's open windows, I saw large, frightened fish passing like
phantoms in the fiery waters. Some were struck by lightning right before my
eyes!

The Nautilus kept descending. I thought it would find calm again at fifteen
meters down. No. The upper strata were too violently agitated. It needed to sink
to fifty meters, searching for a resting place in the bowels of the sea.

But once there, what tranquility we found, what silence, what peace all
around us! Who would have known that a dreadful hurricane was then unleashed
on the surface of this ocean?


CHAPTER 20


In Latitude 47 degrees 24' and Longitude 17 degrees 28'


IN THE AFTERMATH of this storm, we were thrown back to the east. Away
went any hope of

escaping to the landing places of New York or the St. Lawrence. In despair,
poor Ned went into seclusion like Captain Nemo. Conseil and I no longer left
each other.

As I said, the Nautilus veered to the east. To be more accurate, I should have
said to the northeast. Sometimes on the surface of the waves, sometimes beneath
them, the ship wandered for days amid these mists so feared by navigators.
These are caused chiefly by melting ice, which keeps the air extremely damp.
How many ships have perished in these waterways as they tried to get directions
from the hazy lights on the coast! How many casualties have been caused by
these opaque mists! How many collisions have occurred with these reefs, where
the breaking surf is covered by the noise of the wind! How many vessels have
rammed each other, despite their running lights, despite the warnings given by
their bosun's pipes and alarm bells!

So the floor of this sea had the appearance of a battlefield where every ship
defeated by the ocean still lay, some already old and encrusted, others newer and
reflecting our beacon light on their ironwork and copper undersides. Among
these vessels, how many went down with all hands, with their crews and hosts of
immigrants, at these trouble spots so prominent in the statistics: Cape Race, St.
Paul Island, the Strait of Belle Isle, the St. Lawrence estuary! And in only a few
years, how many victims have been furnished to the obituary notices by the
Royal Mail, Inman, and Montreal lines; by vessels named the Solway, the Isis,
the Paramatta, the Hungarian, the Canadian, the Anglo-Saxon, the Humboldt,
and the United States, all run aground; by the Arctic and the Lyonnais, sunk in
collisions; by the President, the Pacific, and the City of Glasgow, lost for reasons
unknown; in the midst of their gloomy rubble, the Nautilus navigated as if
passing the dead in review!

By May 15 we were off the southern tip of the Grand Banks of
Newfoundland. These banks are the result of marine sedimentation, an extensive
accumulation of organic waste brought either from the equator by the Gulf
Stream's current, or from the North Pole by the countercurrent of cold water that
skirts the American coast. Here, too, erratically drifting chunks collect from the


ice breakup. Here a huge boneyard forms from fish, mollusks, and zoophytes
dying over it by the billions.

The sea is of no great depth at the Grand Banks. A few hundred fathoms at
best. But to the south there is a deep, suddenly occurring depression, a 3,000-
meter pit. Here the Gulf Stream widens. Its waters come to full bloom. It loses
its speed and temperature, but it turns into a sea.

Among the fish that the Nautilus startled on its way, I'll mention a one-meter
lumpfish, blackish on top with orange on the belly and rare among its brethren in
that it practices monogamy, a good-sized eelpout, a type of emerald moray
whose flavor is excellent, wolffish with big eyes in a head somewhat resembling
a canine's, viviparous blennies whose eggs hatch inside their bodies like those of
snakes, bloated gobio (or black gudgeon) measuring two decimeters, grenadiers
with long tails and gleaming with a silvery glow, speedy fish venturing far from
their High Arctic seas.

Our nets also hauled in a bold, daring, vigorous, and muscular fish armed
with prickles on its head and stings on its fins, a real scorpion measuring two to
three meters, the ruthless enemy of cod, blennies, and salmon; it was the
bullhead of the northerly seas, a fish with red fins and a brown body covered
with nodules. The Nautilus's fishermen had some trouble getting a grip on this
animal, which, thanks to the formation of its gill covers, can protect its
respiratory organs from any parching contact with the air and can live out of
water for a good while.

And I'll mention--for the record--some little banded blennies that follow
ships into the northernmost seas, sharp-snouted carp exclusive to the north
Atlantic, scorpionfish, and lastly the gadoid family, chiefly the cod species,
which I detected in their waters of choice over these inexhaustible Grand Banks.

Because Newfoundland is simply an underwater peak, you could call these
cod mountain fish. While the Nautilus was clearing a path through their tight
ranks, Conseil couldn't refrain from making this comment:

"Mercy, look at these cod!" he said. "Why, I thought cod were flat, like dab
or sole!"

"Innocent boy!" I exclaimed. "Cod are flat only at the grocery store, where
they're cut open and spread out on display. But in the water they're like mullet,
spindle-shaped and perfectly built for speed."

"I can easily believe master," Conseil replied. "But what crowds of them!
What swarms!"

"Bah! My friend, there'd be many more without their enemies, scorpionfish
and human beings! Do you know how many eggs have been counted in a single
female?"


"T'll go all out," Conseil replied. "500,000."

"11,000,000, my friend."

"11,000,000! I refuse to accept that until I count them myself."

"So count them, Conseil. But it would be less work to believe me. Besides,
Frenchmen, Englishmen, Americans, Danes, and Norwegians catch these cod by
the thousands. They're eaten in prodigious quantities, and without the
astonishing fertility of these fish, the seas would soon be depopulated of them.
Accordingly, in England and America alone, 5,000 ships manned by 75,000
seamen go after cod. Each ship brings back an average catch of 4,400 fish,
making 22,000,000. Off the coast of Norway, the total is the same."

"Fine," Conseil replied, "I'll take master's word for it. I won't count them."

"Count what?"

"Those 11,000,000 eggs. But I'll make one comment."

"What's that?”

"If all their eggs hatched, just four codfish could feed England, America, and
Norway."

As we skimmed the depths of the Grand Banks, I could see perfectly those
long fishing lines, each armed with 200 hooks, that every boat dangled by the
dozens. The lower end of each line dragged the bottom by means of a small
grappling iron, and at the surface it was secured to the buoy-rope of a cork float.
The Nautilus had to maneuver shrewdly in the midst of this underwater
spiderweb.

But the ship didn't stay long in these heavily traveled waterways. It went up
to about latitude 42 degrees. This brought it abreast of St. John's in
Newfoundland and Heart's Content, where the Atlantic Cable reaches its end
point.

Instead of continuing north, the Nautilus took an easterly heading, as if to go
along this plateau on which the telegraph cable rests, where multiple soundings
have given the contours of the terrain with the utmost accuracy.

It was on May 17, about 500 miles from Heart's Content and 2,800 meters
down, that I spotted this cable lying on the seafloor. Conseil, whom I hadn't
alerted, mistook it at first for a gigantic sea snake and was gearing up to classify
it in his best manner. But I enlightened the fine lad and let him down gently by
giving him various details on the laying of this cable.

The first cable was put down during the years 1857-1858; but after
transmitting about 400 telegrams, it went dead. In 1863 engineers built a new
cable that measured 3,400 kilometers, weighed 4,500 metric tons, and was
shipped aboard the Great Eastern. This attempt also failed.

Now then, on May 25 while submerged to a depth of 3,836 meters, the


Nautilus lay in precisely the locality where this second cable suffered the rupture
that ruined the undertaking. It happened 638 miles from the coast of Ireland. At
around two o'clock in the afternoon, all contact with Europe broke off. The
electricians on board decided to cut the cable before fishing it up, and by eleven
o'clock that evening they had retrieved the damaged part. They repaired the joint
and its splice; then the cable was resubmerged. But a few days later it snapped
again and couldn't be recovered from the ocean depths.

These Americans refused to give up. The daring Cyrus Field, who had risked
his whole fortune to promote this undertaking, called for a new bond issue. It
sold out immediately. Another cable was put down under better conditions. Its
sheaves of conducting wire were insulated within a gutta-percha covering, which
was protected by a padding of textile material enclosed in a metal sheath. The
Great Eastern put back to sea on July 13, 1866.

The operation proceeded apace. Yet there was one hitch. As they gradually
unrolled this third cable, the electricians observed on several occasions that
someone had recently driven nails into it, trying to damage its core. Captain
Anderson, his officers, and the engineers put their heads together, then posted a
warning that if the culprit were detected, he would be thrown overboard without
a trial. After that, these villainous attempts were not repeated.

By July 23 the Great Eastern was lying no farther than 800 kilometers from
Newfoundland when it received telegraphed news from Ireland of an armistice
signed between Prussia and Austria after the Battle of Sadova. Through the mists
on the 27th, it sighted the port of Heart's Content. The undertaking had ended
happily, and in its first dispatch, young America addressed old Europe with these
wise words so rarely understood: "Glory to God in the highest, and peace on
earth to men of good will."

I didn't expect to find this electric cable in mint condition, as it looked on
leaving its place of manufacture. The long snake was covered with seashell
rubble and bristling with foraminifera; a crust of caked gravel protected it from
any mollusks that might bore into it. It rested serenely, sheltered from the sea's
motions, under a pressure favorable to the transmission of that electric spark that
goes from America to Europe in 32/100 of a second. This cable will no doubt
last indefinitely because, as observers note, its gutta-percha casing is improved
by a stay in salt water.

Besides, on this well-chosen plateau, the cable never lies at depths that could
cause a break. The Nautilus followed it to its lowest reaches, located 4,431
meters down, and even there it rested without any stress or strain. Then we
returned to the locality where the 1863 accident had taken place.

There the ocean floor formed a valley 120 kilometers wide, into which you


could fit Mt. Blanc without its summit poking above the surface of the waves.
This valley is closed off to the east by a sheer wall 2,000 meters high. We arrived
there on May 28, and the Nautilus lay no farther than 150 kilometers from
Ireland.

Would Captain Nemo head up north and beach us on the British Isles? No.
Much to my surprise, he went back down south and returned to European seas.
As we swung around the Emerald Isle, I spotted Cape Clear for an instant, plus
the lighthouse on Fastnet Rock that guides all those thousands of ships setting
out from Glasgow or Liverpool.

An important question then popped into my head. Would the Nautilus dare to
tackle the English Channel? Ned Land (who promptly reappeared after we
hugged shore) never stopped questioning me. What could I answer him? Captain
Nemo remained invisible. After giving the Canadian a glimpse of American
shores, was he about to show me the coast of France?

But the Nautilus kept gravitating southward. On May 30, in sight of Land's
End, it passed between the lowermost tip of England and the Scilly Islands,
which it left behind to starboard.

If it was going to enter the English Channel, it clearly needed to head east. It
did not.

All day long on May 31, the Nautilus swept around the sea in a series of
circles that had me deeply puzzled. It seemed to be searching for a locality that it
had some trouble finding. At noon Captain Nemo himself came to take our
bearings. He didn't address a word to me. He looked gloomier than ever. What
was filling him with such sadness? Was it our proximity to these European
shores? Was he reliving his memories of that country he had left behind? If so,
what did he feel? Remorse or regret? For a good while these thoughts occupied
my mind, and I had a hunch that fate would soon give away the captain's secrets.

The next day, June 1, the Nautilus kept to the same tack. It was obviously
trying to locate some precise spot in the ocean. Just as on the day before, Captain
Nemo came to take the altitude of the sun. The sea was smooth, the skies clear.
Eight miles to the east, a big steamship was visible on the horizon line. No flag
was flapping from the gaff of its fore-and-aft sail, and I couldn't tell its
nationality.

A few minutes before the sun passed its zenith, Captain Nemo raised his
sextant and took his sights with the utmost precision. The absolute calm of the
waves facilitated this operation. The Nautilus lay motionless, neither rolling nor
pitching.

I was on the platform just then. After determining our position, the captain
pronounced only these words:


"It's right here!"

He went down the hatch. Had he seen that vessel change course and
seemingly head toward us? I'm unable to say.

I returned to the lounge. The hatch closed, and I heard water hissing in the
ballast tanks. The Nautilus began to sink on a vertical line, because its propeller
was in check and no longer furnished any forward motion.

Some minutes later it stopped at a depth of 833 meters and came to rest on
the seafloor.

The ceiling lights in the lounge then went out, the panels opened, and
through the windows I saw, for a half-mile radius, the sea brightly lit by the
beacon's rays.

I looked to port and saw nothing but the immenseness of these tranquil
waters.

To starboard, a prominent bulge on the sea bottom caught my attention. You
would have thought it was some ruin enshrouded in a crust of whitened
seashells, as if under a mantle of snow. Carefully examining this mass, I could
identify the swollen outlines of a ship shorn of its masts, which must have sunk
bow first. This casualty certainly dated from some far-off time. To be so caked
with the limestone of these waters, this wreckage must have spent many a year
on the ocean floor.

What ship was this? Why had the Nautilus come to visit its grave? Was it
something other than a maritime accident that had dragged this craft under the
waters?

I wasn't sure what to think, but next to me I heard Captain Nemo's voice
slowly say:

"Originally this ship was christened the Marseillais. It carried seventy-four
cannons and was launched in 1762. On August 13, 1778, commanded by La
Poype-Vertrieux, it fought valiantly against the Preston. On July 4, 1779, as a
member of the squadron under Admiral d'Estaing, it assisted in the capture of the
island of Grenada. On September 5, 1781, under the Count de Grasse, it took
part in the Battle of Chesapeake Bay. In 1794 the new Republic of France
changed the name of this ship. On April 16 of that same year, it joined the
squadron at Brest under Rear Admiral Villaret de Joyeuse, who was entrusted
with escorting a convoy of wheat coming from America under the command of
Admiral Van Stabel. In this second year of the French Revolutionary Calendar,
on the 11th and 12th days in the Month of Pasture, this squadron fought an
encounter with English vessels. Sir, today is June 1, 1868, or the 13th day in the
Month of Pasture. Seventy-four years ago to the day, at this very spot in latitude
47 degrees 24' and longitude 17 degrees 28’, this ship sank after a heroic battle;


its three masts gone, water in its hold, a third of its crew out of action, it
preferred to go to the bottom with its 356 seamen rather than surrender; and with
its flag nailed up on the afterdeck, it disappeared beneath the waves to shouts of
‘Long live the Republic!"

"This is the Avenger!" I exclaimed.

"Yes, sir! The Avenger! A splendid name!" Captain Nemo murmured,
crossing his arms.


CHAPTER 21


A Mass Execution


THE WAY HE SAID THIS, the unexpectedness of this scene, first the
biography of this patriotic ship, then the excitement with which this eccentric
individual pronounced these last words--the name Avenger whose significance
could not escape me--all this, taken together, had a profound impact on my mind.
My eyes never left the captain. Hands outstretched toward the sea, he
contemplated the proud wreck with blazing eyes. Perhaps I would never learn
who he was, where he came from or where he was heading, but more and more I
could see a distinction between the man and the scientist. It was no ordinary
misanthropy that kept Captain Nemo and his companions sequestered inside the
Nautilus's plating, but a hate so monstrous or so sublime that the passing years
could never weaken it.

Did this hate also hunger for vengeance? Time would soon tell.

Meanwhile the Nautilus rose slowly to the surface of the sea, and I watched
the Avenger's murky shape disappearing little by little. Soon a gentle rolling told
me that we were afloat in the open air.

Just then a hollow explosion was audible. I looked at the captain. The captain
did not stir.

"Captain?" I said.

He didn't reply.

I left him and climbed onto the platform. Conseil and the Canadian were
already there.

"What caused that explosion?" I asked.

"A cannon going off," Ned Land replied.

I stared in the direction of the ship I had spotted. It was heading toward the
Nautilus, and you could tell it had put on steam. Six miles separated it from us.

"What sort of craft is it, Ned?"

"From its rigging and its low masts," the Canadian replied, "I bet it's a
warship. Here's hoping it pulls up and sinks this damned Nautilus!"

"Ned my friend," Conseil replied, "what harm could it do the Nautilus? Will
it attack us under the waves? Will it cannonade us at the bottom of the sea?"

"Tell me, Ned," I asked, "can you make out the nationality of that craft?"

Creasing his brow, lowering his lids, and puckering the corners of his eyes,
the Canadian focused the full power of his gaze on the ship for a short while.


"No, sir," he replied. "I can't make out what nation it's from. It's flying no
flag. But I'll swear it's a warship, because there's a long pennant streaming from
the peak of its mainmast."

For a quarter of an hour, we continued to watch the craft bearing down on us.
But it was inconceivable to me that it had discovered the Nautilus at such a
distance, still less that it knew what this underwater machine really was.

Soon the Canadian announced that the craft was a big battleship, a double-
decker ironclad complete with ram. Dark, dense smoke burst from its two
funnels. Its furled sails merged with the lines of its yardarms. The gaff of its
fore-and-aft sail flew no flag. Its distance still kept us from distinguishing the
colors of its pennant, which was fluttering like a thin ribbon.

It was coming on fast. If Captain Nemo let it approach, a chance for
salvation might be available to us.

"Sir," Ned Land told me, "if that boat gets within a mile of us, I'm jumping
overboard, and I suggest you follow suit."

I didn't reply to the Canadian's proposition but kept watching the ship, which
was looming larger on the horizon. Whether it was English, French, American,
or Russian, it would surely welcome us aboard if we could just get to it.

"Master may recall," Conseil then said, "that we have some experience with
swimming. He can rely on me to tow him to that vessel, if he's agreeable to
going with our friend Ned."

Before I could reply, white smoke streamed from the battleship's bow. Then,
a few seconds later, the waters splashed astern of the Nautilus, disturbed by the
fall of a heavy object. Soon after, an explosion struck my ears.

"What's this? They're firing at us!" I exclaimed.

"Good lads!" the Canadian muttered.

"That means they don't see us as castaways clinging to some wreckage!"

"With all due respect to master--gracious!" Conseil put in, shaking off the
water that had sprayed over him from another shell. "With all due respect to
master, they've discovered the narwhale and they're cannonading the same."

"But it must be clear to them," I exclaimed, "that they're dealing with human
beings."

"Maybe that's why!" Ned Land replied, staring hard at me.

The full truth dawned on me. Undoubtedly people now knew where they
stood on the existence of this so-called monster. Undoubtedly the latter's
encounter with the Abraham Lincoln, when the Canadian hit it with his harpoon,
had led Commander Farragut to recognize the narwhale as actually an
underwater boat, more dangerous than any unearthly cetacean!

Yes, this had to be the case, and undoubtedly they were now chasing this


dreadful engine of destruction on every sea!

Dreadful indeed, if, as we could assume, Captain Nemo had been using the
Nautilus in works of vengeance! That night in the middle of the Indian Ocean,
when he imprisoned us in the cell, hadn't he attacked some ship? That man now
buried in the coral cemetery, wasn't he the victim of some collision caused by the
Nautilus? Yes, I repeat: this had to be the case. One part of Captain Nemo's
secret life had been unveiled. And now, even though his identity was still
unknown, at least the nations allied against him knew they were no longer
hunting some fairy-tale monster, but a man who had sworn an implacable hate
toward them!

This whole fearsome sequence of events appeared in my mind's eye. Instead
of encountering friends on this approaching ship, we would find only pitiless
enemies.

Meanwhile shells fell around us in increasing numbers. Some, meeting the
liquid surface, would ricochet and vanish into the sea at considerable distances.
But none of them reached the Nautilus.

By then the ironclad was no more than three miles off. Despite its violent
cannonade, Captain Nemo hadn't appeared on the platform. And yet if one of
those conical shells had scored a routine hit on the Nautilus's hull, it could have
been fatal to him.

The Canadian then told me:

"Sir, we've got to do everything we can to get out of this jam! Let's signal
them! Damnation! Maybe they'll realize we're decent people!"

Ned Land pulled out his handkerchief to wave it in the air. But he had barely
unfolded it when he was felled by an iron fist, and despite his great strength, he
tumbled to the deck.

"Scum!" the captain shouted. "Do you want to be nailed to the Nautilus's
spur before it charges that ship?"

Dreadful to hear, Captain Nemo was even more dreadful to see. His face was
pale from some spasm of his heart, which must have stopped beating for an
instant. His pupils were hideously contracted. His voice was no longer speaking,
it was bellowing. Bending from the waist, he shook the Canadian by the
shoulders.

Then, dropping Ned and turning to the battleship, whose shells were
showering around him:

"O ship of an accursed nation, you know who I am!" he shouted in his
powerful voice. "And I don't need your colors to recognize you! Look! I'll show
you mine!"

And in the bow of the platform, Captain Nemo unfurled a black flag, like the


one he had left planted at the South Pole.

Just then a shell hit the Nautilus's hull obliquely, failed to breach it,
ricocheted near the captain, and vanished into the sea.

Captain Nemo shrugged his shoulders. Then, addressing me:

"Go below!" he told me in a curt tone. "You and your companions, go
below!"

"Sir," I exclaimed, "are you going to attack this ship?"

"Sir, I'm going to sink it."

"You wouldn't!"

"T will," Captain Nemo replied icily. "You're ill-advised to pass judgment on
me, sir. Fate has shown you what you weren't meant to see. The attack has come.
Our reply will be dreadful. Get back inside!"

"From what country is that ship?"

"You don't know? Fine, so much the better! At least its nationality will
remain a secret to you. Go below!"

The Canadian, Conseil, and I could only obey. Some fifteen of the Nautilus's
seamen surrounded their captain and stared with a feeling of implacable hate at
the ship bearing down on them. You could feel the same spirit of vengeance
enkindling their every soul.

I went below just as another projectile scraped the Nautilus's hull, and I
heard the captain exclaim:

"Shoot, you demented vessel! Shower your futile shells! You won't escape
the Nautilus's spur! But this isn't the place where you'll perish! I don't want your
wreckage mingling with that of the Avenger!"

I repaired to my stateroom. The captain and his chief officer stayed on the
platform. The propeller was set in motion. The Nautilus swiftly retreated, putting
us outside the range of the vessel's shells. But the chase continued, and Captain
Nemo was content to keep his distance.

Near four o'clock in the afternoon, unable to control the impatience and
uneasiness devouring me, I went back to the central companionway. The hatch
was open. I ventured onto the platform. The captain was still strolling there, his
steps agitated. He stared at the ship, which stayed to his leeward five or six miles
off. He was circling it like a wild beast, drawing it eastward, letting it chase after
him. Yet he didn't attack. Was he, perhaps, still undecided?

I tried to intervene one last time. But I had barely queried Captain Nemo
when the latter silenced me:

"I'm the law, I'm the tribunal! I'm the oppressed, and there are my
oppressors! Thanks to them, I've witnessed the destruction of everything I loved,
cherished, and venerated--homeland, wife, children, father, and mother! There


lies everything I hate! Not another word out of you!"

I took a last look at the battleship, which was putting on steam. Then I
rejoined Ned and Conseil.

"We'll escape!" I exclaimed.

"Good," Ned put in. "Where's that ship from?"

"I've no idea. But wherever it's from, it will sink before nightfall. In any
event, it's better to perish with it than be accomplices in some act of revenge
whose merits we can't gauge.”

"That's my feeling," Ned Land replied coolly. "Let's wait for nightfall."

Night fell. A profound silence reigned on board. The compass indicated that
the Nautilus hadn't changed direction. I could hear the beat of its propeller,
churning the waves with steady speed. Staying on the surface of the water, it
rolled gently, sometimes to one side, sometimes to the other.

My companions and I had decided to escape as soon as the vessel came close
enough for us to be heard--or seen, because the moon would wax full in three
days and was shining brightly. Once we were aboard that ship, if we couldn't
ward off the blow that threatened it, at least we could do everything that
circumstances permitted. Several times I thought the Nautilus was about to
attack. But it was content to let its adversary approach, and then it would quickly
resume its retreating ways.

Part of the night passed without incident. We kept watch for an opportunity
to take action. We talked little, being too keyed up. Ned Land was all for
jumping overboard. I forced him to wait. As I saw it, the Nautilus would attack
the double-decker on the surface of the waves, and then it would be not only
possible but easy to escape.

At three o'clock in the morning, full of uneasiness, I climbed onto the
platform. Captain Nemo hadn't left it. He stood in the bow next to his flag, which
a mild breeze was unfurling above his head. His eyes never left that vessel. The
extraordinary intensity of his gaze seemed to attract it, beguile it, and draw it
more surely than if he had it in tow!

The moon then passed its zenith. Jupiter was rising in the east. In the midst
of this placid natural setting, sky and ocean competed with each other in
tranquility, and the sea offered the orb of night the loveliest mirror ever to reflect
its image.

And when I compared this deep calm of the elements with all the fury
seething inside the plating of this barely perceptible Nautilus, I shivered all over.

The vessel was two miles off. It drew nearer, always moving toward the
phosphorescent glow that signaled the Nautilus's presence. I saw its green and
red running lights, plus the white lantern hanging from the large stay of its


foremast. Hazy flickerings were reflected on its rigging and indicated that its
furnaces were pushed to the limit. Showers of sparks and cinders of flaming coal
escaped from its funnels, spangling the air with stars.

I stood there until six o'clock in the morning, Captain Nemo never seeming
to notice me. The vessel lay a mile and a half off, and with the first glimmers of
daylight, it resumed its cannonade. The time couldn't be far away when the
Nautilus would attack its adversary, and my companions and I would leave
forever this man I dared not judge.

I was about to go below to alert them, when the chief officer climbed onto
the platform. Several seamen were with him. Captain Nemo didn't see them, or
didn't want to see them. They carried out certain procedures that, on the
Nautilus, you could call "clearing the decks for action." They were quite simple.
The manropes that formed a handrail around the platform were lowered.
Likewise the pilothouse and the beacon housing were withdrawn into the hull
until they lay exactly flush with it. The surface of this long sheet-iron cigar no
longer offered a single protrusion that could hamper its maneuvers.

I returned to the lounge. The Nautilus still emerged above the surface. A few
morning gleams infiltrated the liquid strata. Beneath the undulations of the
billows, the windows were enlivened by the blushing of the rising sun. That
dreadful day of June 2 had dawned.

At seven o'clock the log told me that the Nautilus had reduced speed. I
realized that it was letting the warship approach. Moreover, the explosions grew
more intensely audible. Shells furrowed the water around us, drilling through it
with an odd hissing sound.

"My friends," I said, "it's time. Let's shake hands, and may God be with us!"

Ned Land was determined, Conseil calm, I myself nervous and barely in
control.

We went into the library. Just as I pushed open the door leading to the well of
the central companionway, I heard the hatch close sharply overhead.

The Canadian leaped up the steps, but I stopped him. A well-known hissing
told me that water was entering the ship's ballast tanks. Indeed, in a few
moments the Nautilus had submerged some meters below the surface of the
waves.

I understood this maneuver. It was too late to take action. The Nautilus
wasn't going to strike the double-decker where it was clad in impenetrable iron
armor, but below its waterline, where the metal carapace no longer protected its
planking.

We were prisoners once more, unwilling spectators at the performance of this
gruesome drama. But we barely had time to think. Taking refuge in my


stateroom, we stared at each other without pronouncing a word. My mind was in
a total daze. My mental processes came to a dead stop. I hovered in that painful
state that predominates during the period of anticipation before some frightful
explosion. I waited, I listened, I lived only through my sense of hearing!

Meanwhile the Nautilus's speed had increased appreciably. So it was
gathering momentum. Its entire hull was vibrating.

Suddenly I let out a yell. There had been a collision, but it was comparatively
mild. I could feel the penetrating force of the steel spur. I could hear scratchings
and scrapings. Carried away with its driving power, the Nautilus had passed
through the vessel's mass like a sailmaker's needle through canvas!

I couldn't hold still. Frantic, going insane, I leaped out of my stateroom and
rushed into the lounge.

Captain Nemo was there. Mute, gloomy, implacable, he was staring through
the port panel.

An enormous mass was sinking beneath the waters, and the Nautilus,
missing none of its death throes, was descending into the depths with it. Ten
meters away, I could see its gaping hull, into which water was rushing with a
sound of thunder, then its double rows of cannons and railings. Its deck was
covered with dark, quivering shadows.

The water was rising. Those poor men leaped up into the shrouds, clung to
the masts, writhed beneath the waters. It was a human anthill that an invading
sea had caught by surprise!

Paralyzed, rigid with anguish, my hair standing on end, my eyes popping out
of my head, short of breath, suffocating, speechless, I stared-- I too! I was glued
to the window by an irresistible allure!

The enormous vessel settled slowly. Following it down, the Nautilus kept
watch on its every movement. Suddenly there was an eruption. The air
compressed inside the craft sent its decks flying, as if the powder stores had been
ignited. The thrust of the waters was so great, the Nautilus swerved away.

The poor ship then sank more swiftly. Its mastheads appeared, laden with
victims, then its crosstrees bending under clusters of men, finally the peak of its
mainmast. Then the dark mass disappeared, and with it a crew of corpses
dragged under by fearsome eddies. . . .

I turned to Captain Nemo. This dreadful executioner, this true archangel of
hate, was still staring. When it was all over, Captain Nemo headed to the door of
his stateroom, opened it, and entered. I followed him with my eyes.

On the rear paneling, beneath the portraits of his heroes, I saw the portrait of
a still-youthful woman with two little children. Captain Nemo stared at them for
a few moments, stretched out his arms to them, sank to his knees, and melted


into sobs.


CHAPTER 22


The Last Words of Captain Nemo


THE PANELS CLOSED over this frightful view, but the lights didn't go on
in the lounge. Inside the Nautilus all was gloom and silence. It left this place of
devastation with prodigious speed, 100 feet beneath the waters. Where was it
going? North or south? Where would the man flee after this horrible act of
revenge?

I reentered my stateroom, where Ned and Conseil were waiting silently.
Captain Nemo filled me with insurmountable horror. Whatever he had once
suffered at the hands of humanity, he had no right to mete out such punishment.
He had made me, if not an accomplice, at least an eyewitness to his vengeance!
Even this was intolerable.

At eleven o'clock the electric lights came back on. I went into the lounge. It
was deserted. I consulted the various instruments. The Nautilus was fleeing
northward at a speed of twenty-five miles per hour, sometimes on the surface of
the sea, sometimes thirty feet beneath it.

After our position had been marked on the chart, I saw that we were passing
into the mouth of the English Channel, that our heading would take us to the
northernmost seas with incomparable speed.

I could barely glimpse the swift passing of longnose sharks, hammerhead
sharks, spotted dogfish that frequent these waters, big eagle rays, swarms of
seahorse looking like knights on a chessboard, eels quivering like fireworks
serpents, armies of crab that fled obliquely by crossing their pincers over their
carapaces, finally schools of porpoise that held contests of speed with the
Nautilus. But by this point observing, studying, and classifying were out of the
question.

By evening we had cleared 200 leagues up the Atlantic. Shadows gathered
and gloom overran the sea until the moon came up.

I repaired to my stateroom. I couldn't sleep. I was assaulted by nightmares.
That horrible scene of destruction kept repeating in my mind's eye.

From that day forward, who knows where the Nautilus took us in the north
Atlantic basin? Always at incalculable speed! Always amid the High Arctic
mists! Did it call at the capes of Spitzbergen or the shores of Novaya Zemlya?
Did it visit such uncharted seas as the White Sea, the Kara Sea, the Gulf of Ob,
the Lyakhov Islands, or those unknown beaches on the Siberian coast? I'm


unable to say. I lost track of the passing hours. Time was in abeyance on the
ship's clocks. As happens in the polar regions, it seemed that night and day no
longer followed their normal sequence. I felt myself being drawn into that
strange domain where the overwrought imagination of Edgar Allan Poe was at
home. Like his fabled Arthur Gordon Pym, I expected any moment to see that
"shrouded human figure, very far larger in its proportions than any dweller
among men," thrown across the cataract that protects the outskirts of the pole!

I estimate--but perhaps I'm mistaken--that the Nautilus's haphazard course
continued for fifteen or twenty days, and I'm not sure how long this would have
gone on without the catastrophe that ended our voyage. As for Captain Nemo, he
was no longer in the picture. As for his chief officer, the same applied. Not one
crewman was visible for a single instant. The Nautilus cruised beneath the
waters almost continuously. When it rose briefly to the surface to renew our air,
the hatches opened and closed as if automated. No more positions were reported
on the world map. I didn't know where we were.

I'll also mention that the Canadian, at the end of his strength and patience,
made no further appearances. Conseil couldn't coax a single word out of him and
feared that, in a fit of delirium while under the sway of a ghastly homesickness,
Ned would kill himself. So he kept a devoted watch on his friend every instant.

You can appreciate that under these conditions, our situation had become
untenable.

One morning--whose date I'm unable to specify--I was slumbering near the
first hours of daylight, a painful, sickly slumber. Waking up, I saw Ned Land
leaning over me, and I heard him tell me in a low voice:

"We're going to escape!"

I sat up.

"When?" I asked.

"Tonight. There doesn't seem to be any supervision left on the Nautilus.
You'd think a total daze was reigning on board. Will you be ready, sir?"

"Yes. Where are we?"

"In sight of land. I saw it through the mists just this moming, twenty miles to
the east."

"What land is it?"

"T've no idea, but whatever it is, there we'll take refuge."

"Yes, Ned! We'll escape tonight even if the sea swallows us up!"

"The sea's rough, the wind's blowing hard, but a twenty-mile run in the
Nautilus's nimble longboat doesn't scare me. Unknown to the crew, I've stowed
some food and flasks of water inside."

"T'm with you."


"What's more," the Canadian added, "if they catch me, I'll defend myself, I'll
fight to the death."

"Then we'll die together, Ned my friend."

My mind was made up. The Canadian left me. I went out on the platform,
where I could barely stand upright against the jolts of the billows. The skies
were threatening, but land lay inside those dense mists, and we had to escape.
Not a single day, or even a single hour, could we afford to lose.

I returned to the lounge, dreading yet desiring an encounter with Captain
Nemo, wanting yet not wanting to see him. What would I say to him? How
could I hide the involuntary horror he inspired in me? No! It was best not to
meet him face to face! Best to try and forget him! And yet... !

How long that day seemed, the last I would spend aboard the Nautilus! I was
left to myself. Ned Land and Conseil avoided speaking to me, afraid they would
give themselves away.

At six o'clock I ate supper, but I had no appetite. Despite my revulsion, I
forced it down, wanting to keep my strength up.

At 6:30 Ned Land entered my stateroom. He told me:

"We won't see each other again before we go. At ten o'clock the moon won't
be up yet. We'll take advantage of the darkness. Come to the skiff. Conseil and I
will be inside waiting for you."

The Canadian left without giving me time to answer him.

I wanted to verify the Nautilus's heading. I made my way to the lounge. We
were racing north-northeast with frightful speed, fifty meters down.

I took one last look at the natural wonders and artistic treasures amassed in
the museum, this unrivaled collection doomed to perish someday in the depths of
the seas, together with its curator. I wanted to establish one supreme impression
in my mind. I stayed there an hour, basking in the aura of the ceiling lights,
passing in review the treasures shining in their glass cases. Then I returned to my
stateroom.

There I dressed in sturdy seafaring clothes. I gathered my notes and packed
them tenderly about my person. My heart was pounding mightily. I couldn't curb
its pulsations. My anxiety and agitation would certainly have given me away if
Captain Nemo had seen me.

What was he doing just then? I listened at the door to his stateroom. I heard
the sound of footsteps. Captain Nemo was inside. He hadn't gone to bed. With
his every movement I imagined he would appear and ask me why I wanted to
escape! I felt in a perpetual state of alarm. My imagination magnified this
sensation. The feeling became so acute, I wondered whether it wouldn't be better
to enter the captain's stateroom, dare him face to face, brave it out with word and


deed!

It was an insane idea. Fortunately I controlled myself and stretched out on
the bed to soothe my bodily agitation. My nerves calmed a little, but with my
brain so aroused, I did a swift review of my whole existence aboard the Nautilus,
every pleasant or unpleasant incident that had crossed my path since I went
overboard from the Abraham Lincoln: the underwater hunting trip, the Torres
Strait, our running aground, the savages of Papua, the coral cemetery, the Suez
passageway, the island of Santorini, the Cretan diver, the Bay of Vigo, Atlantis,
the Ice Bank, the South Pole, our imprisonment in the ice, the battle with the
devilfish, the storm in the Gulf Stream, the Avenger, and that horrible scene of
the vessel sinking with its crew... ! All these events passed before my eyes like
backdrops unrolling upstage in a theater. In this strange setting Captain Nemo
then grew fantastically. His features were accentuated, taking on superhuman
proportions. He was no longer my equal, he was the Man of the Waters, the
Spirit of the Seas.

By then it was 9:30. I held my head in both hands to keep it from bursting. I
closed my eyes. I no longer wanted to think. A half hour still to wait! A half hour
of nightmares that could drive me insane!

Just then I heard indistinct chords from the organ, melancholy harmonies
from some undefinable hymn, actual pleadings from a soul trying to sever its
earthly ties. I listened with all my senses at once, barely breathing, immersed
like Captain Nemo in this musical trance that was drawing him beyond the
bounds of this world.

Then a sudden thought terrified me. Captain Nemo had left his stateroom. He
was in the same lounge I had to cross in order to escape. There I would
encounter him one last time. He would see me, perhaps speak to me! One
gesture from him could obliterate me, a single word shackle me to his vessel!

Even so, ten o'clock was about to strike. It was time to leave my stateroom
and rejoin my companions.

I dared not hesitate, even if Captain Nemo stood before me. I opened the
door cautiously, but as it swung on its hinges, it seemed to make a frightful
noise. This noise existed, perhaps, only in my imagination!

I crept forward through the Nautilus's dark gangways, pausing after each step
to curb the pounding of my heart.

I arrived at the comer door of the lounge. I opened it gently. The lounge was
plunged in profound darkness. Chords from the organ were reverberating faintly.
Captain Nemo was there. He didn't see me. Even in broad daylight I doubt that
he would have noticed me, so completely was he immersed in his trance.

I inched over the carpet, avoiding the tiniest bump whose noise might give


me away. It took me five minutes to reach the door at the far end, which led into
the library.

I was about to open it when a gasp from Captain Nemo nailed me to the spot.
I realized that he was standing up. I even got a glimpse of him because some
rays of light from the library had filtered into the lounge. He was coming toward
me, arms crossed, silent, not walking but gliding like a ghost. His chest was
heaving, swelling with sobs. And I heard him murmur these words, the last of
his to reach my ears:

"O almighty God! Enough! Enough!"

Was it a vow of repentance that had just escaped from this man's conscience .

i)

Frantic, I rushed into the library. I climbed the central companionway, and
going along the upper gangway, I arrived at the skiff. I went through the opening
that had already given access to my two companions.

"Let's go, let's go!" I exclaimed.

"Right away!" the Canadian replied.

First, Ned Land closed and bolted the opening cut into the Nautilus's sheet
iron, using the monkey wrench he had with him. After likewise closing the
opening in the skiff, the Canadian began to unscrew the nuts still bolting us to
the underwater boat.

Suddenly a noise from the ship's interior became audible. Voices were
answering each other hurriedly. What was it? Had they spotted our escape? I felt
Ned Land sliding a dagger into my hand.

"Yes," I muttered, "we know how to die!"

The Canadian paused in his work. But one word twenty times repeated, one
dreadful word, told me the reason for the agitation spreading aboard the
Nautilus. We weren't the cause of the crew's concern.

"Maelstrom! Maelstrom!" they were shouting.

The Maelstrom! Could a more frightening name have rung in our ears under
more frightening circumstances? Were we lying in the dangerous waterways off
the Norwegian coast? Was the Nautilus being dragged into this whirlpool just as
the skiff was about to detach from its plating?

As you know, at the turn of the tide, the waters confined between the Faroe
and Lofoten Islands rush out with irresistible violence. They form a vortex from
which no ship has ever been able to escape. Monstrous waves race together from
every point of the horizon. They form a whirlpool aptly called "the ocean's
navel," whose attracting power extends a distance of fifteen kilometers. It can
suck down not only ships but whales, and even polar bears from the
northernmost regions.


This was where the Nautilus had been sent accidentally-- or perhaps
deliberately--by its captain. It was sweeping around in a spiral whose radius kept
growing smaller and smaller. The skiff, still attached to the ship's plating, was
likewise carried around at dizzying speed. I could feel us whirling. I was
experiencing that accompanying nausea that follows such continuous spinning
motions. We were in dread, in the last stages of sheer horror, our blood frozen in
our veins, our nerves numb, drenched in cold sweat as if from the throes of
dying! And what a noise around our frail skiff! What roars echoing from several
miles away! What crashes from the waters breaking against sharp rocks on the
seafloor, where the hardest objects are smashed, where tree trunks are worn
down and worked into "a shaggy fur," as Norwegians express it!

What a predicament! We were rocking frightfully. The Nautilus defended
itself like a human being. Its steel muscles were cracking. Sometimes it stood on
end, the three of us along with it!

"We've got to hold on tight," Ned said, "and screw the nuts down again! If
we Can stay attached to the Nautilus, we can still make it... !"

He hadn't finished speaking when a cracking sound occurred. The nuts gave
way, and ripped out of its socket, the skiff was hurled like a stone from a sling
into the midst of the vortex.

My head struck against an iron timber, and with this violent shock I lost
consciousness.


CHAPTER 23


Conclusion


WE COME TO the conclusion of this voyage under the seas. What happened
that night, how the skiff escaped from the Maelstrom's fearsome eddies, how
Ned Land, Conseil, and I got out of that whirlpool, I'm unable to say. But when I
regained consciousness, I was lying in a fisherman's hut on one of the Lofoten
Islands. My two companions, safe and sound, were at my bedside clasping my
hands. We embraced each other heartily.

Just now we can't even dream of returning to France. Travel between upper
Norway and the south is limited. So I have to wait for the arrival of a steamboat
that provides bimonthly service from North Cape.

So it is here, among these gallant people who have taken us in, that I'm
reviewing my narrative of these adventures. It is accurate. Not a fact has been
omitted, not a detail has been exaggerated. It's the faithful record of this
inconceivable expedition into an element now beyond human reach, but where
progress will someday make great inroads.

Will anyone believe me? I don't know. Ultimately it's unimportant. What I
can now assert is that I've earned the right to speak of these seas, beneath which
in less than ten months, I've cleared 20,000 leagues in this underwater tour of the
world that has shown me so many wonders across the Pacific, the Indian Ocean,
the Red Sea, the Mediterranean, the Atlantic, the southernmost and northernmost
seas!

But what happened to the Nautilus? Did it withstand the Maelstrom's
clutches? Is Captain Nemo alive? Is he still under the ocean pursuing his
frightful program of revenge, or did he stop after that latest mass execution? Will
the waves someday deliver that manuscript that contains his full life story? Will I
finally learn the man's name? Will the nationality of the stricken warship tell us
the nationality of Captain Nemo?

I hope so. I likewise hope that his powerful submersible has defeated the sea
inside its most dreadful whirlpool, that the Nautilus has survived where so many
ships have perished! If this is the case and Captain Nemo still inhabits the ocean-
- his adopted country--may the hate be appeased in that fierce heart! May the
contemplation of so many wonders extinguish the spirit of vengeance in him!
May the executioner pass away, and the scientist continue his peaceful
exploration of the seas! If his destiny is strange, it's also sublime. Haven't I


encompassed it myself? Didn't I lead ten months of this otherworldly existence?
Thus to that question asked 6,000 years ago in the Book of Ecclesiastes--"Who
can fathom the soundless depths?"-- two men out of all humanity have now
earned the right to reply. Captain Nemo and I.


END OF THE SECOND PART


JOURNEY TO THE CENTER OF THE EARTH
By Jules Verne


PREFACE


THE "Voyages Extraordinaires" of M. Jules Verne deserve to be made widely
known in English-speaking countries by means of carefully prepared
translations. Witty and ingenious adaptations of the researches and discoveries of
modern science to the popular taste, which demands that these should be
presented to ordinary readers in the lighter form of cleverly mingled truth and
fiction, these books will assuredly be read with profit and delight, especially by
English youth. Certainly no writer before M. Jules Verne has been so happy in
weaving together in judicious combination severe scientific truth with a
charming exercise of playful imagination.

Iceland, the starting point of the marvellous underground journey imagined
in this volume, is invested at the present time with. a painful interest in
consequence of the disastrous eruptions last Easter Day, which covered with lava
and ashes the poor and scanty vegetation upon which four thousand persons
were partly dependent for the means of subsistence. For a long time to come the
natives of that interesting island, who cleave to their desert home with all that
amor patriae which is so much more easily understood than explained, will look,
and look not in vain, for the help of those on whom fall the smiles of a kindlier


sun in regions not torn by earthquakes nor blasted and ravaged by volcanic fires.
Will the readers of this little book, who, are gifted with the means of indulging in
the luxury of extended beneficence, remember the distress of their brethren in
the far north, whom distance has not barred from the claim of being counted our
"neighbours"? And whatever their humane feelings may prompt them to bestow
will be gladly added to the Mansion-House Iceland Relief Fund.

In his desire to ascertain how far the picture of Iceland, drawn in the work of
Jules Verne is a correct one, the translator hopes in the course of a mail or two to
receive a communication from a leading man of science in the island, which may
furnish matter for additional information in a future edition.

The scientific portion of the French original is not without a few errors,
which the translator, with the kind assistance of Mr. Cameron of H. M.
Geological Survey, has ventured to point out and correct. It is scarcely to be
expected in a work in which the element of amusement is intended to enter more
largely than that of scientific instruction, that any great degree of accuracy
should be arrived at. Yet the translator hopes that what trifling deviations from
the text or corrections in foot notes he is responsible for, will have done a little
towards the increased usefulness of the work.

F. A.M.

The Vicarage,

Broughton-in-Furness


CHAPTER I.


THE PROFESSOR AND HIS FAMILY

On the 24th of May, 1863, my uncle, Professor Liedenbrock, rushed into his
little house, No. 19 K6nigstrasse, one of the oldest streets in the oldest portion of
the city of Hamburg.

Martha must have concluded that she was very much behindhand, for the
dinner had only just been put into the oven.

"Well, now," said I to myself, "if that most impatient of men is hungry, what
a disturbance he will make!"

"M. Liedenbrock so soon!" cried poor Martha in great alarm, half opening
the dining-room door.

"Yes, Martha; but very likely the dinner is not half cooked, for it is not two
yet. Saint Michael's clock has only just struck half-past one."


"Then why has the master come home so soon?"

"Perhaps he will tell us that himself."

"Here he is, Monsieur Axel; I will run and hide myself while you argue with
him."

And Martha retreated in safety into her own dominions.

I was left alone. But how was it possible for a man of my undecided turn of
mind to argue successfully with so irascible a person as the Professor? With this
persuasion I was hurrying away to my own little retreat upstairs, when the street
door creaked upon its hinges; heavy feet made the whole flight of stairs to shake;
and the master of the house, passing rapidly through the dining-room, threw
himself in haste into his own sanctum.

But on his rapid way he had found time to fling his hazel stick into a corner,
his rough broadbrim upon the table, and these few emphatic words at his
nephew:

"Axel, follow me!"

I had scarcely had time to move when the Professor was again shouting after
me:

"What! not come yet?"

And I rushed into my redoubtable master's study.

Otto Liedenbrock had no mischief in him, I willingly allow that; but unless
he very considerably changes as he grows older, at the end he will be a most
original character.

He was professor at the Johanneum, and was delivering a series of lectures
on mineralogy, in the course of every one of which he broke into a passion once
or twice at least. Not at all that he was over-anxious about the improvement of
his class, or about the degree of attention with which they listened to him, or the
success which might eventually crown his labours. Such little matters of detail
never troubled him much. His teaching was as the German philosophy calls it,
‘subjective’; it was to benefit himself, not others. He was a learned egotist. He
was a well of science, and the pulleys worked uneasily when you wanted to draw
anything out of it. In a word, he was a learned miser.

Germany has not a few professors of this sort.

To his misfortune, my uncle was not gifted with a sufficiently rapid
utterance; not, to be sure, when he was talking at home, but certainly in his
public delivery; this is a want much to be deplored in a speaker. The fact is, that
during the course of his lectures at the Johanneum, the Professor often came to a
complete standstill; he fought with wilful words that refused to pass his
struggling lips, such words as resist and distend the cheeks, and at last break out
into the unasked-for shape of a round and most unscientific oath: then his fury


would gradually abate.

Now in mineralogy there are many half-Greek and half-Latin terms, very
hard to articulate, and which would be most trying to a poet's measures. I don't
wish to say a word against so respectable a science, far be that from me. True, in
the august presence of rhombohedral crystals, retinasphaltic resins, gehlenites,
Fassaites, molybdenites, tungstates of manganese, and titanite of zirconium,
why, the most facile of tongues may make a slip now and then.

It therefore happened that this venial fault of my uncle's came to be pretty
well understood in time, and an unfair advantage was taken of it; the students
laid wait for him in dangerous places, and when he began to stumble, loud was
the laughter, which is not in good taste, not even in Germans. And if there was
always a full audience to honour the Liedenbrock courses, I should be sorry to
conjecture how many came to make merry at my uncle's expense.

Nevertheless my good uncle was a man of deep learning - a fact I am most
anxious to assert and reassert. Sometimes he might irretrievably injure a
specimen by his too great ardour in handling it; but still he united the genius of a
true geologist with the keen eye of the mineralogist. Armed with his hammer, his
steel pointer, his magnetic needles, his blowpipe, and his bottle of nitric acid, he
was a powerful man of science. He would refer any mineral to its proper place
among the six hundred [l] elementary substances now enumerated, by its
fracture, its appearance, its hardness, its fusibility, its sonorousness, its smell,
and its taste.

The name of Liedenbrock was honourably mentioned in colleges and learned
societies. Humphry Davy, [2] Humboldt, Captain Sir John Franklin, General
Sabine, never failed to call upon him on their way through Hamburg. Becquerel,
Ebelman, Brewster, Dumas, Milne-Edwards, Saint-Claire-Deville frequently
consulted him upon the most difficult problems in chemistry, a science which
was indebted to him for considerable discoveries, for in 1853 there had appeared
at Leipzig an imposing folio by Otto Liedenbrock, entitled, "A Treatise upon
Transcendental Chemistry," with plates; a work, however, which failed to cover
its expenses.

To all these titles to honour let me add that my uncle was the curator of the
museum of mineralogy formed by M. Struve, the Russian ambassador; a most
valuable collection, the fame of which is European.

Such was the gentleman who addressed me in that impetuous manner. Fancy
a tall, spare man, of an iron constitution, and with a fair complexion which took
off a good ten years from the fifty he must own to. His restless eyes were in
incessant motion behind his full-sized spectacles. His long, thin nose was like a
knife blade. Boys have been heard to remark that that organ was magnetised and


attracted iron filings. But this was merely a mischievous report; it had no
attraction except for snuff, which it seemed to draw to itself in great quantities.

When I have added, to complete my portrait, that my uncle walked by
mathematical strides of a yard and a half, and that in walking he kept his fists
firmly closed, a sure sign of an irritable temperament, I think I shall have said
enough to disenchant any one who should by mistake have coveted much of his
company.

He lived in his own little house in K6nigstrasse, a structure half brick and
half wood, with a gable cut into steps; it looked upon one of those winding
canals which intersect each other in the middle of the ancient quarter of
Hamburg, and which the great fire of 1842 had fortunately spared.

[1] Sixty-three. (Tr.)

[2] As Sir Humphry Davy died in 1829, the translator must be pardoned for
pointing out here an anachronism, unless we are to assume that the learned
Professor's celebrity dawned in his earliest years. (Tr.)

It is true that the old house stood slightly off the perpendicular, and bulged
out a little towards the street; its roof sloped a little to one side, like the cap over
the left ear of a Tugendbund student; its lines wanted accuracy; but after all, it
stood firm, thanks to an old elm which buttressed it in front, and which often in
spring sent its young sprays through the window panes.

My uncle was tolerably well off for a German professor. The house was his
own, and everything in it. The living contents were his god-daughter Grduben, a
young Virlandaise of seventeen, Martha, and myself. As his nephew and an
orphan, I became his laboratory assistant.

I freely confess that I was exceedingly fond of geology and all its kindred
sciences; the blood of a mineralogist was in my veins, and in the midst of my
specimens I was always happy.

In a word, a man might live happily enough in the little old house in the
KOnigstrasse, in spite of the restless impatience of its master, for although he
was a little too excitable - he was very fond of me. But the man had no notion
how to wait; nature herself was too slow for him. In April, after a had planted in
the terra-cotta pots outside his window seedling plants of mignonette and
convolvulus, he would go and give them a little pull by their leaves to make
them grow faster. In dealing with such a strange individual there was nothing for
it but prompt obedience. I therefore rushed after him.


CHAPTER IL.


A MYSTERY TO BE SOLVED AT ANY PRICE

That study of his was a museum, and nothing else. Specimens of everything
known in mineralogy lay there in their places in perfect order, and correctly
named, divided into inflammable, metallic, and lithoid minerals.

How well I knew all these bits of science! Many a time, instead of enjoying
the company of lads of my own age, I had preferred dusting these graphites,
anthracites, coals, lignites, and peats! And there were bitumens, resins, organic
salts, to be protected from the least grain of dust; and metals, from iron to gold,
metals whose current value altogether disappeared in the presence of the
republican equality of scientific specimens; and stones too, enough to rebuild
entirely the house in K6nigstrasse, even with a handsome additional room,
which would have suited me admirably.

But on entering this study now I thought of none of all these wonders; my
uncle alone filled my thoughts. He had thrown himself into a velvet easy-chair,
and was grasping between his hands a book over which he bent, pondering with
intense admiration.

"Here's a remarkable book! What a wonderful book!" he was exclaiming.

These ejaculations brought to my mind the fact that my uncle was liable to
occasional fits of bibliomania; but no old book had any value in his eyes unless
it had the virtue of being nowhere else to be found, or, at any rate, of being
illegible.

"Well, now; don't you see it yet? Why I have got a priceless treasure, that I
found his morning, in rummaging in old Hevelius's shop, the Jew."

"Magnificent!" I replied, with a good imitation of enthusiasm.

What was the good of all this fuss about an old quarto, bound in rough calf, a
yellow, faded volume, with a ragged seal depending from it?

But for all that there was no lull yet in the admiring exclamations of the
Professor.

"See," he went on, both asking the questions and supplying the answers.
"Isn't it a beauty? Yes; splendid! Did you ever see such a binding? Doesn't the
book open easily? Yes; it stops open anywhere. But does it shut equally well?
Yes; for the binding and the leaves are flush, all in a straight line, and no gaps or
openings anywhere. And look at its back, after seven hundred years. Why,
Bozerian, Closs, or Purgold might have been proud of such a binding!"


While rapidly making these comments my uncle kept opening and shutting
the old tome. I really could do no less than ask a question about its contents,
although I did not feel the slightest interest.

"And what is the title of this marvellous work?" I asked with an affected
eagerness which he must have been very blind not to see through.

"This work," replied my uncle, firing up with renewed enthusiasm, "this
work is the Heims Kringla of Snorre Turlleson, the most famous Icelandic author
of the twelfth century! It is the chronicle of the Norwegian princes who ruled in
Iceland."

"Indeed;" I cried, keeping up wonderfully, "of course it is a German
translation?"

"What!" sharply replied the Professor, "a translation! What should I do with
a translation? This is the Icelandic original, in the magnificent idiomatic
vernacular, which is both rich and simple, and admits of an infinite variety of
grammatical combinations and verbal modifications."

"Like German." I happily ventured.

"Yes." replied my uncle, shrugging his shoulders; "but, in addition to all this,
the Icelandic has three numbers like the Greek, and irregular declensions of
nouns proper like the Latin."

"Ah!" said I, a little moved out of my indifference; "and is the type good?"

"Type! What do you mean by talking of type, wretched Axel? Type! Do you
take it for a printed book, you ignorant fool? It is a manuscript, a Runic
manuscript."

"Runic?"

"Yes. Do you want me to explain what that is?"

"Of course not," I replied in the tone of an injured man. But my uncle
persevered, and told me, against my will, of many things I cared nothing about.

"Runic characters were in use in Iceland in former ages. They were invented,
it is said, by Odin himself. Look there, and wonder, impious young man, and
admire these letters, the invention of the Scandinavian god!"

Well, well! not knowing what to say, I was going to prostrate myself before
this wonderful book, a way of answering equally pleasing to gods and kings, and
which has the advantage of never giving them any embarrassment, when a little
incident happened to divert conversation into another channel.

This was the appearance of a dirty slip of parchment, which slipped out of
the volume and fell upon the floor.

My uncle pounced upon this shred with incredible avidity. An old document,
enclosed an immemorial time within the folds of this old book, had for him an
immeasurable value.


"What's this?" he cried.

And he laid out upon the table a piece of parchment, five inches by three,
and along which were traced certain mysterious characters.

Here is the exact facsimile. I think it important to let these strange signs be
publicly known, for they were the means of drawing on Professor Liedenbrock
and his nephew to undertake the most wonderful expedition of the nineteenth
century.

[Runic glyphs occur here]

The Professor mused a few moments over this series of characters; then
raising his spectacles he pronounced:

"These are Runic letters; they are exactly like those of the manuscript of
Snorre Turlleson. But, what on earth is their meaning?"

Runic letters appearing to my mind to be an invention of the learned to
mystify this poor world, I was not sorry to see my uncle suffering the pangs of
mystification. At least, so it seemed to me, judging from his fingers, which were
beginning to work with terrible energy.

"It is certainly old Icelandic," he muttered between his teeth.

And Professor Liedenbrock must have known, for he was acknowledged to
be quite a polyglot. Not that he could speak fluently in the two thousand
languages and twelve thousand dialects which are spoken on the earth, but he
knew at least his share of them.

So he was going, in the presence of this difficulty, to give way to all the
impetuosity of his character, and I was preparing for a violent outbreak, when
two o'clock struck by the little timepiece over the fireplace.

At that moment our good housekeeper Martha opened the study door, saying:

"Dinner is ready!"

I am afraid he sent that soup to where it would boil away to nothing, and
Martha took to her heels for safety. I followed her, and hardly knowing how I got
there I found myself seated in my usual place.

I waited a few minutes. No Professor came. Never within my remembrance
had he missed the important ceremonial of dinner. And yet what a good dinner it
was! There was parsley soup, an omelette of ham garnished with spiced sorrel, a
fillet of veal with compote of prunes; for dessert, crystallised fruit; the whole
washed down with sweet Moselle.

All this my uncle was going to sacrifice to a bit of old parchment. As an
affectionate and attentive nephew I considered it my duty to eat for him as well
as for myself, which I did conscientiously.

"I have never known such a thing," said Martha. "M. Liedenbrock is not at
table!"


"Who could have believed it?" I said, with my mouth full.

"Something serious is going to happen," said the servant, shaking her head.

My opinion was, that nothing more serious would happen than an awful
scene when my uncle should have discovered that his dinner was devoured. I had
come to the last of the fruit when a very loud voice tore me away from the
pleasures of my dessert. With one spring I bounded out of the dining-room into
the study.


CHAPTER MU.


THE RUNIC WRITING EXERCISES THE PROFESSOR

"Undoubtedly it is Runic," said the Professor, bending his brows; "but there
is a secret in it, and I mean to discover the key."

A violent gesture finished the sentence.

"Sit there," he added, holding out his fist towards the table. "Sit there, and
write.”

I was seated in a trice.

"Now I will dictate to you every letter of our alphabet which corresponds
with each of these Icelandic characters. We will see what that will give us. But,
by St. Michael, if you should dare to deceive me -"

The dictation commenced. I did my best. Every letter was given me one after
the other, with the following remarkable result:

mm.rmlls esrevel seecIde sgtssmf vnteief niedrke kt,samn atrateS saodrm
emtnael nvaect rrilSa Atsaar .nvcrc ieaabs ccrmi eevtV! frAntv dt,iac oseibo
Kediil

[Redactor: In the original version the initial letter is an 'm' with a superscore
over it. It is my supposition that this is the translator's way of writing 'mm' and I
have replaced it accordingly, since our typography does not allow such a
character. |

When this work was ended my uncle tore the paper from me and examined it
attentively for a long time.

"What does it all mean?" he kept repeating mechanically.

Upon my honour I could not have enlightened him. Besides he did not ask


me, and he went on talking to himself.

"This is what is called a cryptogram, or cipher," he said, "in which letters are
purposely thrown in confusion, which if properly arranged would reveal their
sense. Only think that under this jargon there may lie concealed the clue to some
great discovery!"

As for me, I was of opinion that there was nothing at all, in it; though, of
course, I took care not to say so.

Then the Professor took the book and the parchment, and diligently
compared them together.

"These two writings are not by the same hand," he said; "the cipher is of later
date than the book, an undoubted proof of which I see in a moment. The first
letter is a double m, a letter which is not to be found in Turlleson's book, and
which was only added to the alphabet in the fourteenth century. Therefore there
are two hundred years between the manuscript and the document."

I admitted that this was a strictly logical conclusion.

"I am therefore led to imagine," continued my uncle, "that some possessor of
this book wrote these mysterious letters. But who was that possessor? Is his
name nowhere to be found in the manuscript?"

My uncle raised his spectacles, took up a strong lens, and carefully examined
the blank pages of the book. On the front of the second, the title-page, he noticed
a sort of stain which looked like an ink blot. But in looking at it very closely he
thought he could distinguish some half-effaced letters. My uncle at once fastened
upon this as the centre of interest, and he laboured at that blot, until by the help
of his microscope he ended by making out the following Runic characters which
he read without difficulty.

"Arne Saknussemm!" he cried in triumph. "Why that is the name of another
Icelander, a savant of the sixteenth century, a celebrated alchemist!"

I gazed at my uncle with satisfactory admiration.

"Those alchemists," he resumed, "Avicenna, Bacon, Lully, Paracelsus, were
the real and only savants of their time. They made discoveries at which we are
astonished. Has not this Saknussemm concealed under his cryptogram some
surprising invention? It is so; it must be so!"

The Professor's imagination took fire at this hypothesis.

"No doubt," I ventured to reply, "but what interest would he have in thus
hiding so marvellous a discovery?"

"Why? Why? How can I tell? Did not Galileo do the same by Saturn? We
shall see. I will get at the secret of this document, and I will neither sleep nor eat
until I have found it out."

My comment on this was a half-suppressed "Oh!"


"Nor you either, Axel," he added.

"The deuce!" said I to myself; "then it is lucky I have eaten two dinners to-
day!"

"First of all we must find out the key to this cipher; that cannot be difficult."

At these words I quickly raised my head; but my uncle went on soliloquising.

"There's nothing easier. In this document there are a hundred and thirty-two
letters, viz., seventy-seven consonants and fifty-five vowels. This is the
proportion found in southern languages, whilst northern tongues are much richer
in consonants; therefore this is in a southern language."

These were very fair conclusions, I thought.

"But what language is it?”

Here I looked for a display of learning, but I met instead with profound
analysis.

"This Saknussemm," he went on, "was a very well-informed man; now since
he was not writing in his own mother tongue, he would naturally select that
which was currently adopted by the choice spirits of the sixteenth century; I
mean Latin. If I am mistaken, I can but try Spanish, French, Italian, Greek, or
Hebrew. But the savants of the sixteenth century generally wrote in Latin. I am
therefore entitled to pronounce this, a priori, to be Latin. It is Latin."

I jumped up in my chair. My Latin memories rose in revolt against the notion
that these barbarous words could belong to the sweet language of Virgil.

"Yes, it is Latin,” my uncle went on; "but it is Latin confused and in disorder;
"pertubata seu inordinata," as Euclid has it."

"Very well,” thought I, "if you can bring order out of that confusion, my dear
uncle, you are a clever man."

"Let us examine carefully," said he again, taking up the leaf upon which I
had written. "Here is a series of one hundred and thirty-two letters in apparent
disorder. There are words consisting of consonants only, as nrrils; others, on the
other hand, in which vowels predominate, as for instance the fifth, uneeief, or the
last but one, oseibo. Now this arrangement has evidently not been premeditated;
it has arisen mathematically in obedience to the unknown law which has ruled in
the succession of these letters. It appears to me a certainty that the original
sentence was written in a proper manner, and afterwards distorted by a law
which we have yet to discover. Whoever possesses the key of this cipher will
read it with fluency. What is that key? Axel, have you got it?"

I answered not a word, and for a very good reason. My eyes had fallen upon
a charming picture, suspended against the wall, the portrait of Grduben. My
uncle's ward was at that time at Altona, staying with a relation, and in her
absence I was very downhearted; for I may confess it to you now, the pretty


Virlandaise and the professor's nephew loved each other with a patience and a
calmness entirely German. We had become engaged unknown to my uncle, who
was too much taken up with geology to be able to enter into such feelings as
ours. Grduben was a lovely blue-eyed blonde, rather given to gravity and
seriousness; but that did not prevent her from loving me very sincerely. As for
me, I adored her, if there is such a word in the German language. Thus it
happened that the picture of my pretty Virlandaise threw me in a moment out of
the world of realities into that of memory and fancy.

There looked down upon me the faithful companion of my labours and my
recreations. Every day she helped me to arrange my uncle's precious specimens;
she and I labelled them together. Mademoiselle Grauben was an accomplished
mineralogist; she could have taught a few things to a savant. She was fond of
investigating abstruse scientific questions. What pleasant hours we have spent in
study; and how often I envied the very stones which she handled with her
charming fingers.

Then, when our leisure hours came, we used to go out together and turn into
the shady avenues by the Alster, and went happily side by side up to the old
windmill, which forms such an improvement to the landscape at the head of the
lake. On the road we chatted hand in hand; I told her amusing tales at which she
laughed heartilv. Then we reached the banks of the Elbe, and after having bid
good-bye to the swan, sailing gracefully amidst the white water lilies, we
returned to the quay by the steamer.

That is just where I was in my dream, when my uncle with a vehement
thump on the table dragged me back to the realities of life.

"Come," said he, "the very first idea which would come into any one's head
to confuse the letters of a sentence would be to write the words vertically instead
of horizontally."

"Indeed!" said I.

"Now we must see what would be the effect of that, Axel; put down upon
this paper any sentence you like, only instead of arranging the letters in the usual
way, one after the other, place them in succession in vertical columns, so as to
group them together in five or six vertical lines."

I caught his meaning, and immediately produced the following literary
wonder:

Iyloaulolwrbou,nGevwmdrneeyea!

"Good," said the professor, without reading them, "now set down those
words in a horizontal line."

I obeyed, and with this result:

Tyloau lolwrb ou,nGe vwmdrn eeyea!


"Excellent!" said my uncle, taking the paper hastily out of my hands. "This
begins to look just like an ancient document: the vowels and the consonants are
grouped together in equal disorder; there are even capitals in the middle of
words, and commas too, just as in Saknussemm's parchment."

I considered these remarks very clever.

"Now," said my uncle, looking straight at me, "to read the sentence which
you have just written, and with which I am wholly unacquainted, I shall only
have to take the first letter of each word, then the second, the third, and so forth."

And my uncle, to his great astonishment, and my much greater, read:

"IT love you well, my own dear Grauben!"

"Hallo!" cried the Professor.

Yes, indeed, without knowing what I was about, like an awkward and
unlucky lover, I had compromised myself by writing this unfortunate sentence.

"Aha! you are in love with Gréuben?" he said, with the right look for a
guardian.

"Yes; no!" I stammered.

"You love Grduben," he went on once or twice dreamily. "Well, let us apply
the process I have suggested to the document in question."

My uncle, falling back into his absorbing contemplations, had already
forgotten my imprudent words. I merely say imprudent, for the great mind of so
learned a man of course had no place for love affairs, and happily the grand
business of the document gained me the victory.

Just as the moment of the supreme experiment arrived the Professor's eyes
flashed right through his spectacles. There was a quivering in his fingers as he
grasped the old parchment. He was deeply moved. At last he gave a preliminary
cough, and with profound gravity, naming in succession the first, then the second
letter of each word, he dictated me the following:

mmessvnkaSenrA.icefdoK.segnittamvrtn
ecertserrette,rotaisadva,ednecsedsadne lacartniiilvlsiratracS arbmvtabiledmek
meretarcsilvcolsleffenSnl.

I confess I felt considerably excited in coming to the end; these letters
named, one at a time, had carried no sense to my mind; I therefore waited for the
Professor with great pomp to unfold the magnificent but hidden Latin of this
mysterious phrase.

But who could have foretold the result? A violent thump made the furniture
rattle, and spilt some ink, and my pen dropped from between my fingers.

"That's not it," cried my uncle, "there's no sense in it."

Then darting out like a shot, bowling down stairs like an avalanche, he
rushed into the K6nigstrasse and fled.


CHAPTER IV.


THE ENEMY TO BE STARVED INTO SUBMISSION

"He is gone!" cried Martha, running out of her kitchen at the noise of the
violent slamming of doors.

"Yes," I replied, "completely gone."

"Well; and how about his dinner?" said the old servant.

"He won't have any.”

"And his supper?"

"He won't have any."

"What?" cried Martha, with clasped hands.

"No, my dear Martha, he will eat no more. No one in the house is to eat
anything at all. Uncle Liedenbrock is going to make us all fast until he has
succeeded in deciphering an undecipherable scrawl."

"Oh, my dear! must we then all die of hunger?"

I hardly dared to confess that, with so absolute a ruler as my uncle, this fate
was inevitable.

The old servant, visibly moved, returned to the kitchen, moaning piteously.

When I was alone, I thought I would go and tell Grauben all about it. But
how should I be able to escape from the house? The Professor might return at
any moment. And suppose he called me? And suppose he tackled me again with
this logomachy, which might vainly have been set before ancient Oedipus. And
if I did not obey his call, who could answer for what might happen?

The wisest course was to remain where I was. A mineralogist at Besancon
had just sent us a collection of siliceous nodules, which I had to classify: so I set
to work; I sorted, labelled, and arranged in their own glass case all these hollow
specimens, in the cavity of each of which was a nest of little crystals.

But this work did not succeed in absorbing all my attention. That old
document kept working in my brain. My head throbbed with excitement, and I
felt an undefined uneasiness. I was possessed with a presentiment of coming
evil.

In an hour my nodules were all arranged upon successive shelves. Then I


dropped down into the old velvet armchair, my head thrown back and my hands
joined over it. I lighted my long crooked pipe, with a painting on it of an idle-
looking naiad; then I amused myself watching the process of the conversion of
the tobacco into carbon, which was by slow degrees making my naiad into a
negress. Now and then I listened to hear whether a well-known step was on the
stairs. No. Where could my uncle be at that moment? I fancied him running
under the noble trees which line the road to Altona, gesticulating, making shots
with his cane, thrashing the long grass, cutting the heads off the thistles, and
disturbing the contemplative storks in their peaceful solitude.

Would he return in triumph or in discouragement? Which would get the
upper hand, he or the secret? I was thus asking myself questions, and
mechanically taking between my fingers the sheet of paper mysteriously
disfigured with the incomprehensible succession of letters I had written down;
and I repeated to myself "What does it all mean?"

I sought to group the letters so as to form words. Quite impossible! When I
put them together by twos, threes, fives or sixes, nothing came of it but
nonsense. To be sure the fourteenth, fifteenth and sixteenth letters made the
English word ‘ice’; the eighty-third and two following made 'sir'; and in the midst
of the document, in the second and third lines, I observed the words, "rots,"
"mutabile," "ira," "net," "atra."

"Come now," I thought, "these words seem to justify my uncle's view about
the language of the document. In the fourth line appeared the word "luco", which
means a sacred wood. It is true that in the third line was the word "tabiled",
which looked like Hebrew, and in the last the purely French words "mer", "arc",
"mere." "

All this was enough to drive a poor fellow crazy. Four different languages in
this ridiculous sentence! What connection could there possibly be between such
words as ice, sir, anger, cruel, sacred wood, changeable, mother, bow, and sea?
The first and the last might have something to do with each other; it was not at
all surprising that in a document written in Iceland there should be mention of a
sea of ice; but it was quite another thing to get to the end of this cryptogram with
so small a clue. So I was struggling with an insurmountable difficulty; my brain
got heated, my eyes watered over that sheet of paper; its hundred and thirty-two
letters seemed to flutter and fly around me like those motes of mingled light and
darkness which float in the air around the head when the blood is rushing
upwards with undue violence. I was a prey to a kind of hallucination; I was
stifling; I wanted air. Unconsciously I fanned myself with the bit of paper, the
back and front of which successively came before my eyes. What was my
surprise when, in one of those rapid revolutions, at the moment when the back


was turned to me I thought I caught sight of the Latin words "craterem,"
"terrestre," and others.

A sudden light burst in upon me; these hints alone gave me the first glimpse
of the truth; I had discovered the key to the cipher. To read the document, it
would not even be necessary to read it through the paper. Such as it was, just
such as it had been dictated to me, so it might be spelt out with ease. All those
ingenious professorial combinations were coming right. He was right as to the
arrangement of the letters; he was right as to the language. He had been within a
hair's breadth of reading this Latin document from end to end; but that hair's
breadth, chance had given it to me!

You may be sure I felt stirred up. My eyes were dim, I could scarcely see. I
had laid the paper upon the table. At a glance I could tell the whole secret.

At last I became more calm. I made a wise resolve to walk twice round the
room quietly and settle my nerves, and then I returned into the deep gulf of the
huge armchair.

"Now I'll read it," I cried, after having well distended my lungs with air.

I leaned over the table; I laid my finger successively upon every letter; and
without a pause, without one moment's hesitation, I read off the whole sentence
aloud.

Stupefaction! terror! I sat overwhelmed as if with a sudden deadly blow.
What! that which I read had actually, really been done! A mortal man had had
the audacity to penetrate! ...

"Ah!" I cried, springing up. "But no! no! My uncle shall never know it. He
would insist upon doing it too. He would want to know all about it. Ropes could
not hold him, such a determined geologist as he is! He would start, he would, in
spite of everything and everybody, and he would take me with him, and we
should never get back. No, never! never!"

My over-excitement was beyond all description.

"No! no! it shall not be," I declared energetically; "and as it is in my power to
prevent the knowledge of it coming into the mind of my tyrant, I will do it. By
dint of turning this document round and round, he too might discover the key. I
will destroy it."

There was a little fire left on the hearth. I seized not only the paper but
Saknussemm's parchment; with a feverish hand I was about to fling it all upon
the coals and utterly destroy and abolish this dangerous secret, when the, study
door opened, and my uncle appeared.


CHAPTER V.


FAMINE, THEN VICTORY, FOLLOWED BY DISMAY

I had only just time to replace the unfortunate document upon the table.

Professor Liedenbrock seemed to be greatly abstracted.

The ruling thought gave him no rest. Evidently he had gone deeply into the
matter, analytically and with profound scrutiny. He had brought all the resources
of his mind to bear upon it during his walk, and he had come back to apply some
new combination.

He sat in his armchair, and pen in hand he began what looked very much like
algebraic formula: I followed with my eyes his trembling hands, I took count of
every movement. Might not some unhoped-for result come of it? I trembled, too,
very unnecessarily, since the true key was in my hands, and no other would open
the secret.

For three long hours my uncle worked on without a word, without lifting his
head; rubbing out, beginning again, then rubbing out again, and so on a hundred
times.

I knew very well that if he succeeded in setting down these letters in every
possible relative position, the sentence would come out. But I knew also that
twenty letters alone could form two quintillions, four hundred and thirty-two
quadrillions, nine hundred and two trillions, eight billions, a hundred and
seventy-six millions, six hundred and forty thousand combinations. Now, here
were a hundred and thirty-two letters in this sentence, and these hundred and
thirty-two letters would give a number of different sentences, each made up of at
least a hundred and thirty-three figures, a number which passed far beyond all
calculation or conception.

So I felt reassured as far as regarded this heroic method of solving the
difficulty.

But time was passing away; night came on; the street noises ceased; my
uncle, bending over his task, noticed nothing, not even Martha half opening the
door; he heard not a sound, not even that excellent woman saying:

"Will not monsieur take any supper tonight?"

And poor Martha had to go away unanswered. As for me, after long
resistance, I was overcome by sleep, and fell off at the end of the sofa, while
uncle Liedenbrock went on calculating and rubbing out his calculations.


When I awoke next morning that indefatigable worker was still at his post.
His red eyes, his pale complexion, his hair tangled between his feverish fingers,
the red spots on his cheeks, revealed his desperate struggle with impossibilities,
and the weariness of spirit, the mental wrestlings he must have undergone all
through that unhappy night.

To tell the plain truth, I pitied him. In spite of the reproaches which I
considered I had a right to lay upon him, a certain feeling of compassion was
beginning to gain upon me. The poor man was so entirely taken up with his one
idea that he had even forgotten how to get angry. All the strength of his feelings
was concentrated upon one point alone; and as their usual vent was closed, it
was to be feared lest extreme tension should give rise to an explosion sooner or
later.

I might with a word have loosened the screw of the steel vice that was
crushing his brain; but that word I would not speak.

Yet I was not an ill-natured fellow. Why was I dumb at such a crisis? Why so
insensible to my uncle's interests?

"No, no," I repeated, "I shall not speak. He would insist upon going; nothing
on earth could stop him. His imagination is a volcano, and to do that which other
geologists have never done he would risk his life. I will preserve silence. I will
keep the secret which mere chance has revealed to me. To discover it, would be
to kill Professor Liedenbrock! Let him find it out himself if he can. I will never
have it laid to my door that I led him to his destruction."

Having formed this resolution, I folded my arms and waited. But I had not
reckoned upon one little incident which turned up a few hours after.

When our good Martha wanted to go to Market, she found the door locked.
The big key was gone. Who could have taken it out? Assuredly, it was my uncle,
when he returned the night before from his hurried walk.

Was this done on purpose? Or was it a mistake? Did he want to reduce us by
famine? This seemed like going rather too far! What! should Martha and I be
victims of a position of things in which we had not the smallest interest? It was a
fact that a few years before this, whilst my uncle was working at his great
classification of minerals, he was forty-eight hours without eating, and all his
household were obliged to share in this scientific fast. As for me, what I
remember is, that I got severe cramps in my stomach, which hardly suited the
constitution of a hungry, growing lad.

Now it appeared to me as if breakfast was going to be wanting, just as supper
had been the night before. Yet I resolved to be a hero, and not to be conquered
by the pangs of hunger. Martha took it very seriously, and, poor woman, was
very much distressed. As for me, the impossibility of leaving the house


distressed me a good deal more, and for a very good reason. A caged lover's
feelings may easily be imagined.

My uncle went on working, his imagination went off rambling into the ideal
world of combinations; he was far away from earth, and really far away from
earthly wants.

About noon hunger began to stimulate me severely. Martha had, without
thinking any harm, cleared out the larder the night before, so that now there was
nothing left in the house. Still I held out; I made it a point of honour.

Two o'clock struck. This was becoming ridiculous; worse than that,
unbearable. I began to say to myself that I was exaggerating the importance of
the document; that my uncle would surely not believe in it, that he would set it
down as a mere puzzle; that if it came to the worst, we should lay violent hands
on him and keep him at home if he thought on venturing on the expedition that,
after all, he might himself discover the key of the cipher, and that then I should
be clear at the mere expense of my involuntary abstinence.

These reasons seemed excellent to me, though on the night before I should
have rejected them with indignation; I even went so far as to condemn myself for
my absurdity in having waited so long, and I finally resolved to let it all out.

I was therefore meditating a proper introduction to the matter, so as not to
seem too abrupt, when the Professor jumped up, clapped on his hat, and prepared
to go out.

Surely he was not going out, to shut us in again! no, never!

"Uncle!" I cried.

He seemed not to hear me.

"Uncle Liedenbrock!" I cried, lifting up my voice.

"Ay," he answered like a man suddenly waking.

"Uncle, that key!"

"What key? The door key?"

"No, no!" I cried. "The key of the document."

The Professor stared at me over his spectacles; no doubt he saw something
unusual in the expression of my countenance; for he laid hold of my arm, and
speechlessly questioned me with his eyes. Yes, never was a question more
forcibly put.

I nodded my head up and down.

He shook his pityingly, as if he was dealing with a lunatic. I gave a more
affirmative gesture.

His eyes glistened and sparkled with live fire, his hand was shaken
threateningly.

This mute conversation at such a momentous crisis would have riveted the


attention of the most indifferent. And the fact really was that I dared not speak
now, so intense was the excitement for fear lest my uncle should smother me in
his first joyful embraces. But he became so urgent that I was at last compelled to
answer.

"Yes, that key, chance -"

"What is that you are saying?" he shouted with indescribable emotion.

"There, read that!" I said, presenting a sheet of paper on which I had written.

"But there is nothing in this," he answered, crumpling up the paper.

"No, nothing until you proceed to read from the end to the beginning."

I had not finished my sentence when the Professor broke out into a cry, nay, a
roar. A new revelation burst in upon him. He was transformed!

"Aha, clever Saknussemm!" he cried. "You had first written out your
sentence the wrong way."

And darting upon the paper, with eyes bedimmed, and voice choked with
emotion, he read the whole document from the last letter to the first.

It was conceived in the following terms:

In Sneffels Joculis craterem quem delibat Umbra Scartaris Julii intra
calendas descende, Audax viator, et terrestre centrum attinges. Quod feci, Arne
Saknussemm. [1]

Which bad Latin may be translated thus:

"Descend, bold traveller, into the crater of the jokul of Sneffels, which the
shadow of Scartaris touches before the kalends of July, and you will attain the
centre of the earth; which I have done, Arne Saknussemm."

In reading this, my uncle gave a spring as if he had touched a Leyden jar. His
audacity, his joy, and his convictions were magnificent to behold. He came and
he went; he seized his head between both his hands; he pushed the chairs out of
their places, he piled up his books; incredible as it may seem, he rattled his
precious nodules of flints together; he sent a kick here, a thump there. At last his
nerves calmed down, and like a man exhausted by too lavish an expenditure of
vital power, he sank back exhausted into his armchair.

"What o'clock is it?" he asked after a few moments of silence.

"Three o'clock," I replied.

"Is it really? The dinner-hour is past, and I did not know it. I am half dead
with hunger. Come on, and after dinner -"

[1] In the cipher, audax is written avdas, and quod and quem, hod and ken.
(Tr.)

"Well?"

"After dinner, pack up my trunk."

"What?" I cried.


"And yours!" replied the indefatigable Professor, entering the dining-room.


CHAPTER VI.


EXCITING DISCUSSIONS ABOUT AN UNPARALLELED
ENTERPRISE

At these words a cold shiver ran through me. Yet I controlled myself; I even
resolved to put a good face upon it. Scientific arguments alone could have any
weight with Professor Liedenbrock. Now there were good ones against the
practicability of such a journey. Penetrate to the centre of the earth! What
nonsense! But I kept my dialectic battery in reserve for a suitable opportunity,
and I interested myself in the prospect of my dinner, which was not yet
forthcoming.

It is no use to tell of the rage and imprecations of my uncle before the empty
table. Explanations were given, Martha was set at liberty, ran off to the market,
and did her part so well that in an hour afterwards my hunger was appeased, and
I was able to return to the contemplation of the gravity of the situation.

During all dinner time my uncle was almost merry; he indulged in some of
those learned jokes which never do anybody any harm. Dessert over, he
beckoned me into his study.

I obeyed; he sat at one end of his table, I at the other.


"Axel," said he very mildly; "you are a very ingenious young man, you have
done me a splendid service, at a moment when, wearied out with the struggle, I
was going to abandon the contest. Where should I have lost myself? None can
tell. Never, my lad, shall I forget it; and you shall have your share in the glory to
which your discovery will lead."

"Oh, come!" thought I, "he is in a good way. Now is the time for discussing
that same glory."

"Before all things," my uncle resumed, "I enjoin you to preserve the most
inviolable secrecy: you understand? There are not a few in the scientific world
who envy my success, and many would be ready to undertake this enterprise, to
whom our return should be the first news of it."

"Do you really think there are many people bold enough?" said I.

"Certainly; who would hesitate to acquire such renown? If that document
were divulged, a whole army of geologists would be ready to rush into the
footsteps of Arne Saknussemm."

"I don't feel so very sure of that, uncle," I replied; "for we have no proof of
the authenticity of this document."

"What! not of the book, inside which we have discovered it?"

"Granted. I admit that Saknussemm may have written these lines. But does it
follow that he has really accomplished such a journey? And may it not be that
this old parchment is intended to mislead?"

I almost regretted having uttered this last word, which dropped from me in
an unguarded moment. The Professor bent his shaggy brows, and I feared I had
seriously compromised my own safety. Happily no great harm came of it. A
smile flitted across the lip of my severe companion, and he answered:

"That is what we shall see."

"Ah!" said I, rather put out. "But do let me exhaust all the possible objections
against this document."

"Speak, my boy, don't be afraid. You are quite at liberty to express your
opinions. You are no longer my nephew only, but my colleague. Pray go on."

"Well, in the first place, I wish to ask what are this Jokul, this Sneffels, and
this Scartaris, names which I have never heard before?"

"Nothing easier. I received not long ago a map from my friend, Augustus
Petermann, at Liepzig. Nothing could be more apropos. Take down the third
atlas in the second shelf in the large bookcase, series Z, plate 4."

I rose, and with the help of such precise instructions could not fail to find the
required atlas. My uncle opened it and said:

"Here is one of the best maps of Iceland, that of Handersen, and I believe this
will solve the worst of our difficulties."


I bent over the map.

"You see this volcanic island," said the Professor; "observe that all the
volcanoes are called jokuls, a word which means glacier in Icelandic, and under
the high latitude of Iceland nearly all the active volcanoes discharge through
beds of ice. Hence this term of jokul is applied to all the eruptive mountains in
Iceland."

"Very good," said I; "but what of Sneffels?"

I was hoping that this question would be unanswerable; but I was mistaken.
My uncle replied:

"Follow my finger along the west coast of Iceland. Do you see Rejkiavik, the
capital? You do. Well; ascend the innumerable fiords that indent those sea-beaten
shores, and stop at the sixty-fifth degree of latitude. What do you see there?"

"I see a peninsula looking like a thigh bone with the knee bone at the end of
ite

"A very fair comparison, my lad. Now do you see anything upon that knee
bone?"

"Yes; a mountain rising out of the sea."

"Right. That is Snefell."

"That Snefell?"

"Tt is. It is a mountain five thousand feet high, one of the most remarkable in
the world, if its crater leads down to the centre of the earth."

"But that is impossible," I said shrugging my shoulders, and disgusted at
such a ridiculous supposition.

"Impossible?" said the Professor severely; "and why, pray?"

"Because this crater is evidently filled with lava and burning rocks, and
therefore -"

"But suppose it is an extinct volcano?"

"Extinct?"

"Yes; the number of active volcanoes on the surface of the globe is at the
present time only about three hundred. But there is a very much larger number of
extinct ones. Now, Snefell is one of these. Since historic times there has been
but one eruption of this mountain, that of 1219; from that time it has quieted
down more and. more, and now it is no longer reckoned among active
volcanoes."

To such positive statements I could make no reply. I therefore took refuge in
other dark passages of the document.

"What is the meaning of this word Scartaris, and what have the kalends of
July to do with it?"

My uncle took a few minutes to consider. For one short moment I felt a ray


of hope, speedily to be extinguished. For he soon answered thus:

"What is darkness to you is light to me. This proves the ingenious care with
which Saknussemm guarded and defined his discovery. Sneffels, or Snefell, has
several craters. It was therefore necessary to point out which of these leads to the
centre of the globe. What did the Icelandic sage do? He observed that at the
approach of the kalends of July, that is to say in the last days of June, one of the
peaks, called Scartaris, flung its shadow down the mouth of that particular crater,
and he committed that fact to his document. Could there possibly have been a
more exact guide? As soon as we have arrived at the summit of Snefell we shall
have no hesitation as to the proper road to take."

Decidedly, my uncle had answered every one of my objections. I saw that his
position on the old parchment was impregnable. I therefore ceased to press him
upon that part of the subject, and as above all things he must be convinced, I
passed on to scientific objections, which in my opinion were far more serious.

"Well, then," I said, "I am forced to admit that Saknussemm's sentence is
clear, and leaves no room for doubt. I will even allow that the document bears
every mark and evidence of authenticity. That learned philosopher did get to the
bottom of Sneffels, he has seen the shadow of Scartaris touch the edge of the
crater before the kalends of July; he may even have heard the legendary stories
told in his day about that crater reaching to the centre of the world; but as for
reaching it himself, as for performing the journey, and returning, if he ever went,
I say no - he never, never did that."

"Now for your reason?" said my uncle ironically.

"All the theories of science demonstrate such a feat to be impracticable."

"The theories say that, do they?" replied the Professor in the tone of a meek
disciple. "Oh! unpleasant theories! How the theories will hinder. us, won't they?”

I saw that he was only laughing at me; but I went on all the same.

"Yes; it is perfectly well known that the internal temperature rises one degree
for every 70 feet in depth; now, admitting this proportion to be constant, and the
radius of the earth being fifteen hundred leagues, there must be a temperature of
360,032 degrees at the centre of the earth. Therefore, all the substances that
compose the body of this earth must exist there in a state of incandescent gas; for
the metals that most resist the action of heat, gold, and platinum, and the hardest
rocks, can never be either solid or liquid under such a temperature. I have
therefore good reason for asking if it is possible to penetrate through such a
medium."

"So, Axel, it is the heat that troubles you?"

"Of course it is. Were we to reach a depth of thirty miles we should have
arrived at the limit of the terrestrial crust, for there the temperature will be more


than 2372 degrees."

"Are you afraid of being put into a state of fusion?"

"T will leave you to decide that question,” I answered rather sullenly. "This is
my decision," replied Professor Liedenbrock, putting on one of his grandest airs.
"Neither you nor anybody else knows with any certainty what is going on in the
interior of this globe, since not the twelve thousandth part of its radius is known;
science is eminently perfectible; and every new theory is soon routed by a newer.
Was it not always believed until Fourier that the temperature of the
interplanetary spaces decreased perpetually? and is it not known at the present
time that the greatest cold of the ethereal regions is never lower than 40 degrees
below zero Fahr.? Why should it not be the same with the internal heat? Why
should it not, at a certain depth, attain an impassable limit, instead of rising to
such a point as to fuse the most infusible metals?"

As my uncle was now taking his stand upon hypotheses, of course, there was
nothing to be said.

"Well, I will tell you that true savants, amongst them Poisson, have
demonstrated that if a heat of 360,000 degrees [1] existed in the interior of the
globe, the fiery gases arising from the fused matter would acquire an elastic
force which the crust of the earth would be unable to resist, and that it would
explode like the plates of a bursting boiler."

"That is Poisson's opinion, my uncle, nothing more."

"Granted. But it is likewise the creed adopted by other distinguished
geologists, that the interior of the globe is neither gas nor water, nor any of the
heaviest minerals known, for in none of these cases would the earth weigh what
it does."

"Oh, with figures you may prove anything!"

"But is it the same with facts! Is it not known that the number of volcanoes
has diminished since the first days of creation? and if there is central heat may
we not thence conclude that it is in process of diminution?"

"My good uncle, if you will enter into the legion of speculation, I can discuss
the matter no longer."

"But I have to tell you that the highest names have come to the support of my
views. Do you remember a visit paid to me by the celebrated chemist, Humphry
Davy, in 1825?"

"Not at all, for I was not born until nineteen years afterwards."

"Well, Humphry Davy did call upon me on his way through Hamburg. We
were long engaged in discussing, amongst other problems, the hypothesis of the
liquid structure of the terrestrial nucleus. We were agreed that it could not be in a
liquid state, for a reason which science has never been able to confute."


[1] The degrees of temperature are given by Jules Verne according to the
centigrade system, for which we will in each case substitute the Fahrenheit
measurement. (TTr.)

"What is that reason?" I said, rather astonished.

"Because this liquid mass would be subject, like the ocean, to the lunar
attraction, and therefore twice every day there would be internal tides, which,
upheaving the terrestrial crust, would cause periodical earthquakes!"

"Yet it is evident that the surface of the globe has been subject to the action
of fire," I replied, "and it is quite reasonable to suppose that the external crust
cooled down first, whilst the heat took refuge down to the centre."

"Quite a mistake," my uncle answered. "The earth has been heated by
combustion on its surface, that is all. Its surface was composed of a great number
of metals, such as potassium and sodium, which have the peculiar property of
igniting at the mere contact with air and water; these metals kindled when the
atmospheric vapours fell in rain upon the soil; and by and by, when the waters
penetrated into the fissures of the crust of the earth, they broke out into fresh
combustion with explosions and eruptions. Such was the cause of the numerous
volcanoes at the origin of the earth."

"Upon my word, this is a very clever hypothesis," I exclaimed, in spite rather
of myself.

"And which Humphry Davy demonstrated to me by a simple experiment. He
formed a small ball of the metals which I have named, and which was a very fair
representation of our globe; whenever he caused a fine dew of rain to fall upon
its surface, it heaved up into little monticules, it became oxydized and formed
miniature mountains; a crater broke open at one of its summits; the eruption took
place, and communicated to the whole of the ball such a heat that it could not be
held in the hand."

In truth, I was beginning to be shaken by the Professor's arguments, besides
which he gave additional weight to them by his usual ardour and fervent
enthusiasm.

"You see, Axel," he added, "the condition of the terrestrial nucleus has given
rise to various hypotheses among geologists; there is no proof at all for this
internal heat; my opinion is that there is no such thing, it cannot be; besides we
shall see for ourselves, and, like Arne Saknussemm, we shall know exactly what
to hold as truth concerning this grand question."

"Very well, we shall see," I replied, feeling myself carried off by his
contagious enthusiasm. "Yes, we shall see; that is, if it is possible to see anything
there."

"And why not? May we not depend upon electric phenomena to give us


light? May we not even expect light from the atmosphere, the pressure of which
may render it luminous as we approach the centre?"

"Yes, yes," said I; "that is possible, too."

"Tt is certain,” exclaimed my uncle in a tone of triumph. "But silence, do you
hear me? silence upon the whole subject; and let no one get before us in this
design of discovering the centre of the earth."


CHAPTER VII.


A WOMAN'S COURAGE

Thus ended this memorable seance. That conversation threw me into a fever.
I came out of my uncle's study as if I had been stunned, and as if there was not
air enough in all the streets of Hamburg to put me right again. I therefore made
for the banks of the Elbe, where the steamer lands her passengers, which forms
the communication between the city and the Hamburg railway.

Was I convinced of the truth of what I had heard? Had I not bent under the
iron rule of the Professor Liedenbrock? Was I to believe him in earnest in his
intention to penetrate to the centre of this massive globe? Had I been listening to
the mad speculations of a lunatic, or to the scientific conclusions of a lofty
genius? Where did truth stop? Where did error begin?

I was all adrift amongst a thousand contradictory hypotheses, but I could not
lay hold of one.

Yet I remembered that I had been convinced, although now my enthusiasm
was beginning to cool down; but I felt a desire to start at once, and not to lose
time and courage by calm reflection. I had at that moment quite courage enough
to strap my knapsack to my shoulders and start.

But I must confess that in another hour this unnatural excitement abated, my
nerves became unstrung, and from the depths of the abysses of this earth I
ascended to its surface again.

"It is quite absurd!" I cried, "there is no sense about it. No sensible young
man should for a moment entertain such a proposal. The whole thing is non-
existent. I have had a bad night, I have been dreaming of horrors."

But I had followed the banks of the Elbe and passed the town. After passing


the port too, I had reached the Altona road. I was led by a presentiment, soon to
be realised; for shortly I espied my little Graéuben bravely returning with her
light step to Hamburg.

"Grauben!" I cried from afar off.

The young girl stopped, rather frightened perhaps to hear her name called
after her on the high road. Ten yards more, and I had joined her.

"Axel!" she cried surprised. "What! have you come to meet me? Is this why
you are here, sir?"

But when she had looked upon me, Grduben could not fail to see the
uneasiness and distress of my mind.

"What is the matter?" she said, holding out her hand.

"What is the matter, Grauben?" I cried.

In a couple of minutes my pretty Virlandaise was fully informed of the
position of affairs. For a time she was silent. Did her heart palpitate as mine did?
I don't know about that, but I know that her hand did not tremble in mine. We
went on a hundred yards without speaking.

At last she said, "Axel!"

"My dear Grduben."

"That will be a splendid journey!"

I gave a bound at these words.

"Yes, Axel, a journey worthy of the nephew of a savant; it is a good thing for
a man to be distinguished by some great enterprise."

"What, Grduben, won't you dissuade me from such an undertaking?"

"No, my dear Axel, and I would willingly go with you, but that a poor girl
would only be in your way."

"Is that quite true?"

"It is true.”

Ah! women and young girls, how incomprehensible are your feminine
hearts! When you are not the timidest, you are the bravest of creatures. Reason
has nothing to do with your actions. What! did this child encourage me in such
an expedition! Would she not be afraid to join it herself? And she was driving
me to it, one whom she loved!

I was disconcerted, and, if I must tell the whole truth, I was ashamed.

"Grduben, we will see whether you will say the same thing tomorrow."

"Tomorrow, dear Axel, I will say what I say to-day."

Gréuben and I, hand in hand, but in silence, pursued our way. The emotions
of that day were breaking my heart.

After all, I thought, the kalends of July are a long way off, and between this
and then many things may take place which will cure my uncle of his desire to


travel underground.

It was night when we arrived at the house in K6nigstrasse. I expected to find
all quiet there, my uncle in bed as was his custom, and Martha giving her last
touches with the feather brush.

But I had not taken into account the Professor's impatience. I found him
shouting-and working himself up amidst a crowd of porters and messengers who
were all depositing various loads in the passage. Our old servant was at her wits'
end.

"Come, Axel, come, you miserable wretch," my uncle cried from as far off as
he could see me. "Your boxes are not packed, and my papers are not arranged;
where's the key of my carpet bag? and what have you done with my gaiters?"

I stood thunderstruck. My voice failed. Scarcely could my lips utter the
words:

"Are we really going?"

"Of course, you unhappy boy! Could I have dreamed that yon would have
gone out for a walk instead of hurrying your preparations forward?"

"Are we to go?" I asked again, with sinking hopes.

"Yes; the day after tomorrow, early."

I could hear no more. I fled for refuge into my own little room.

All hope was now at an end. My uncle had been all the morning making
purchases of a part of the tools and apparatus required for this desperate
undertaking. The passage was encumbered with rope ladders, knotted cords,
torches, flasks, grappling irons, alpenstocks, pickaxes, iron shod sticks, enough
to load ten men.

I spent an awful night. Next morning I was called early. I had quite decided I
would not open the door. But how was I to resist the sweet voice which was
always music to my ears, saying, "My dear Axel?"

I came out of my room. I thought my pale countenance and my red and
sleepless eyes would work upon Grauben's sympathies and change her mind.

"Ah! my dear Axel," she said. "I see you are better. A night's rest has done
you good."

"Done me good!" I exclaimed.

I rushed to the glass. Well, in fact I did look better than I had expected. I
could hardly believe my own eyes.

"Axel," she said, "I have had a long talk with my guardian. He is a bold
philosopher, a man of immense courage, and you must remember that his blood
flows in your veins. He has confided to me his plans, his hopes, and why and
how he hopes to attain his object. He will no doubt succeed. My dear Axel, it is a
grand thing to devote yourself to science! What honour will fall upon Herr


Liedenbrock, and so be reflected upon his companion! When you return, Axel,
you will be a man, his equal, free to speak and to act independently, and free to -

The dear girl only finished this sentence by blushing. Her words revived me.
Yet I refused to believe we should start. I drew Grduben into the Professor's
study.

"Uncle, is it true that we are to go?"

"Why do you doubt?"

"Well, I don't doubt," I said, not to vex him; "but, I ask, what need is there to
hurry?"

"Time, time, flying with irreparable rapidity."

"But it is only the 16th May, and until the end of June --"

"What, you monument of ignorance! do you think you can get to Iceland ina
couple of days? If you had not deserted me like a fool I should have taken you to
the Copenhagen office, to Liffender & Co., and you would have learned then that
there is only one trip every month from Copenhagen to Rejkiavik, on the 22nd."

"Well?"

"Well, if we waited for the 22nd June we should be too late to see the
shadow of Scartaris touch the crater of Sneffels. Therefore we must get to
Copenhagen as fast as we can to secure our passage. Go and pack up."

There was no reply to this. I went up to my room. Grduben followed me. She
undertook to pack up all things necessary for my voyage. She was no more
moved than if I had been starting for a little trip to Ltibeck or Heligoland. Her
little hands moved without haste. She talked quietly. She supplied me with
sensible reasons for our expedition. She delighted me, and yet I was angry with
her. Now and then I felt I ought to break out into a passion, but she took no
notice and went on her way as methodically as ever.

Finally the last strap was buckled; I came downstairs. All that day the
philosophical instrument makers and the electricians kept coming and going.
Martha was distracted.

"Is master mad?" she asked.

I nodded my head.

"And is he going to take you with him?"

I nodded again.

"Where to?”

I pointed with my finger downward.

"Down into the cellar?" cried the old servant.

"No," I said. "Lower down than that."

Night came. But I knew nothing about the lapse of time.


"Tomorrow morning at six precisely," my uncle decreed "we start."

At ten o'clock I fell upon my bed, a dead lump of inert matter. All through
the night terror had hold of me. I spent it dreaming of abysses. I was a prey to
delirium. I felt myself grasped by the Professor's sinewy hand, dragged along,
hurled down, shattered into little bits. I dropped down unfathomable precipices
with the accelerating velocity of bodies falling through space. My life had
become an endless fall. I awoke at five with shattered nerves, trembling and
weary. I came downstairs. My uncle was at table, devouring his breakfast. I
stared at him with horror and disgust. But dear Grauben was there; so I said
nothing, and could eat nothing.

At half-past five there was a rattle of wheels outside. A large carriage was
there to take us to the Altona railway station. It was soon piled up with my
uncle's multifarious preparations.

"Where's your box?" he cried.

"It is ready," I replied, with faltering voice.

"Then make haste down, or we shall lose the train."

It was now manifestly impossible to maintain the struggle against destiny. I
went up again to my room, and rolling my portmanteaus downstairs I darted
after him.

At that moment my uncle was solemnly investing Grduben with the reins of
government. My pretty Virlandaise was as calm and collected as was her wont.
She kissed her guardian; but could not restrain a tear in touching my cheek with
her gentle lips.

"Grduben!" I murmured.

"Go, my dear Axel, go! I am now your betrothed; and when you come back I
will be your wife."

I pressed her in my arms and took my place in the carriage. Martha and the
young girl, standing at the door, waved their last farewell. Then the horses,
roused by the driver's whistling, darted off at a gallop on the road to Altona.


CHAPTER VIII.


SERIOUS PREPARATIONS FOR’ VERTICAL
DESCENT


Altona, which is but a suburb of Hamburg, is the terminus of the Kiel
railway, which was to carry us to the Belts. In twenty minutes we were in
Holstein.

At half-past six the carriage stopped at the station; my uncle's numerous
packages, his voluminous impedimenta, were unloaded, removed, labelled,
weighed, put into the luggage vans, and at seven we were seated face to face in
our compartment. The whistle sounded, the engine started, we were off.

Was I resigned? No, not yet. Yet the cool morning air and the scenes on the
road, rapidly changed by the swiftness of the train, drew me away somewhat
from my sad reflections.

As for the Professor's reflections, they went far in advance of the swiftest
express. We were alone in the carriage, but we sat in silence. My uncle examined
all his pockets and his travelling bag with the minutest care. I saw that he had
not forgotten the smallest matter of detail.

Amongst other documents, a sheet of paper, carefully folded, bore the
heading of the Danish consulate with the signature of W. Christiensen, consul at
Hamburg and the Professor's friend. With this we possessed the proper
introductions to the Governor of Iceland.

I also observed the famous document most carefully laid up in a secret
pocket in his portfolio. I bestowed a malediction upon it, and then proceeded to
examine the country.

It was a very long succession of uninteresting loamy and fertile flats, a very
easy country for the construction of railways, and propitious for the laying-down
of these direct level lines so dear to railway companies.

I had no time to get tired of the monotony; for in three hours we stopped at
Kiel, close to the sea.

The luggage being labelled for Copenhagen, we had no occasion to look
after it. Yet the Professor watched every article with jealous vigilance, until all
were safe on board. There they disappeared in the hold.

My uncle, notwithstanding his hurry, had so well calculated the relations
between the train and the steamer that we had a whole day to spare. The steamer
Ellenora, did not start until night. Thence sprang a feverish state of excitement
in which the impatient irascible traveller devoted to perdition the railway
directors and the steamboat companies and the governments which allowed such
intolerable slowness. I was obliged to act chorus to him when he attacked the


captain of the Ellenora upon this subject. The captain disposed of us summarily.

At Kiel, as elsewhere, we must do something to while away the time. What
with walking on the verdant shores of the bay within which nestles the little
town, exploring the thick woods which make it look like a nest embowered
amongst thick foliage, admiring the villas, each provided with a little bathing
house, and moving about and grumbling, at last ten o'clock came.

The heavy coils of smoke from the Ellenora's funnel unrolled in the sky, the
bridge shook with the quivering of the struggling steam; we were on board, and
owners for the time of two berths, one over the other, in the only saloon cabin on
board.

At a quarter past the moorings were loosed and the throbbing steamer
pursued her way over the dark waters of the Great Belt.

The night was dark; there was a sharp breeze and a rough sea, a few lights
appeared on shore through the thick darkness; later on, I cannot tell when, a
dazzling light from some lighthouse threw a bright stream of fire along the
waves; and this is all I can remember of this first portion of our sail.

At seven in the morning we landed at Korsor, a small town on the west coast
of Zealand. There we were transferred from the boat to another line of railway,
which took us by just as flat a country as the plain of Holstein.

Three hours' travelling brought us to the capital of Denmark. My uncle had
not shut his eyes all night. In his impatience I believe he was trying to accelerate
the train with his feet.

At last he discerned a stretch of sea.

"The Sound!" he cried.

At our left was a huge building that looked like a hospital.

"That's a lunatic asylum," said one of or travelling companions.

Very good! thought I, just the place we want to end our days in; and great as
it is, that asylum is not big enough to contain all Professor Liedenbrock's
madness!

At ten in the morning, at last, we set our feet in Copenhagen; the luggage
was put upon a Carriage and taken with ourselves to the Phoenix Hotel in Breda
Gate. This took half an hour, for the station is out of the town. Then my uncle,
after a hasty toilet, dragged me after him. The porter at the hotel could speak
German and English; but the Professor, as a polyglot, questioned him in good
Danish, and it was in the same language that that personage directed him to the
Museum of Northern Antiquities.

The curator of this curious establishment, in which wonders are gathered
together out of which the ancient history of the country might be reconstructed
by means of its stone weapons, its cups and its jewels, was a learned savant, the


friend of the Danish consul at Hamburg, Professor Thomsen.

My uncle had a cordial letter of introduction to him. As a general rule one
savant greets another with coolness. But here the case was different. M.
Thomsen, like a good friend, gave the Professor Liedenbrock a cordial greeting,
and he even vouchsafed the same kindness to his nephew. It is hardly necessary
to say the secret was sacredly kept from the excellent curator; we were simply
disinterested travellers visiting Iceland out of harmless curiosity.

M. Thomsen placed his services at our disposal, and we visited the quays
with the object of finding out the next vessel to sail.

I was yet in hopes that there would be no means of getting to Iceland. But
there was no such luck. A small Danish schooner, the Valkyria, was to set sail for
Rejkiavik on the 2nd of June. The captain, M. Bjarne, was on board. His
intending passenger was so joyful that he almost squeezed his hands till they
ached. That good man was rather surprised at his energy. To him it seemed a
very simple thing to go to Iceland, as that was his business; but to my uncle it
was sublime. The worthy captain took advantage of his enthusiasm to charge
double fares; but we did not trouble ourselves about mere trifles. .

"You must be on board on Tuesday, at seven in the morning,” said Captain
Bjarne, after having pocketed more dollars than were his due.

Then we thanked M. Thomsen for his kindness, "and we returned to the
Phoenix Hotel.

"It's all right, it's all right," my uncle repeated. "How fortunate we are to have
found this boat ready for sailing. Now let us have some breakfast and go about
the town."

We went first to Kongens-nye-Torw, an irregular square in which are two
innocent-looking guns, which need not alarm any one. Close by, at No. 5, there
was a French "restaurant," kept by a cook of the name of Vincent, where we had
an ample breakfast for four marks each (2_s_. 4_d_.).

Then I took a childish pleasure in exploring the city; my uncle let me take
him with me, but he took notice of nothing, neither the insignificant king's
palace, nor the pretty seventeenth century bridge, which spans the canal before
the museum, nor that immense cenotaph of Thorwaldsen's, adorned with horrible
mural painting, and containing within it a collection of the sculptor's works, nor
in a fine park the toylike chateau of Rosenberg, nor the beautiful renaissance
edifice of the Exchange, nor its spire composed of the twisted tails of four
bronze dragons, nor the great windmill on the ramparts, whose huge arms dilated
in the sea breeze like the sails of a ship.

What delicious walks we should have had together, my pretty Virlandaise
and I, along the harbour where the two-deckers and the frigate slept peaceably


by the red roofing of the warehouse, by the green banks of the strait, through the
deep shades of the trees amongst which the fort is half concealed, where the
guns are thrusting out their black throats between branches of alder and willow.

But, alas! Graduben was far away; and I never hoped to see her again.

But if my uncle felt no attraction towards these romantic scenes he was very
much struck with the aspect of a certain church spire situated in the island of
Amak, which forms the south-west quarter of Copenhagen.

I was ordered to direct my feet that way; I embarked on a small steamer
which plies on the canals, and in a few minutes she touched the quay of the
dockyard.

After crossing a few narrow streets where some convicts, in trousers half
yellow and half grey, were at work under the orders of the gangers, we arrived at
the Vor Frelsers Kirk. There was nothing remarkable about the church; but there
was a reason why its tall spire had attracted the Professor's attention. Starting
from the top of the tower, an external staircase wound around the spire, the
spirals circling up into the sky.

"Let us get to the top,” said my uncle.

"T shall be dizzy," I said.

"The more reason why we should go up; we must get used to it."

"But -"

"Come, I tell you; don't waste our time."

I had to obey. A keeper who lived at the other end of the street handed us the
key, and the ascent began.

My uncle went ahead with a light step. I followed him not without alarm, for
my head was very apt to feel dizzy; I possessed neither the equilibrium of an
eagle nor his fearless nature.

As long as we were protected on the inside of the winding staircase up the
tower, all was well enough; but after toiling up a hundred and fifty steps the
fresh air came to salute my face, and we were on the leads of the tower. There
the aerial staircase began its gyrations, only guarded by a thin iron rail, and the
narrowing steps seemed to ascend into infinite space!

"Never shall I be able to do it," I said.

"Don't be a coward; come up, sir"; said my uncle with the coldest cruelty.

I had to follow, clutching at every step. The keen air made me giddy; I felt
the spire rocking with every gust of wind; my knees began to fail; soon I was
crawling on my knees, then creeping on my stomach; I closed my eyes; I seemed
to be lost in space.

At last I reached the apex, with the assistance of my uncle dragging me up by
the collar.


"Look down!" he cried. "Look down well! You must take a lesson

in abysses."

I opened my eyes. I saw houses squashed flat as if they had all fallen down
from the skies; a smoke fog seemed to drown them. Over my head ragged clouds
were drifting past, and by an optical inversion they seemed stationary, while the
steeple, the ball and I were all spinning along with fantastic speed. Far away on
one side was the green country, on the other the sea sparkled, bathed in sunlight.
The Sound stretched away to Elsinore, dotted with a few white sails, like sea-
gulls' wings; and in the misty east and away to the north-east lay outstretched the
faintly-shadowed shores of Sweden. All this immensity of space whirled and
wavered, fluctuating beneath my eyes.

But I was compelled to rise, to stand up, to look. My first lesson in dizziness
lasted an hour. When I got permission to come down and feel the solid street
pavements I was afflicted with severe lumbago.

"Tomorrow we will do it again," said the Professor.

And it was so; for five days in succession, I was obliged to undergo this anti-
vertiginous exercise; and whether I would or not, I made some improvement in
the art of "lofty contemplations."


CHAPTER IX.


ICELAND! BUT WHAT NEXT?

The day for our departure arrived. The day before it our kind friend M.
Thomsen brought us letters of introduction to Count Trampe, the Governor of
Iceland, M. Picturssen, the bishop's suffragan, and M. Finsen, mayor of
Rejkiavik. My uncle expressed his gratitude by tremendous compressions of
both his hands.

On the 2nd, at six in the evening, all our precious baggage being safely on
board the Valkyria, the captain took us into a very narrow cabin.

"Is the wind favourable?" my uncle asked.

"Excellent," replied Captain Bjarne; "a sou'-easter. We shall pass down the
Sound full speed, with all sails set."

In a few minutes the schooner, under her mizen, brigantine, topsail, and


topgallant sail, loosed from her moorings and made full sail through the straits.
In an hour the capital of Denmark seemed to sink below the distant waves, and
the Valkyria was skirting the coast by Elsinore. In my nervous frame of mind I
expected to see the ghost of Hamlet wandering on the legendary castle terrace.

"Sublime madman!" I said, "no doubt you would approve of our expedition.
Perhaps you would keep us company to the centre of the globe, to find the
solution of your eternal doubts."

But there was no ghostly shape upon the ancient walls. Indeed, the castle is
much younger than the heroic prince of Denmark. It now answers the purpose of
a sumptuous lodge for the doorkeeper of the straits of the Sound, before which
every year there pass fifteen thousand ships of all nations.

The castle of Kronsberg soon disappeared in the mist, as well as the tower of
Helsingborg, built on the Swedish coast, and the schooner passed lightly on her
way urged by the breezes of the Cattegat.

The Valkyria was a splendid sailer, but on a sailing vessel you can place no
dependence. She was taking to Rejkiavik coal, household goods, earthenware,
woollen clothing, and a cargo of wheat. The crew consisted of five men, all
Danes.

"How long will the passage take?" my uncle asked.

"Ten days," the captain replied, "if we don't meet a nor'-wester in passing the
Faroes."

"But are you not subject to considerable delays?"

"No, M. Liedenbrock, don't be uneasy, we shall get there in very good time."

At evening the schooner doubled the Skaw at the northern point of Denmark,
in the night passed the Skager Rack, skirted Norway by Cape Lindness, and
entered the North Sea.

In two days more we sighted the coast of Scotland near Peterhead,,and the
Valkyria turned her lead towards the Faroe Islands, passing between the Orkneys
and Shetlands.

Soon the schooner encountered the great Atlantic swell; she had to tack
against the north wind, and reached the Faroes only with some difficulty. On the
8th the captain made out Myganness, the southernmost of these islands, and
from that moment took a straight course for Cape Portland, the most southerly
point of Iceland.

The passage was marked by nothing unusual. I bore the troubles of the sea
pretty well; my uncle, to his own intense disgust, and his greater shame, was ill
all through the voyage.

He therefore was unable to converse with the captain about Snefell, the way
to get to it, the facilities for transport, he was obliged to put off these inquiries


until his arrival, and spent all his time at full length in his cabin, of which the
timbers creaked and shook with every pitch she took. It must be confessed he
was not undeserving of his punishment.

On the 11th we reached Cape Portland. The clear open weather gave us a
good view of Myrdals jokul, which overhangs it. The cape is merely a low hill
with steep sides, standing lonely by the beach.

The Valkyria kept at some distance from the coast, taking a westerly course
amidst great shoals of whales and sharks. Soon we came in sight of an enormous
perforated rock, through which the sea dashed furiously. The Westman islets
seemed to rise out of the ocean like a group of rocks in a liquid plain. From that
time the schooner took a wide berth and swept at a great distance round Cape
Rejkianess, which forms the western point of Iceland.

The rough sea prevented my uncle from coming on deck to admire these
shattered and surf-beaten coasts.

Forty-eight hours after, coming out of a storm which forced the schooner to
scud under bare poles, we sighted east of us the beacon on Cape Skagen, where
dangerous rocks extend far away seaward. An Icelandic pilot came on board, and
in three hours the Valkyria dropped her anchor before Rejkiavik, in Faxa Bay.

The Professor at last emerged from his cabin, rather pale and wretched-
looking, but still full of enthusiasm, and with ardent satisfaction shining in his
eyes.

The population of the town, wonderfully interested in the arrival of a vessel
from which every one expected something, formed in groups upon the quay.

My uncle left in haste his floating prison, or rather hospital. But before
quitting the deck of the schooner he dragged me forward, and pointing with
outstretched finger north of the bay at a distant mountain terminating in a double
peak, a pair of cones covered with perpetual snow, he cried:

"Snefell! Snefell!"

Then recommending me, by an impressive gesture, to keep silence, he went
into the boat which awaited him. I followed, and presently we were treading the
soil of Iceland.

The first man we saw was a good-looking fellow enough, in a general's
uniform. Yet he was not a general but a magistrate, the Governor of the island,
M. le Baron Trampe himself. The Professor was soon aware of the presence he
was in. He delivered him his letters from Copenhagen, and then followed a short
conversation in the Danish language, the purport of which I was quite ignorant
of, and for a very good reason. But the result of this first conversation was, that
Baron Trampe placed himself entirely at the service of Professor Liedenbrock.

My uncle was just as courteously received by the mayor, M. Finsen, whose


appearance was as military, and disposition and office as pacific, as the
Governor's.

As for the bishop's suffragan, M. Picturssen, he was at that moment engaged
on an episcopal visitation in the north. For the time we must be resigned to wait
for the honour of being presented to him. But M. Fridrikssen, professor of
natural sciences at the school of Rejkiavik, was a delightful man, and his
friendship became very precious to me. This modest philosopher spoke only
Danish and Latin. He came to proffer me his good offices in the language of
Horace, and I felt that we were made to understand each other. In fact he was the
only person in Iceland with whom I could converse at all.

This good-natured gentleman made over to us two of the three rooms which
his house contained, and we were soon installed in it with all our luggage, the
abundance of which rather astonished the good people of Rejkiavik.

"Well, Axel," said my uncle, "we are getting on, and now the worst is over."

"The worst!" I said, astonished.

"To be sure, now we have nothing to do but go down."

"Oh, if that is all, you are quite right; but after all, when we have gone down,
we Shall have to get up again, I suppose?"

"Oh I don't trouble myself about that. Come, there's no time to lose; I am
going to the library. Perhaps there is some manuscript of Saknussemm's there,
and I should be glad to consult it."

"Well, while you are there I will go into the town. Won't you?"

"Oh, that is very uninteresting to me. It is not what is upon this island, but
what is underneath, that interests me."

I went out, and wandered wherever chance took me.

It would not be easy to lose your way in Rejkiavik. I was therefore under no
necessity to inquire the road, which exposes one to mistakes when the only
medium of intercourse is gesture.

The town extends along a low and marshy level, between two hills. An
immense bed of lava bounds it on one side, and falls gently towards the sea. On
the other extends the vast bay of Faxa, shut in at the north by the enormous
glacier of the Snefell, and of which the Valkyria was for the time the only
occupant. Usually the English and French conservators of fisheries moor in this
bay, but just then they were cruising about the western coasts of the island.

The longest of the only two streets that Rejkiavik possesses was parallel with
the beach. Here live the merchants and traders, in wooden cabins made of red
planks set horizontally; the other street, running west, ends at the little lake
between the house of the bishop and other non-commercial people.

I had soon explored these melancholy ways; here and there I got a glimpse of


faded turf, looking like a worn-out bit of carpet, or some appearance of a kitchen
garden, the sparse vegetables of which (potatoes, cabbages, and lettuces), would
have figured appropriately upon a Lilliputian table. A few sickly wallflowers
were trying to enjoy the air and sunshine.

About the middle of the tin-commercial street I found the public cemetery,
inclosed with a mud wall, and where there seemed plenty of room.

Then a few steps brought me to the Governor's house, a but compared with
the town hall of Hamburg, a palace in comparison with the cabins of the
Icelandic population.

Between the little lake and the town the church is built in the Protestant style,
of calcined stones extracted out of the volcanoes by their own labour and at their
own expense; in high westerly winds it was manifest that the red tiles of the roof
would be scattered in the air, to the great danger of the faithful worshippers.

On a neighbouring hill I perceived the national school, where, as I was
informed later by our host, were taught Hebrew, English, French, and Danish,
four languages of which, with shame I confess it, I don't know a single word;
after an examination I should have had to stand last of the forty scholars
educated at this little college, and I should have been held unworthy to sleep
along with them in one of those little double closets, where more delicate youths
would have died of suffocation the very first night.

In three hours I had seen not only the town but its environs. The general
aspect was wonderfully dull. No trees, and scarcely any vegetation. Everywhere
bare rocks, signs of volcanic action. The Icelandic buts are made of earth and
turf, and the walls slope inward; they rather resemble roofs placed on the
ground. But then these roofs are meadows of comparative fertility. Thanks to the
internal heat, the grass grows on them to some degree of perfection. It is
carefully mown in the hay season; if it were not, the horses would come to
pasture on these green abodes.

In my excursion I met but few people. On returning to the main street I found
the greater part of the population busied in drying, salting, and putting on board
codfish, their chief export. The men looked like robust but heavy, blond
Germans with pensive eyes, conscious of being far removed from their fellow
creatures, poor exiles relegated to this land of ice, poor creatures who should
have been Esquimaux, since nature had condemned them to live only just
outside the arctic circle! In vain did I try to detect a smile upon their lips;
sometimes by a spasmodic and involuntary contraction of the muscles they
seemed to laugh, but they never smiled.

Their costume consisted of a coarse jacket of black woollen cloth called in
Scandinavian lands a 'vadmel,' a hat with a very broad brim, trousers with a


narrow edge of red, and a bit of leather rolled round the foot for shoes.

The women looked as sad and as resigned as the men; their faces were
agreeable but expressionless, and they wore gowns and petticoats of dark
‘'vadmel'; as maidens, they wore over their braided hair a little knitted brown cap;
when married, they put around their heads a coloured handkerchief, crowned
with a peak of white linen.

After a good walk I returned to M. Fridrikssen's house, where I found my
uncle already in his host's company.


CHAPTER X.


INTERESTING CONVERSATIONS WITH
ICELANDIC SAVANTS


Dinner was ready. Professor Liedenbrock devoured his portion voraciously,
for his compulsory fast on board had converted his stomach into a vast
unfathomable gulf. There was nothing remarkable in the meal itself; but the
hospitality of our host, more Danish than Icelandic, reminded me of the heroes
of old. It was evident that we were more at home than he was himself.

The conversation was carried on in the vernacular tongue, which my uncle
mixed with German and M. Fridrikssen with Latin for my benefit. It turned upon
scientific questions as befits philosophers; but Professor Liedenbrock was
excessively reserved, and at every sentence spoke to me with his eyes, enjoining
the most absolute silence upon our plans.

In the first place M. Fridrikssen wanted to know what success my uncle had
had at the library.

"Your library! why there is nothing but a few tattered books upon almost
deserted shelves."

"Indeed!" replied M. Fridrikssen, "why we possess eight thousand volumes,
many of them valuable and scarce, works in the old Scandinavian language, and
we have all the novelties that Copenhagen sends us every year."


"Where do you keep your eight thousand volumes? For my part -"

"Oh, M. Liedenbrock, they are all over the country. In this icy region we are
fond of study. There is not a farmer nor a fisherman that cannot read and does
not read. Our principle is, that books, instead of growing mouldy behind an iron
grating, should be worn out under the eyes of many readers. Therefore, these
volumes are passed from one to another, read over and over, referred to again
and again; and it often happens that they find their way back to their shelves
only after an absence of a year or two."

"And in the meantime," said my uncle rather spitefully, "strangers --"

"Well, what would you have? Foreigners have their libraries at home, and the
first essential for labouring people is that they should be educated. I repeat to
you the love of reading runs in Icelandic blood. In 1816 we founded a
prosperous literary society; learned strangers think themselves honoured in
becoming members of it. It publishes books which educate our fellow-
countrymen, and do the country great service. If you will consent to be a
corresponding member, Herr Liedenbrock, you will be giving us great pleasure."

My uncle, who had already joined about a hundred learned societies,
accepted with a grace which evidently touched M. Fridrikssen.

"Now," said he, "will you be kind enough to tell me what books you hoped to
find in our library and I may perhaps enable you to consult them?"

My uncle's eyes and mine met. He hesitated. This direct question went to the
root of the matter. But after a moment's reflection he decided on speaking.

"Monsieur Fridrikssen, I wished to know if amongst your ancient books you
possessed any of the works of Arne Saknussemm?"

"Arne Saknussemm!" replied the Rejkiavik professor. "You mean that
learned sixteenth century savant, a naturalist, a chemist, and a traveller?"

"Just so!"

"One of the glories of Icelandic literature and science?"

"That's the man."

"An illustrious man anywhere!"

"Quite so."

"And whose courage was equal to his genius!"

"IT see that you know him well."

My uncle was bathed in delight at hearing his hero thus described. He feasted
his eyes upon M. Fridrikssen's face.

"Well," he cried, "where are his works?"

"His works, we have them not."

"What - not in Iceland?"

"They are neither in Iceland nor anywhere else."


"Why is that?"

"Because Arne Saknussemm was persecuted for heresy, and in 1573 his
books were burned by the hands of the common hangman."

"Very good! Excellent!" cried my uncle, to the great scandal of the professor
of natural history.

"What!" he cried.

"Yes, yes; now it is all clear, now it is all unravelled; and I see why
Saknussemm, put into the Index Expurgatorius, and compelled to hide the
discoveries made by his genius, was obliged to bury in an incomprehensible
cryptogram the secret -"

"What secret?" asked M. Fridrikssen, starting.

"Oh, just a secret which -" my uncle stammered.

"Have you some private document in your possession?" asked our host.

"No; I was only supposing a case."

"Oh, very well," answered M. Fridrikssen, who was kind enough not to
pursue the subject when he had noticed the embarrassment of his friend. "I hope
you will not leave our island until you have seen some of its mineralogical
wealth."

"Certainly," replied my uncle; "but I am rather late; or have not others been
here before me?"

"Yes, Herr Liedenbrock; the labours of MM. Olafsen and Povelsen, pursued
by order of the king, the researches of Troil the scientific mission of MM.
Gaimard and Robert on the French corvette La Recherche, [1] and lately the
observations of scientific men who came in the Reine Hortense, have added
materially to our knowledge of Iceland. But I assure you there is plenty left."

"Do you think so?" said my uncle, pretending to look very modest, and
trying to hide the curiosity was flashing out of his eyes.

"Oh, yes; how many mountains, glaciers, and volcanoes there are to study,
which are as yet but imperfectly known! Then, without going any further, that
mountain in the horizon. That is Snefell."

"Ah!" said my uncle, as coolly as he was able, "is that Snefell?"

"Yes; one of the most curious volcanoes, and the crater of which has scarcely
ever been visited."

"Is it extinct?”

"Oh, yes; more than five hundred years."

"Well," replied my uncle, who was frantically locking his legs together to
keep himself from jumping up in the air, "that is where I mean to begin my
geological studies, there on that Seffel - Fessel - what do you call it?"

"Snefell," replied the excellent M. Fridrikssen.


This part of the conversation was in Latin; I had understood every word of it,
and I could hardly conceal my amusement at seeing my uncle trying to keep
down the excitement and satisfaction which were brimming over in every limb
and every feature. He tried hard to put on an innocent little expression of
simplicity; but it looked like a diabolical grin.

[1] Recherche was sent out in 1835 by Admiral Duperré to learn the fate of
the lost expedition of M. de Blosseville in the Lilloise which has never been
heard of.

"Yes," said he, "your words decide me. We will try to scale that Snefell;
perhaps even we may pursue our studies in its crater!"

"I am very sorry," said M. Fridrikssen, "that my engagements will not allow
me to absent myself, or I would have accompanied you myself with both
pleasure and profit."

"Oh, no, no!" replied my uncle with great animation, "we would not disturb
any one for the world, M. Fridrikssen. Still, I thank you with all my heart: the
company of such a talented man would have been very serviceable, but the
duties of your profession -"

I am glad to think that our host, in the innocence of his Icelandic soul, was
blind to the transparent artifices of my uncle.

"I very much approve of your beginning with that volcano, M. Liedenbrock.
You will gather a harvest of interesting observations. But, tell me, how do you
expect to get to the peninsula of Snefell?"

"By sea, crossing the bay. That's the most direct way."

"No doubt; but it is impossible."

"Why? "

"Because we don't possess a single boat at Rejkiavik."

"You don't mean to say so?"

"You will have to go by land, following the shore. It will be longer, but more
interesting."

"Very well, then; and now I shall have to see about a guide."

"I have one to offer you."

"A safe, intelligent man."

"Yes; an inhabitant of that peninsula He is an eiderdown hunter, and very
clever. He speaks Danish perfectly."

"When can I see him?"

"Tomorrow, if you like."

"Why not to-day?"

"Because he won't be here till tomorrow."

"Tomorrow, then," added my uncle with a sigh.


This momentous conversation ended in a few minutes with warm
acknowledgments paid by the German to the Icelandic Professor. At this dinner
my uncle had just elicited important facts, amongst others, the history of
Saknussemm, the reason of the mysterious document, that his host would not
accompany him in his expedition, and that the very next day a guide would be
waiting upon him.


CHAPTER XI.


A GUIDE FOUND TO THE CENTRE OF THE EARTH

In the evening I took a short walk on the beach and returned at night to my
plank-bed, where I slept soundly all night.

When I awoke I heard my uncle talking at a great rate in the next room. I
immediately dressed and joined him.

He was conversing in the Danish language with a tall man, of robust build.
This fine fellow must have been possessed of great strength. His eyes, set in a
large and ingenuous face, seemed to me very intelligent; they were of a dreamy
sea-blue. Long hair, which would have been called red even in England, fell in
long meshes upon his broad shoulders. The movements of this native were lithe
and supple; but he made little use of his arms in speaking, like a man who knew
nothing or cared nothing about the language of gestures. His whole appearance
bespoke perfect calmness and self-possession, not indolence but tranquillity. It
was felt at once that he would be beholden to nobody, that he worked for his
own convenience, and that nothing in this world could astonish or disturb his
philosophic calmness.

I caught the shades of this Icelander's character by the way in which he
listened to the impassioned flow of words which fell from the Professor. He
stood with arms crossed, perfectly unmoved by my uncle's incessant
gesticulations. A negative was expressed by a slow movement of the head from
left to right, an affirmative by a slight bend, so slight that his long hair scarcely
moved. He carried economy of motion even to parsimony.

Certainly I should never have dreamt in looking at this man that he was a
hunter; he did not look likely to frighten his game, nor did he seem as if he
would even get near it. But the mystery was explained when M. Fridrikssen
informed me that this tranquil personage was only a hunter of the eider duck,


whose under plumage constitutes the chief wealth of the island. This is the
celebrated eider down, and it requires no great rapidity of movement to get it.

Early in summer the female, a very pretty bird, goes to build her nest among
the rocks of the fiords with which the coast is fringed. After building the nest she
feathers it with down plucked from her own breast. Immediately the hunter, or
rather the trader, comes and robs the nest, and the female recommences her
work. This goes on as long as she has any down left. When she has stripped
herself bare the male takes his turn to pluck himself. But as the coarse and hard
plumage of the male has no commercial value, the hunter does not take the
trouble to rob the nest of this; the female therefore lays her eggs in the spoils of
her mate, the young are hatched, and next year the harvest begins again.

Now, as the eider duck does not select steep cliffs for her nest, but rather the
smooth terraced rocks which slope to the sea, the Icelandic hunter might exercise
his calling without any inconvenient exertion. He was a farmer who was not
obliged either to sow or reap his harvest, but merely to gather it in.

This grave, phlegmatic, and silent individual was called Hans Bjelke; and he
came recommended by M. Fridrikssen. He was our future guide. His manners
were a singular contrast with my uncle's.

Nevertheless, they soon came to understand each other. Neither looked at the
amount of the payment: the one was ready to accept whatever was offered; the
other was ready to give whatever was demanded. Never was bargain more
readily concluded.

The result of the treaty was, that Hans engaged on his part to conduct us to
the village of Stapi, on the south shore of the Snefell peninsula, at the very foot
of the volcano. By land this would be about twenty-two miles, to be done, said
my uncle, in two days.

But when he learnt that the Danish mile was 24,000 feet long, he was obliged
to modify his calculations and allow seven or eight days for the march.

Four horses were to be placed at our disposal - two to carry him and me, two
for the baggage. Hams, as was his custom, would go on foot. He knew all that
part of the coast perfectly, and promised to take us the shortest way.

His engagement was not to terminate with our arrival at Stapi; he was to
continue in my uncle's service for the whole period of his scientific researches,
for the remuneration of three rixdales a week (about twelve shillings), but it was
an express article of the covenant that his wages should be counted out to him
every Saturday at six o'clock in the evening, which, according to him, was one
indispensable part of the engagement.

The start was fixed for the 16th of June. My uncle wanted to pay the hunter a
portion in advance, but he refused with one word:


"Efter," said he.

"After," said the Professor for my edification.

The treaty concluded, Hans silently withdrew.

"A famous fellow," cried my uncle; "but he little thinks of the marvellous
part he has to play in the future."

"So he is to go with us as far as --"

"As far as the centre of the earth, Axel."

Forty-eight hours were left before our departure; to my great regret I had to
employ them in preparations; for all our ingenuity was required to pack every
article to the best advantage; instruments here, arms there, tools in this package,
provisions in that: four sets of packages in all.

The instruments were:

1. An Eigel's centigrade thermometer, graduated up to 150 degrees (302
degrees Fahr.), which seemed to me too much or too little. Too much if the
internal heat was to rise so high, for in this case we should be baked, not enough
to measure the temperature of springs or any matter in a state of fusion.

2. An aneroid barometer, to indicate extreme pressures of the atmosphere. An
ordinary barometer would not have answered the purpose, as the pressure would
increase during our descent to a point which the mercurial barometer [1] would
not register.

3. A chronometer, made by Boissonnas, jun., of Geneva, accurately set to the
meridian of Hamburg.

4. Two compasses, viz., a common compass and a dipping needle.

5. Anight glass.

6. Two of Ruhmkorff's apparatus, which, by means of an electric current,
supplied a safe and handy portable light [2]

The arms consisted of two of Purdy's rifles and two brace of pistols. But
what did we want arms for? We had neither savages nor wild beasts to fear, I
supposed. But my uncle seemed to believe in his arsenal as in his instruments,
and more especially in a considerable quantity of gun cotton, which is unaffected
by moisture, and the explosive force of which exceeds that of gunpowder.

[1] In M. Verne's book a 'manometer' is the instrument used, of which very
little is known. In a complete list of philosophical instruments the translator
cannot find the name. As he is assured by a first-rate instrument maker,
Chadburn, of Liverpool, that an aneroid can be constructed to measure any
depth, he has thought it best to furnish the adventurous professor with this more
familiar instrument. The 'manometer' is generally known as a pressure gauge. -
TRANS.

[2] Ruhmkorff's apparatus consists of a Bunsen pile worked with bichromate


of potash, which makes no smell; an induction coil carries the electricity
generated by the pile into communication with a lantern of peculiar construction;
in this lantern there is a spiral glass tube from which the air has been excluded,
and in which remains only a residuum of carbonic acid gas or of nitrogen. When
the apparatus is put in action this gas becomes luminous, producing a white
steady light. The pile and coil are placed in a leathern bag which the traveller
carries over his shoulders; the lantern outside of the bag throws sufficient light
into deep darkness; it enables one to venture without fear of explosions into the
midst of the most inflammable gases, and is not extinguished even in the deepest
waters. M. Ruhmkorff is a learned and most ingenious man of science; his great
discovery is his induction coil, which produces a powerful stream of electricity.
He obtained in 1864 the quinquennial prize of 50,000 franc reserved by the
French government for the most ingenious application of electricity.

The tools comprised two pickaxes, two spades, a silk ropeladder, three iron-
tipped sticks, a hatchet, a hammer, a dozen wedges and iron spikes, and a long
knotted rope. Now this was a large load, for the ladder was 300 feet long.

And there were provisions too: this was not a large parcel, but it was
comforting to know that of essence of beef and biscuits there were six months'
consumption. Spirits were the only liquid, and of water we took none; but we
had flasks, and my uncle depended on springs from which to fill them. Whatever
objections I hazarded as to their quality, temperature, and even absence,
remained ineffectual.

To complete the exact inventory of all our travelling accompaniments, I must
not forget a pocket medicine chest, containing blunt scissors, splints for broken
limbs, a piece of tape of unbleached linen, bandages and compresses, lint, a
lancet for bleeding, all dreadful articles to take with one. Then there was a row
of phials containing dextrine, alcoholic ether, liquid acetate of lead, vinegar, and
ammonia drugs which afforded me no comfort. Finally, all the articles needful to
supply Ruhmkorff's apparatus.

My uncle did not forget-a supply of tobacco, coarse grained powder, and
amadou, nor a leathern belt in which he carried a sufficient quantity of gold,
silver, and paper money. Six pairs of boots and shoes, made waterproof with a
composition of indiarubber and naphtha, were packed amongst the tools.

"Clothed, shod, and equipped like this," said my uncle, "there is no telling
how far we may go."

The 14th was wholly spent in arranging all our different articles. In the
evening we dined with Baron Tramps; the mayor of Rejkiavik, and Dr. Hyaltalin,
the first medical man of the place, being of the party. M. Fridrikssen was not
there. I learned afterwards that he and the Governor disagreed upon some


question of administration, and did not speak to each other. I therefore knew not
a single word of all that was said at this semi-official dinner; but I could not help
noticing that my uncle talked the whole time.

On the 15th our preparations were all made. Our host gave the Professor very
great pleasure by presenting him with a map of Iceland far more complete than
that of Hendersen. It was the map of M. Olaf Nikolas Olsen, in the proportion of
1 to 480,000 of the actual size of the island, and published by the Icelandic
Literary Society. It was a precious document for a mineralogist.

Our last evening was spent in intimate conversation with M. Fridrikssen,
with whom I felt the liveliest sympathy; then, after the talk, succeeded, for me, at
any rate, a disturbed and restless night.

At five in the morning I was awoke by the neighing and pawing of four
horses under my window. I dressed hastily and came down into the street. Hans
was finishing our packing, almost as it were without moving a limb; and yet he
did his work cleverly. My uncle made more noise than execution, and the guide
seemed to pay very little attention to his energetic directions.

At six o'clock our preparations were over. M. Fridrikssen shook hands with
us. My uncle thanked him heartily for his extreme kindness. I constructed a few
fine Latin sentences to express my cordial farewell. Then we bestrode our steeds
and with his last adieu M. Fridrikssen treated me to a line of Virgil eminently
applicable to such uncertain wanderers as we were likely to be:

"Et quacumque viam dedent fortuna sequamur."

"Therever fortune clears a way,

Thither our ready footsteps stray."


CHAPTER XII.


A BARREN LAND


We had started under a sky overcast but calm. There was no fear of heat,
none of disastrous rain. It was just the weather for tourists.


The pleasure of riding on horseback over an unknown country made me easy
to be pleased at our first start. I threw myself wholly into the pleasure of the trip,
and enjoyed the feeling of freedom and satisfied desire. I was beginning to take a
real share in the enterprise.

"Besides," I said to myself, "where's the risk? Here we are travelling all
through a most interesting country! We are about to climb a very remarkable
mountain; at the worst we are going to scramble down an extinct crater. It is
evident that Saknussemm did nothing more than this. As for a passage leading to
the centre of the globe, it is mere rubbish! perfectly impossible! Very well, then;
let us get all the good we can out of this expedition, and don't let us haggle about
the chances."

This reasoning having settled my mind, we got out of Rejkiavik.

Hans moved steadily on, keeping ahead of us at an even, smooth, and rapid
pace. The baggage horses followed him without giving any trouble. Then came
my uncle and myself, looking not so very ill-mounted on our small but hardy
animals.

Iceland is one of the largest islands in Europe. Its surface is 14,000 square
miles, and it contains but 16,000 inhabitants. Geographers have divided it into
four quarters, and we were crossing diagonally the south-west quarter, called the
‘Sudvester Fjordungr.'

On leaving Rejkiavik Hans took us by the seashore. We passed lean pastures
which were trying very hard, but in vain, to look green; yellow came out best.
The rugged peaks of the trachyte rocks presented faint outlines on the eastern
horizon; at times a few patches of snow, concentrating the vague light, glittered
upon the slopes of the distant mountains; certain peaks, boldly uprising, passed
through the grey clouds, and reappeared above the moving mists, like breakers
emerging in the heavens.

Often these chains of barren rocks made a dip towards the sea, and
encroached upon the scanty pasturage: but there was always enough room to
pass. Besides, our horses instinctively chose the easiest places without ever
slackening their pace. My uncle was refused even the satisfaction of stirring up
his beast with whip or voice. He had no excuse for being impatient. I could not
help smiling to see so tall a man on so small a pony, and as his long legs nearly
touched the ground he looked like a six-legged centaur.

"Good horse! good horse!" he kept saying. "You will see, Axel, that there is
no more sagacious animal than the Icelandic horse. He is stopped by neither
snow, nor storm, nor impassable roads, nor rocks, glaciers, or anything. He is
courageous, sober, and surefooted. He never makes a false step, never shies. If
there is a river or fiord to cross (and we shall meet with many) you will see him


plunge in at once, just as if he were amphibious, and gain the opposite bank. But
we must not hurry him; we must let him have his way, and we shall get on at the
rate of thirty miles a day."

"We may; but how about our guide?"

"Oh, never mind him. People like him get over the ground without a thought.
There is so little action in this man that he will never get tired; and besides, if he
wants it, he shall have my horse. I shall get cramped if I don't have-a little
action. The arms are all right, but the legs want exercise."

We were advancing at a rapid pace. The country was already almost a desert.
Here and there was a lonely farm, called a boér built either of wood, or of sods,
or of pieces of lava, looking like a poor beggar by the wayside. These ruinous
huts seemed to solicit charity from passers-by; and on very small provocation we
should have given alms for the relief of the poor inmates. In this country there
were no roads and paths, and the poor vegetation, however slow, would soon
efface the rare travellers’ footsteps.

Yet this part of the province, at a very small distance from the capital, is
reckoned among the inhabited and cultivated portions of Iceland. What, then,
must other tracts be, more desert than this desert? In the first half mile we had
not seen one farmer standing before his cabin door, nor one shepherd tending a
flock less wild than himself, nothing but a few cows and sheep left to
themselves. What then would be those convulsed regions upon which we were
advancing, regions subject to the dire phenomena of eruptions, the offspring of
volcanic explosions and subterranean convulsions?

We were to know them before long, but on consulting Olsen's map, I saw
that they would be avoided by winding along the seashore. In fact, the great
plutonic action is confined to the central portion of the island; there, rocks of the
trappean and volcanic class, including trachyte, basalt, and tuffs and
agglomerates associated with streams of lava, have made this a land of
supernatural horrors. I had no idea of the spectacle which was awaiting us in the
peninsula of Snefell, where these ruins of a fiery nature have formed a frightful
chaos.

In two hours from Rejkiavik we arrived at the burgh of Gufunes, called
Aolkirkja, or principal church. There was nothing remarkable here but a few
houses, scarcely enough for a German hamlet.

Hans stopped here half an hour. He shared with us our frugal breakfast;
answering my uncle's questions about the road and our resting place that night
with merely yes or no, except when he said "Gardar."

I consulted the map to see where Gardar was. I saw there was a small town
of that name on the banks of the Hvalfiord, four miles from Rejkiavik. I showed


it to my uncle.

"Four miles only!" he exclaimed; "four miles out of twenty-eight. What a
nice little walk!"

He was about to make an observation to the guide, who without answering
resumed his place at the head, and went on his way.

Three hours later, still treading on the colourless grass of the pasture land, we
had to work round the Kolla fiord, a longer way but an easier one than across
that inlet. We soon entered into a 'pingstacer’ or parish called Ejulberg, from
whose steeple twelve o'clock would have struck, if Icelandic churches were rich
enough to possess clocks. But they are like the parishioners who have no
watches and do without.

There our horses were baited; then taking the narrow path to left between a
chain of hills and the sea, they carried us to our next stage, the aolkirkja of
Brantar and one mile farther on, to Saurboér 'Annexia,' a chapel of ease built on
the south shore of the Hvalfiord.

It was now four o'clock, and we had gone four Icelandic miles, or twenty-
four English miles.

In that place the fiord was at least three English miles wide; the waves rolled
with a rushing din upon the sharp-pointed rocks; this inlet was confined between
walls of rock, precipices crowned by sharp peaks 2,000 feet high, and
remarkable for the brown strata which separated the beds of reddish tuff.
However much I might respect the intelligence of our quadrupeds, I hardly cared
to put it to the test by trusting myself to it on horseback across an arm of the sea.

If they are as intelligent as they are said to be, I thought, they won't try it. In
any case, I will tax my intelligence to direct theirs.

But my uncle would not wait. He spurred on to the edge. His steed lowered
his head to examine the nearest waves and stopped. My uncle, who had an
instinct of his own, too, applied pressure, and was again refused by the animal
significantly shaking his head. Then followed strong language, and the whip; but
the brute answered these arguments with kicks and endeavours to throw his rider.
At last the clever little pony, with a bend of his knees, started from under the
Professor's legs, and left him standing upon two boulders on the shore just like
the colossus of Rhodes.

"Confounded brute!" cried the unhorsed horseman, suddenly degraded into a
pedestrian, just as ashamed as a cavalry officer degraded to a foot soldier.

"Fdrja," said the guide, touching his shoulder.

"What! a boat?"

"Der," replied Hans, pointing to one.

"Yes," I cried; "there is a boat."


"Why did not you say so then? Well, let us go on."

"Tidvatten," said the guide.

"What is he saying?"

"He says tide," said my uncle, translating the Danish word.

"No doubt we must wait for the tide."

"Forbida," said my uncle.

"Ja," replied Hans.

My uncle stamped with his foot, while the horses went on to the boat.

I perfectly understood the necessity of abiding a particular moment of the
tide to undertake the crossing of the fiord, when, the sea having reached its
greatest height, it should be slack water. Then the ebb and flow have no sensible
effect, and the boat does not risk being carried either to the bottom or out to sea.

That favourable moment arrived only with six o'clock; when my uncle,
myself, the guide, two other passengers and the four horses, trusted ourselves to
a somewhat fragile raft. Accustomed as I was to the swift and sure steamers on
the Elbe, I found the oars of the rowers rather a slow means of propulsion. It
took us more than an hour to cross the fiord; but the passage was effected
without any mishap.

In another half hour we had reached the aolkirkja of Gardar


CHAPTER XIII.


HOSPITALITY UNDER THE ARCTIC CIRCLE


It ought to have been night-time, but under the 65th parallel there was
nothing surprising in the nocturnal polar light. In Iceland during the months of
June and July the sun does not set.

But the temperature was much lower. I was cold and more hungry than cold.
Welcome was the sight of the boér which was hospitably opened to receive us.

It was a peasant's house, but in point of hospitality it was equal to a king's.
On our arrival the master came with outstretched hands, and without more


ceremony he beckoned us to follow him.

To accompany him down the long, narrow, dark passage, would have been
impossible. Therefore, we followed, as he bid us. The building was constructed
of roughly squared timbers, with rooms on both sides, four in number, all
opening out into the one passage: these were the kitchen, the weaving shop, the
badstofa, or family sleeping-room, and the visitors' room, which was the best of
all. My uncle, whose height had not been thought of in building the house, of
course hit his head several times against the beams that projected from the
ceilings.

We were introduced into our apartment, a large room with a floor of earth
stamped hard down, and lighted by a window, the panes of which were formed
of sheep's bladder, not admitting too much light. The sleeping accommodation
consisted of dry litter, thrown into two wooden frames painted red, and
omamented with Icelandic sentences. I was hardly expecting so much comfort;
the only discomfort proceeded from the strong odour of dried fish, hung meat,
and sour milk, of which my nose made bitter complaints.

When we had laid aside our travelling wraps the voice of the host was heard
inviting us to the kitchen, the only room where a fire was lighted even in the
severest cold.

My uncle lost no time in obeying the friendly call, nor was I slack in
following.

The kitchen chimney was constructed on the ancient pattern; in the middle of
the room was a stone for a hearth, over it in the roof a hole to let the smoke
escape. The kitchen was also a dining-room.

At our entrance the host, as if he had never seen us, greeted us with the word
"Sellvertu," which means "be happy," and came and kissed us on the cheek.

After him his wife pronounced the same words, accompanied with the same
ceremonial; then the two placing their hands upon their hearts, inclined
profoundly before us.

I hasten to inform the reader that this Icelandic lady was the mother of
nineteen children, all, big and little, swarming in the midst of the dense wreaths
of smoke with which the fire on the hearth filled the chamber. Every moment I
noticed a fair-haired and rather melancholy face peeping out of the rolling
volumes of smoke - they were a perfect cluster of unwashed angels.

My uncle and I treated this little tribe with kindness; and in a very short time
we each had three or four of these brats on our shoulders, as many on our laps,
and the rest between our knees. Those who could speak kept repeating
"Sellvertu," in every conceivable tone; those that could not speak made up for
that want by shrill cries.


This concert was brought to a close by the announcement of dinner. At that
moment our hunter returned, who had been seeing his horses provided for; that is
to say, he had economically let them loose in the fields, where the poor beasts
had to content themselves with the scanty moss they could pull off the rocks and
a few meagre sea weeds, and the next day they would not fail to come of
themselves and resume the labours of the previous day.

"Sellvertu," said Hans.

Then calmly, automatically, and dispassionately he kissed the host, the
hostess, and their nineteen children.

This ceremony over, we Sat at table, twenty-four in number, and therefore
one upon another. The luckiest had only two urchins upon their knees.

But silence reigned in all this littke world at the arrival of the soup, and the
national taciturnity resumed its empire even over the children. The host served
out to us a soup made of lichen and by no means unpleasant, then an immense
piece of dried fish floating in butter rancid with twenty years' keeping, and,
therefore, according to Icelandic gastronomy, much preferable to fresh butter.
Along with this, we had 'skye,' a sort of clotted milk, with biscuits, and a liquid
prepared from juniper berries; for beverage we had a thin milk mixed with water,
called in this country 'blanda.' It is not for me to decide whether this diet is
wholesome or not; all I can say is, that I was desperately hungry, and that at
dessert I swallowed to the very last gulp of a thick broth made from buckwheat.

As soon as the meal was over the children disappeared, and their elders
gathered round the peat fire, which also burnt such miscellaneous fuel as briars,
cow-dung, and fishbones. After this little pinch of warmth the different groups
retired to their respective rooms. Our hostess hospitably offered us her assistance
in undressing, according to Icelandic usage; but on our gracefully declining, she
insisted no longer, and I was able at last to curl myself up in my mossy bed.

At five next morning we bade our host farewell, my uncle with difficulty
persuading him to accept a proper remuneration; and Hans signalled the start.

At a hundred yards from Gardar the soil began to change its aspect; it
became boggy and less favourable to progress. On our right the chain of
mountains was indefinitely prolonged like an immense system of natural
fortifications, of which we were following the counter-scarp or lesser steep;
often we were met by streams, which we had to ford with great care, not to wet
our packages.

The desert became wider and more hideous; yet from time to time we
seemed to descry a human figure that fled at our approach, sometimes a sharp
turn would bring us suddenly within a short distance of one of these spectres,
and I was filled with loathing at the sight of a huge deformed head, the skin


shining and hairless, and repulsive sores visible through the gaps in the poor
creature's wretched rags.

The unhappy being forbore to approach us and offer his misshapen hand. He
fled away, but not before Hans had saluted him with the customary "S@llvertu."

"Spetelsk," said he.

"A leper!" my uncle repeated.

This word produced a repulsive effect. The horrible disease of leprosy is too
common in Iceland; it is not contagious, but hereditary, and lepers are forbidden
to malry.

These apparitions were not cheerful, and did not throw any charm over the
less and less attractive landscapes. The last tufts of grass had disappeared from
beneath our feet. Not a tree was to be seen, unless we except a few dwarf birches
as low as brushwood. Not an animal but a few wandering ponies that their
owners would not feed. Sometimes we could see a hawk balancing himself on
his wings under the grey cloud, and then darting away south with rapid flight. I
felt melancholy under this savage aspect of nature, and my thoughts went away
to the cheerful scenes I had left in the far south.

We had to cross a few narrow fiords, and at last quite a wide gulf; the tide,
then high, allowed us to pass over without delay, and to reach the hamlet of
Alftanes, one mile beyond.

That evening, after having forded two rivers full of trout and pike, called
Alfa and Heta, we were obliged to spend the night in a deserted building worthy
to be haunted by all the elfins of Scandinavia. The ice king certainly held court
here, and gave us all night long samples of what he could do.

No particular event marked the next day. Bogs, dead levels, melancholy
desert tracks, wherever we travelled. By nightfall we had accomplished half our
journey, and we lay at Krésolbt.

On the 19th of June, for about a mile, that is an Icelandic mile, we walked
upon hardened lava; this ground is called in the country ‘hraun'; the writhen
surface presented the appearance of distorted, twisted cables, sometimes
stretched in length, sometimes contorted together; an immense torrent, once
liquid, now solid, ran from the nearest mountains, now extinct volcanoes, but the
ruins around revealed the violence of the past eruptions. Yet here and there were
a few jets of steam from hot springs.

We had no time to watch these phenomena; we had to proceed on our way.
Soon at the foot of the mountains the boggy land reappeared, intersected by little
lakes. Our route now lay westward; we had turned the great bay of Faxa, and the
twin peaks of Snefell rose white into the cloudy sky at the distance of at least
five miles.


The horses did their duty well, no difficulties stopped them in their steady
career. I was getting tired; but my uncle was as firm and straight as he was at our
first start. I could not help admiring his persistency, as well as the hunter's, who
treated our expedition like a mere promenade.

June 20. At six p.m. we reached Biidir, a village on the sea shore; and the
guide there claiming his due, my uncle settled with him. It was Hans' own
family, that is, his uncles and cousins, who gave us hospitality; we were kindly
received, and without taxing too much the goodness of these folks, I would
willingly have tarried here to recruit after my fatigues. But my uncle, who
wanted no recruiting, would not hear of it, and the next morning we had to
bestride our beasts again.

The soil told of the neighbourhood of the mountain, whose granite
foundations rose from the earth like the knotted roots of some huge oak. We
were rounding the immense base of the volcano. The Professor hardly took his
eyes off it. He tossed up his arms and seemed to defy it, and to declare, "There
stands the giant that I shall conquer." After about four hours' walking the horses
stopped of their own accord at the door of the priest's house at Stapi.


CHAPTER XIV.


BUT ARCTICS CAN BE INHOSPITABLE, TOO

Stapi is a village consisting of about thirty huts, built of lava, at the south
side of the base of the volcano. It extends along the inner edge of a small fiord,
inclosed between basaltic walls of the strangest construction.

Basalt is a brownish rock of igneous origin. It assumes regular forms, the
arrangement of which is often very surprising. Here nature had done her work
geometrically, with square and compass and plummet. Everywhere else her art
consists alone in throwing down huge masses together in disorder. You see cones
imperfectly formed, irregular pyramids, with a fantastic disarrangement of lines;
but here, as if to exhibit an example of regularity, though in advance of the very
earliest architects, she has created a severely simple order of architecture, never
surpassed either by the splendours of Babylon or the wonders of Greece.

I had heard of the Giant's Causeway in Ireland, and Fingal's Cave in Staffa,


one of the Hebrides; but I had never yet seen a basaltic formation.

At Stapi I beheld this phenomenon in all its beauty.

The wall that confined the fiord, like all the coast of the peninsula, was
composed of a series of vertical columns thirty feet high. These straight shafts,
of fair proportions, supported an architrave of horizontal slabs, the overhanging
portion of which formed a semi-arch over the sea. At. intervals, under this
natural shelter, there spread out vaulted entrances in beautiful curves, into which
the waves came dashing with foam and spray. A few shafts of basalt, torn from
their hold by the fury of tempests, lay along the soil like remains of an ancient
temple, in ruins for ever fresh, and over which centuries passed without leaving
a trace of age upon them.

This was our last stage upon the earth. Hans had exhibited great intelligence,
and it gave me some little comfort to think then that he was not going to leave
us.

On arriving at the door of the rector's house, which was not different from
the others, I saw a man shoeing a horse, hammer in hand, and with a leathern
apron on.

"Sellvertu," said the hunter.

"God dag," said the blacksmith in good Danish.

"Kyrkoherde," said Hans, turning round to my uncle.

"The rector," repeated the Professor. "It seems, Axel, that this good man is
the rector."

Our guide in the meanwhile was making the 'kyrkoherde’ aware of the
position of things; when the latter, suspending his labours for a moment, uttered
a sound no doubt understood between horses and farriers, and immediately a tall
and ugly hag appeared from the hut. She must have been six feet at the least. I
was in great alarm lest she should treat me to the Icelandic kiss; but there was no
occasion to fear, nor did she do the honours at all too gracefully.

The visitors' room seemed to me the worst in the whole cabin. It was close,
dirty, and evil smelling. But we had to be content. The rector did not to go in for
antique hospitality. Very far from it. Before the day was over I saw that we had
to do with a blacksmith, a fisherman, a hunter, a joiner, but not at all with a
minister of the Gospel. To be sure, it was a week-day; perhaps on a Sunday he
made amends.

I don't mean to say anything against these poor priests, who after all are very
wretched. They receive from the Danish Government a ridiculously small
pittance, and they get from the parish the fourth part of the tithe, which does not
come to sixty marks a year (about £4). Hence the necessity to work for their
livelihood; but after fishing, hunting, and shoeing horses for any length of time,


one soon gets into the ways and manners of fishermen, hunters, and farriers, and
other rather rude and uncultivated people; and that evening I found out that
temperance was not among the virtues that distinguished my host.

My uncle soon discovered what sort of a man he had to do with; instead of a
good and learned man he found a rude and coarse peasant. He therefore resolved
to commence the grand expedition at once, and to leave this inhospitable
parsonage. He cared nothing about fatigue, and resolved to spend some days
upon the mountain.

The preparations for our departure were therefore made the very day after
our arrival at Stapi. Hans hired the services of three Icelanders to do the duty of
the horses in the transport of the burdens; but as soon as we had arrived at the
crater these natives were to turn back and leave us to our own devices. This was
to be clearly understood.

My uncle now took the opportunity to explain to Hans that it was his
intention to explore the interior of the volcano to its farthest limits.

Hans merely nodded. There or elsewhere, down in the bowels of the earth, or
anywhere on the surface, all was alike to him. For my own part the incidents of
the journey had hitherto kept me amused, and made me forgetful of coming
evils; but now my fears again were beginning to get the better of me. But what
could I do? The place to resist the Professor would have been Hamburg, not the
foot of Snefell.

One thought, above all others, harassed and alarmed me; it was one
calculated to shake firmer nerves than mine.

Now, thought I, here we are, about to climb Snefell. Very good. We will
explore the crater. Very good, too, others have done as much without dying for it.
But that is not all. If there is a way to penetrate into the very bowels of the
island, if that ill-advised Saknussemm has told a true tale, we shall lose our way
amidst the deep subterranean passages of this volcano. Now, there is no proof
that Snefell is extinct. Who can assure us that an eruption is not brewing at this
very moment? Does it follow that because the monster has slept since 1229 he
must therefore never awake again? And if he wakes up presently, where shall we
be?

It was worth while debating this question, and I did debate it. I could not
sleep for dreaming about eruptions. Now, the part of ejected scoriae and ashes
seemed to my mind a very rough one to act.

So, at last, when I could hold out no longer, I resolved to lay the case before
my uncle, as prudently and as cautiously as possible, just under the form of an
almost impossible hypothesis.

I went to him. I communicated my fears to him, and drew back a step to give


him room for the explosion which I knew must follow. But I was mistaken.

"IT was thinking of that," he replied with great simplicity.

What could those words mean? - Was he actually going to listen to reason?
Was he contemplating the abandonment of his plans? This was too good to be
true.

After a few moments’ silence, during which I dared not question him, he
resumed:

"I was thinking of that. Ever since we arrived at Stapi I have been occupied
with the important question you have just opened, for we must not be guilty of
imprudence."

"No, indeed!" I replied with forcible emphasis.

"For six hundred years Snefell has been dumb; but he may speak again.
Now, eruptions are always preceded by certain well-known phenomena. I have
therefore examined the natives, I have studied external appearances, and I can
assure you, Axel, that there will be no eruption."

At this positive affirmation I stood amazed and speechless.

"You don't doubt my word?" said my uncle. "Well, follow me."

I obeyed like an automaton. Coming out from the priest's house, the
Professor took a straight road, which, through an opening in the basaltic wall, led
away from the sea. We were soon in the open country, if one may give that name
to a vast extent of mounds of volcanic products. This tract seemed crushed under
a rain of enormous ejected rocks of trap, basalt, granite, and all kinds of igneous
rocks.

Here and there I could see puffs and jets of steam curling up into the air,
called in Icelandic 'reykir,' issuing from thermal springs, and indicating by their
motion the volcanic energy underneath. This seemed to justify my fears: But I
fell from the height of my new-born hopes when my uncle said:

"You see all these volumes of steam, Axel; well, they demonstrate that we
have nothing to fear from the fury of a volcanic eruption."

"Am I to believe that?" I cried.

"Understand this clearly," added the Professor. "At the approach of an
eruption these jets would redouble their activity, but disappear altogether during
the period of the eruption. For the elastic fluids, being no longer under pressure,
go off by way of the crater instead of escaping by their usual passages through
the fissures in the soil. Therefore, if these vapours remain in their usual
condition, if they display no augmentation of force, and if you add to this the
observation that the wind and rain are not ceasing and being replaced by a still
and heavy atmosphere, then you may affirm that no eruption is preparing."

"But -"


'No more; that is sufficient. When science has uttered her voice, let babblers
hold their peace.

I returned to the parsonage, very crestfallen. My uncle had beaten me with
the weapons of science. Still I had one hope left, and this was, that when we had
reached the bottom of the crater it would be impossible, for want of a passage, to
go deeper, in spite of all the Saknussemm's in Iceland.

I spent that whole night in one constant nightmare; in the heart of a volcano,
and from the deepest depths of the earth I saw myself tossed up amongst the
interplanetary spaces under the form of an eruptive rock.

The next day, June 23, Hans was awaiting us with his companions carrying
provisions, tools, and instruments; two iron pointed sticks, two rifles, and two
shot belts were for my uncle and myself. Hans, as a cautious man, had added to
our luggage a leathern bottle full of water, which, with that in our flasks, would
ensure us a supply of water for eight days.

It was nine in the morning. The priest and his tall Megera were awaiting us
at the door. We supposed they were standing there to bid us a kind farewell. But
the farewell was put in the unexpected form of a heavy bill, in which everything
was charged, even to the very air we breathed in the pastoral house, infected as it
was. This worthy couple were fleecing us just as a Swiss innkeeper might have
done, and estimated their imperfect hospitality at the highest price.

My uncle paid without a remark: a man who is starting for the centre of the
earth need not be particular about a few rix dollars.

This point being settled, Hans gave the signal, and we soon left Stapi behind
us.


CHAPTER XV.


SNAFELL AT LAST

Snefell is 5,000 feet high. Its double cone forms the limit of a trachytic belt
which stands out distinctly in the mountain system of the island. From our
starting point we could see the two peaks boldly projected against the dark grey
sky; I could see an enormous cap of snow coming low down upon the giant's
brow.


We walked in single file, headed by the hunter, who ascended by narrow
tracks, where two could not have gone abreast. There was therefore no room for
conversation.

After we had passed the basaltic wall of the fiord of Stapi we passed over a
vegetable fibrous peat bog, left from the ancient vegetation of this peninsula.
The vast quantity of this unworked fuel would be sufficient to warm the whole
population of Iceland for a century; this vast turbary measured in certain ravines
had in many places a depth of seventy feet, and presented layers of carbonized
remains of vegetation alternating with thinner layers of tufaceous pumice.

As a true nephew of the Professor Liedenbrock, and in spite of my dismal
prospects, I could not help observing with interest the mineralogical curiosities
which lay about me as in a vast museum, and I constructed for myself a
complete geological account of Iceland.

This most curious island has evidently been projected from the bottom of the
sea at a comparatively recent date. Possibly, it may still be subject to gradual
elevation. If this is the case, its origin may well be attributed to subterranean
fires. Therefore, in this case, the theory of Sir Humphry Davy, Saknussemm's
document, and my uncle's theories would all go off in smoke. This hypothesis
led me to examine with more attention the appearance of the surface, and I soon
arrived at a conclusion as to the nature of the forces which presided at its birth.

Iceland, which is entirely devoid of alluvial soil, is wholly composed of
volcanic tufa, that is to say, an agglomeration of porous rocks and stones. Before
the volcanoes broke out it consisted of trap rocks slowly upraised to the level of
the sea by the action of central forces. The internal fires had not yet forced their
way through.

But at a later period a wide chasm formed diagonally from south-west to
north-east, through which was gradually forced out the trachyte which was to
form a mountain chain. No violence accompanied this change; the matter thrown
out was in vast quantities, and the liquid material oozing out from the abysses of
the earth slowly spread in extensive plains or in hillocky masses. To this period
belong the felspar, syenites, and porphyries.

But with the help of this outflow the thickness of the crust of the island
increased materially, and therefore also its powers of resistance. It may easily be
conceived what vast quantities of elastic gases, what masses of molten matter
accumulated beneath its solid surface whilst no exit was practicable after the
cooling of the trachytic crust. Therefore a time would come when the elastic and
explosive forces of the imprisoned gases would upheave this ponderous cover
and drive out for themselves openings through tall chimneys. Hence then the
volcano would distend and lift up the crust, and then burst through a crater


suddenly formed at the summit or thinnest part of the volcano.

To the eruption succeeded other volcanic phenomena. Through the outlets
now made first escaped the ejected basalt of which the plain we had just left
presented such marvellous specimens. We were moving over grey rocks of dense
and massive formation, which in cooling had formed into hexagonal prisms.
Everywhere around us we saw truncated cones, formerly so many fiery mouths.

After the exhaustion of the basalt, the volcano, the power of which grew by
the extinction of the lesser craters, supplied an egress to lava, ashes, and scoriae,
of which I could see lengthened screes streaming down the sides of the mountain
like flowing hair.

Such was the succession of phenomena which produced Iceland, all arising
from the action of internal fire; and to suppose that the mass within did not still
exist in a state of liquid incandescence was absurd; and nothing could surpass
the absurdity of fancying that it was possible to reach the earth's centre.

So I felt a little comforted as we advanced to the assault of Snefell.

The way was growing more and more arduous, the ascent steeper and
steeper; the loose fragments of rock trembled beneath us, and the utmost care
was needed to avoid dangerous falls.

Hans went on as quietly as if he were on level ground; sometimes he
disappeared altogether behind the huge blocks, then a shrill whistle would direct
us on our way to him. Sometimes he would halt, pick up a few bits of stone,
build them up into a recognisable form, and thus made landmarks to guide us in
our way back. A very wise precaution in itself, but, as things turned out, quite
useless.

Three hours' fatiguing march had only brought us to the base of the
mountain. There Hans bid us come to a halt, and a hasty breakfast was served
out. My uncle swallowed two mouthfuls at a time to get on faster. But, whether
he liked it or not, this was a rest as well as a breakfast hour and he had to wait
till it pleased our guide to move on, which came to pass in an hour. The three
Icelanders, just as taciturn as their comrade the hunted, never spoke, and ate their
breakfasts in silence.

We were now beginning to scale the steep sides of Snefell. Its snowy
summit, by an optical illusion not unfrequent in mountains, seemed close to us,
and yet how many weary hours it took to reach it! The stones, adhering by no
soil or fibrous roots of vegetation, rolled away from under our feet, and rushed
down the precipice below with the swiftness of an avalanche.

At some places the flanks of the mountain formed an angle with the horizon
of at least 36 degrees; it was impossible to climb them, and these stony cliffs had
to be tacked round, not without great difficulty. Then we helped each other with


our sticks.

I must admit that my uncle kept as close to me as he could; he never lost
sight of me, and in many straits his arm furnished me with a powerful support.
He himself seemed to possess an instinct for equilibrium, for he never stumbled.
The Icelanders, though burdened with our loads, climbed with the agility of
mountaineers.

To judge by the distant appearance of the summit of Snefell, it would have
seemed too steep to ascend on our side. Fortunately, after an hour of fatigue and
athletic exercises, in the midst of the vast surface of snow presented by the
hollow between the two peaks, a kind of staircase appeared unexpectedly which
greatly facilitated our ascent. It was formed by one of those torrents of stones
flung up by the eruptions, called 'sting' by the Icelanders. If this torrent had not
been arrested in its fall by the formation of the sides of the mountain, it would
have gone on to the sea and formed more islands.

Such as it was, it did us good service. The steepness increased, but these
stone steps allowed us to rise with facility, and even with such rapidity that,
having rested for a moment while my companions continued their ascent, I
perceived them already reduced by distance to microscopic dimensions.

At seven we had ascended the two thousand steps of this grand staircase, and
we had attained a bulge in the mountain, a kind of bed on which rested the cone
proper of the crater.

Three thousand two hundred feet below us stretched the sea. We had passed
the limit of perpetual snow, which, on account of the moisture of the climate, is
at a greater elevation in Iceland than the high latitude would give reason to
suppose. The cold was excessively keen. The wind was blowing violently. I was
exhausted. The Professor saw that my limbs were refusing to perform their
office, and in spite of his impatience he decided on stopping. He therefore spoke
to the hunter, who shook his head, saying:

"Ofvanfor."

"Tt seems we must go higher," said my uncle.

Then he asked Hans for his reason.

"Mistour," replied the guide.

"Ja Mistour," said one of the Icelanders in a tone of alarm.

"What does that word mean?" I asked uneasily.

"Look!" said my uncle.

I looked down upon the plain. An immense column of pulverized pumice,
sand and dust was rising with a whirling circular motion like a waterspout; the
wind was lashing it on to that side of Snefell where we were holding on; this
dense veil, hung across the sun, threw a deep shadow over the mountain. If that


huge revolving pillar sloped down, it would involve us in its whirling eddies.
This phenomenon, which is not unfrequent when the wind blows from the
glaciers, is called in Icelandic 'mistour.'

"Hastigt! hastigt!" cried our guide.

Without knowing Danish I understood at once that we must follow Hans at
the top of our speed. He began to circle round the cone of the crater, but in a
diagonal direction so as to facilitate our progress. Presently the dust storm fell
upon the mountain, which quivered under the shock; the loose stones, caught
with the irresistible blasts of wind, flew about in a perfect hail as in an eruption.
Happily we were on the opposite side, and sheltered from all harm. But for the
precaution of our guide, our mangled bodies, torn and pounded into fragments,
would have been carried afar like the ruins hurled along by some unknown
meteor.

Yet Hans did not think it prudent to spend the night upon the sides of the
cone. We continued our zigzag climb. The fifteen hundred remaining feet took
us five hours to clear; the circuitous route, the diagonal and the counter marches,
must have measured at least three leagues. I could stand it no longer. I was
yielding to the effects of hunger and cold. The rarefied air scarcely gave play to
the action of my lungs.

At last, at eleven in the sunlight night, the summit of Snefell was reached,
and before going in for shelter into the crater I had time to observe the midnight
sun, at his lowest point, gilding with his pale rays the island that slept at my feet.


CHAPTER XVI.


BOLDLY DOWN THE CRATER


Supper was rapidly devoured, and the little company housed themselves as
best they could. The bed was hard, the shelter not very substantial, and our
position an anxious one, at five thousand feet above the sea level. Yet I slept
particularly well; it was one of the best nights I had ever had, and I did not even


dream.

Next morning we awoke half frozen by the sharp keen air, but with the light
of a splendid sun. I rose from my granite bed and went out to enjoy the
magnificent spectacle that lay unrolled before me.

I stood on the very summit of the southernmost of Snefell's peaks. The range
of the eye extended over the whole island. By an optical law which obtains at all
great heights, the shores seemed raised and the centre depressed. It seemed as if
one of Helbesmer's raised maps lay at my feet. I could see deep valleys
intersecting each other in every direction, precipices like low walls, lakes
reduced to ponds, rivers abbreviated into streams. On my right were numberless
glaciers and innumerable peaks, some plumed with feathery clouds of smoke.
The undulating surface of these endless mountains, crested with sheets of snow,
reminded one of a stormy sea. If I looked westward, there the ocean lay spread
out in all its magnificence, like a mere continuation of those flock-like summits.
The eye could hardly tell where the snowy ridges ended and the foaming waves
began.

I was thus steeped in the marvellous ecstasy which all high summits develop
in the mind; and now without giddiness, for I was beginning to be accustomed to
these sublime aspects of nature. My dazzled eyes were bathed in the bright flood
of the solar rays. I was forgetting where and who I was, to live the life of elves
and sylphs, the fanciful creation of Scandinavian superstitions. I felt intoxicated
with the sublime pleasure of lofty elevations without thinking of the profound
abysses into which I was shortly to be plunged. But I was brought back to the
realities of things by the arrival of Hans and the Professor, who joined me on the
summit.

My uncle pointed out to me in the far west a light steam or mist, a semblance
of land, which bounded the distant horizon of waters.

"Greenland!" said he.

"Greenland?" I cried.

"Yes; we are only thirty-five leagues from it; and during thaws the white
bears, borne by the ice fields from the north, are carried even into Iceland. But
never mind that. Here we are at the top of Snefell and here are two peaks, one
north and one south. Hans will tell us the name of that on which we are now
standing."

The question being put, Hans replied:

"Scartaris."

My uncle shot a triumphant glance at me.

"Now for the crater!" he cried.

The crater of Snefell resembled an inverted cone, the openingof which might


be half a league in diameter. Its depth appeared to be about two thousand feet.
Imagine the aspect of such a reservoir, brim full and running over with liquid fire
amid the rolling thunder. The bottom of the funnel was about 250 feet in circuit,
so that the gentle slope allowed its lower brim to be reached without much
difficulty. Involuntarily I compared the whole crater to an enormous erected
mortar, and the comparison put me in a terrible fright.

"What madness," I thought, "to go down into a mortar, perhaps a loaded
mortar, to be shot up into the air at a moment's notice!"

But I did not try to back out of it. Hans with perfect coolness resumed the
lead, and I followed him without a word.

In order to facilitate the descent, Hans wound his way down the cone by a
spiral path. Our route lay amidst eruptive rocks, some of which, shaken out of
their loosened beds, rushed bounding down the abyss, and in their fall awoke
echoes remarkable for their loud and well-defined sharpness.

In certain parts of the cone there were glaciers. Here Hans advanced only
with extreme precaution, sounding his way with his iron-pointed pole, to
discover any crevasses in it. At particularly dubious passages we were obliged to
connect ourselves with each other by a long cord, in order that any man who
missed his footing might be held up by his companions. This solid formation
was prudent, but did not remove all danger.

Yet, notwithstanding the difficulties of the descent, down steeps unknown to
the guide, the journey was accomplished without accidents, except the loss of a
coil of rope, which escaped from the hands of an Icelander, and took the shortest
way to the bottom of the abyss.

At mid-day we arrived. I raised my head and saw straight above me the
upper aperture of the cone, framing a bit of sky of very small circumference, but
almost perfectly round. Just upon the edge appeared the snowy peak of Saris,
standing out sharp and clear against endless space.

At the bottom of the crater were three chimneys, through which, in its
eruptions, Snefell had driven forth fire and lava from its central furnace. Each of
these chimneys was a hundred feet in diameter. They gaped before us right in
our path. I had not the courage to look down either of them. But Professor
Liedenbrock had hastily surveyed all three; he was panting, running from one to
the other, gesticulating, and uttering incoherent expressions. Hans and his
comrades, seated upon loose lava rocks, looked at him with asmuch wonder as
they knew how to express, and perhaps taking him for an escaped lunatic.

Suddenly my uncle uttered a cry. I thought his foot must have slipped and
that he had fallen down one of the holes. But, no; I saw him, with arms
outstretched and legs straddling wide apart, erect before a granite rock that stood


in the centre of the crater, just like a pedestal made ready to receive a statue of
Pluto. He stood like a man stupefied, but the stupefaction soon gave way to
delirious rapture.

"Axel, Axel," he cried. "Come, come!"

Iran. Hans and the Icelanders never stirred.

"Look!" cried the Professor.

And, sharing his astonishment, but I think not his joy, I read on the western
face of the block, in Runic characters, half mouldered away with lapse of ages,
this thrice-accursed name:

[At this point a Runic text appears]

"Arne Saknussemm!" replied my uncle. "Do you yet doubt?"

I made no answer; and I returned in silence to my lava seat in a state of utter
speechless consternation. Here was crushing evidence.

How long I remained plunged in agonizing reflections I cannot tell; all that I
know is, that on raising my head again, I saw only my uncle and Hans at the
bottom of the crater. The Icelanders had been dismissed, and they were now
descending the outer slopes of Snefell to return to Stapi.

Hans slept peaceably at the foot of a rock, in a lava bed, where he had found
a suitable couch for himself; but my uncle was pacing around the bottom of the
crater like a wild beast in a cage. I had neither the wish nor the strength to rise,
and following the guide's example I went off into an unhappy slumber, fancying
I could hear ominous noises or feel tremblings within the recesses of the
mountain.

Thus the first night in the crater passed away.

The next morning, a grey, heavy, cloudy sky seemed to droop over the
summit of the cone. I did not know this first from the appearances of nature, but
I found it out by my uncle's impetuous wrath.

I soon found out the cause, and hope dawned again in my heart. For this
reason.

Of the three ways open before us, one had been taken by Saknussemm. The
indications of the learned Icelander hinted at in the cryptogram, pointed to this
fact that the shadow of Scartaris came to touch that particular way during the
latter days of the month of June.

That sharp peak might hence be considered as the gnomon of a vast sun dial,
the shadow projected from which on a certain day would point out the road to
the centre of the earth.

Now, no sun no shadow, and therefore no guide. Here was June 25. If the sun
was Clouded for six days we must postpone our visit till next year.

My limited powers of description would fail, were I to attempt a picture of


the Professor's angry impatience. The day wore on, and no shadow came to lay
itself along the bottom of the crater. Hans did not move from the spot he had
selected; yet he must be asking himself what were we waiting for, if he asked
himself anything at all. My uncle spoke not a word to me. His gaze, ever
directed upwards, was lost in the grey and misty space beyond.

On the 26th nothing yet. Rain mingled with snow was falling all day long.
Hans built a but of pieces of lava. I felt a malicious pleasure in watching the
thousand rills and cascades that came tumbling down the sides of the cone, and
the deafening continuous din awaked by every stone against which they
bounded.

My uncle's rage knew no bounds. It was enough to irritate a meeker man
than he; for it was foundering almost within the port.

But Heaven never sends unmixed grief, and for Professor Liedenbrock there
was a Satisfaction in store proportioned to his desperate anxieties.

The next day the sky was again overcast; but on the 29th of June, the last day
but one of the month, with the change of the moon came a change of weather.
The sun poured a flood of light down the crater. Every hillock, every rock and
stone, every projecting surface, had its share of the beaming torrent, and threw
its shadow on the ground. Amongst them all, Scartaris laid down his sharp-
pointed angular shadow which began to move slowly in the opposite direction to
that of the radiant orb.

My uncle turned too, and followed it.

At noon, being at its least extent, it came and softly fell upon the edge of the
middle chimney.

"There it is! there it is!" shouted the Professor.

"Now for the centre of the globe!" he added in Danish.

I looked at Hans, to hear what he would say.

"Fortt!" was his tranquil answer.

"Forward!" replied my uncle.

It was thirteen minutes past one.


CHAPTER XVII.


VERTICAL DESCENT


Now began our real journey. Hitherto our toil had overcome all difficulties,
now difficulties would spring up at every step.

I had not yet ventured to look down the bottomless pit into which I was
about to take a plunge The supreme hour had come. I might now either share in
the enterprise or refuse to move forward. But I was ashamed to recoil in the
presence of the hunter. Hans accepted the enterprise with such calmness, such
indifference, such perfect disregard of any possible danger that I blushed at the
idea of being less brave than he. If I had been alone I might have once more tried
the effect of argument; but in the presence of the guide I held my peace; my
heart flew back to my sweet Virlandaise, and I approached the central chimney.

I have already mentioned that it was a hundred feet in diameter, and three
hundred feet round. I bent over a projecting rock and gazed down. My hair stood
on end with terror. The bewildering feeling of vacuity laid hold upon me. I felt
my centre of gravity shifting its place, and giddiness mounting into my brain like
drunkenness. There is nothing more treacherous than this attraction down deep
abysses. I was just about to drop down, when a hand laid hold of me. It was that
of Hans. I suppose I had not taken as many lessons on gulf exploration as I ought
to have done in the Frelsers Kirk at Copenhagen.

But, however short was my examination of this well, I had taken some
account of its conformation. Its almost perpendicular walls were bristling with
innumerable projections which would facilitate the descent. But if there was no
want of steps, still there was no rail. A rope fastened to the edge of the aperture
might have helped us down. But how were we to unfasten it, when arrived at the
other end?

My uncle employed a very simple expedient to obviate this difficulty. He
uncoiled a cord of the thickness of a finger, and four hundred feet long; first he
dropped half of it down, then he passed it round a lava block that projected
conveniently, and threw the other half down the chimney. Each of us could then
descend by holding with the hand both halves of the rope, which would not be
able to unroll itself from its hold; when two hundred feet down, it would be easy
to get possession of the whole of the rope by letting one end go and pulling
down by the other. Then the exercise would go on again ad infinitum.

"Now," said my uncle, after having completed these preparations, "now let us
look to our loads. I will divide them into three lots; each of us will strap one
upon his back. I mean only fragile articles."

Of course, we were not included under that head.


"Hans," said he, "will take charge of the tools and a portion of the provisions;
you, Axel, will take another third of the provisions, and the arms; and I will take
the rest of the provisions and the delicate instruments."

"But," said I, "the clothes, and that mass of ladders and ropes, what is to
become of them?"

"They will go down by themselves."

"How so?" I asked.

"You will see presently."

My uncle was always willing to employ magnificent resources. Obeying
orders, Hans tied all the non-fragile articles in one bundle, corded them firmly,
and sent them bodily down the gulf before us.

I listened to the dull thuds of the descending bale. My uncle, leaning over the
abyss, followed the descent of the luggage with a satisfied nod, and only rose
erect when he had quite lost sight of it.

"Very well, now it is our turn."

Now I ask any sensible man if it was possible to hear those words without a
shudder.

The Professor fastened his package of instruments upon his shoulders; Hans
took the tools; I took the arms: and the descent commenced in the following
order; Hans, my uncle, and myself. It was effected in profound silence, broken
only by the descent of loosened stones down the dark gulf.

I dropped as it were, frantically clutching the double cord with one hand and
buttressing myself from the wall with the other by means of my stick. One idea
overpowered me almost, fear lest the rock should give way from which I was
hanging. This cord seemed a fragile thing for three persons to be suspended
from. I made as little use of it as possible, performing wonderful feats of
equilibrium upon the lava projections which my foot seemed to catch hold of
like a hand.

When one of these slippery steps shook under the heavier form of Hans, he
said in his tranquil voice:

"Gif akt! "

"Attention!" repeated my uncle.

In half an hour we were standing upon the surface of a rock jammed in
across the chimney from one side to the other.

Hans pulled the rope by one of its ends, the other rose in the air; after passing
the higher rock it came down again, bringing with it a rather dangerous shower
of bits of stone and lava.

Leaning over the edge of our narrow standing ground, I observed that the
bottom of the hole was still invisible.


The same manoeuvre was repeated with the cord, and half an hour after we
had descended another two hundred feet.

I don't suppose the maddest geologist under such circumstances would have
studied the nature of the rocks that we were passing. I am sure I did trouble my
head about them. Pliocene, miocene, eocene, cretaceous, jurassic, triassic,
permian, carboniferous, devonian, silurian, or primitive was all one to me. But
the Professor, no doubt, was pursuing his observations or taking notes, for in one
of our halts he said to me:

"The farther I go the more confidence I feel. The order of these volcanic
formations affords the strongest confirmation to the theories of Davy. We are
now among the primitive rocks, upon which the chemical operations took place
which are produced by the contact of elementary bases of metals with water. I
repudiate the notion of central heat altogether. We shall see further proof of that
very soon."

No variation, always the same conclusion. Of course, I was not inclined to
argue. My silence was taken for consent and the descent went on.

Another three hours, and I saw no bottom to the chimney yet. When I lifted
my head I perceived the gradual contraction of its aperture. Its walls, by a gentle
incline, were drawing closer to each other, and it was beginning to grow darker.

Still we kept descending. It seemed to me that the falling stones were
meeting with an earlier resistance, and that the concussion gave a more abrupt
and deadened sound.

As I had taken care to keep an exact account of our manceuvres with the
rope, which I knew that we had repeated fourteen times, each descent occupying
half an hour, the conclusion was easy that we had been seven hours, plus
fourteen quarters of rest, making ten hours and a half. We had started at one, it
must therefore now be eleven o'clock; and the depth to which we had descended
was fourteen times 200 feet, or 2,800 feet.

At this moment I heard the voice of Hans.

"Halt!" he cried.

I stopped short just as I was going to place my feet upon my uncle's head.

"We are there," he cried.

"Where?" said I, stepping near to him.

"At the bottom of the perpendicular chimney," he answered.

"Is there no way farther?"

"Yes; there is a sort of passage which inclines to the right. We will see about
that tomorrow. Let us have our supper, and go to sleep."

The darkness was not yet complete. The provision case was opened; we
refreshed ourselves, and went to sleep as well as we could upon a bed of stones


and lava fragments.

When lying on my back, I opened my eyes and saw a bright sparkling point
of light at the extremity of the gigantic tube 3,000 feet long, now a vast
telescope.

It was a star which, seen from this depth, had lost all scintillation, and which
by my computation should be 46; Ursa minor. Then I fell fast asleep.


CHAPTER XVIII.


THE WONDERS OF TERRESTRIAL DEPTHS


At eight in the morning a ray of daylight came to wake us up. The thousand
shining surfaces of lava on the walls received it on its passage, and scattered it
like a shower of sparks.

There was light enough to distinguish surrounding objects.

"Well, Axel, what do you say to it?" cried my uncle, rubbing his hands. "Did
you ever spend a quieter night in our little house at K6nigsberg? No noise of cart
wheels, no cries of basket women, no boatmen shouting!"

"No doubt it is very quiet at the bottom of this well, but there is something
alarming in the quietness itself."

"Now come!" my uncle cried; "if you are frightened already, what will you
be by and by? We have not gone a single inch yet into the bowels of the earth."

"What do you mean?"

"I mean that we have only reached the level of the island. long vertical tube,
which terminates at the mouth of the crater, has its lower end only at the level of
the sea."

"Are you sure of that?"

"Quite sure. Consult the barometer."

In fact, the mercury, which had risen in the instrument as fast as we
descended, had stopped at twenty-nine inches.

"You see," said the Professor, "we have now only the pressure of our
atmosphere, and I shall be glad when the aneroid takes the place of the
barometer."


And in truth this instrument would become useless as soon as the weight of
the atmosphere should exceed the pressure ascertained at the level of the sea.

"But," I said, "is there not reason to fear that this ever-increasing pressure
will become at last very painful to bear?"

"No; we shall descend at a slow rate, and our lungs will become inured to a
denser atmosphere. Aeronauts find the want of air as they rise to high elevations,
but we shall perhaps have too much: of the two, this is what I should prefer.
Don't let us lose a moment. Where is the bundle we sent down before us?"

I then remembered that we had searched for it in vain the evening before. My
uncle questioned Hans, who, after having examined attentively with the eye of a
huntsman, replied:

"Der huppe!"

"Up there."

And so it was. The bundle had been caught by a projection a hundred feet
above us. Immediately the Icelander climbed up like a cat, and in a few minutes
the package was in our possession.

"Now," said my uncle, "let us breakfast; but we must lay in a good stock, for
we don't know how long we may have to go on."

The biscuit and extract of meat were washed down with a draught of water
mingled with a little gin.

Breakfast over, my uncle drew from his pocket a small notebook, intended
for scientific observations. He consulted his instruments, and recorded:

"Monday, July 1.

"Chronometer, 8.17 a.m.; barometer, 297 in.; thermometer, 6° (43° F.).
Direction, E.S.E."

This last observation applied to the dark gallery, and was indicated by the
compass.

"Now, Axel," cried the Professor with enthusiasm, "now we are really going
into the interior of the earth. At this precise moment the journey commences."

So saying, my uncle took in one hand Ruhmkorff's apparatus, which was
hanging from his neck; and with the other he formed an electric communication
with the coil in the lantern, and a sufficiently bright light dispersed the darkness
of the passage.

Hans carried the other apparatus, which was also put into action. This
ingenious application of electricity would enable us to go on for a long time by
creating an artificial light even in the midst of the most inflammable gases.

"Now, march!" cried my uncle.

Each shouldered his package. Hans drove before him the load of cords and
clothes; and, myself walking last, we entered the gallery.


At the moment of becoming engulfed in this dark gallery, I raised my head,
and saw for the last time through the length of that vast tube the sky of Iceland,
which I was never to behold again.

The lava, in the last eruption of 1229, had forced a passage through this
tunnel. It still lined the walls with a thick and glistening coat. The electric light
was here intensified a hundredfold by reflection.

The only difficulty in proceeding lay in not sliding too fast down an incline
of about forty-five degrees; happily certain asperities and a few blisterings here
and there formed steps, and we descended, letting our baggage slip before us
from the end of a long rope.

But that which formed steps under our feet became stalactites overhead. The
lava, which was porous in many places, had formed a surface covered with small
rounded blisters; crystals of opaque quartz, set with limpid tears of glass, and
hanging like clustered chandeliers from the vaulted roof, seemed as it were to
kindle and form a sudden illumination as we passed on our way. It seemed as if
the genii of the depths were lighting up their palace to receive their terrestrial
guests.

"It is magnificent!" I cried spontaneously. "My uncle, what a sight! Don't you
admire those blending hues of lava, passing from reddish brown to bright yellow
by imperceptible shades? And these crystals are just like globes of light."

"Ali, you think so, do you, Axel, my boy? Well, you will see greater
splendours than these, I hope. Now let us march: march!"

He had better have said slide, for we did nothing but drop down the steep
inclines. It was the facifs descensus Averni of Virgil. The compass, which I
consulted frequently, gave our direction as southeast with inflexible steadiness.
This lava stream deviated neither to the right nor to the left.

Yet there was no sensible increase of temperature. This justified Davy's
theory, and more than once I consulted the thermometer with surprise. Two
hours after our departure it only marked 10° (50° Fahr.), an increase of only 4°.
This gave reason for believing that our descent was more horizontal than
vertical. As for the exact depth reached, it was very easy to ascertain that; the
Professor measured accurately the angles of deviation and inclination on the
road, but he kept the results to himself.

About eight in the evening he signalled to stop. Hans sat down at once. The
lamps were hung upon a projection in the lava; we were in a sort of cavern
where there was plenty of air. Certain puffs of air reached us. What atmospheric
disturbance was the cause of them? I could not answer that question at the
moment. Hunger and fatigue made me incapable of reasoning. A descent of
seven hours consecutively is not made without considerable expenditure of


strength. I was exhausted. The order to ‘halt' therefore gave me pleasure. Hans
laid our provisions upon a block of lava, and we ate with a good appetite. But
one thing troubled me, our supply of water was half consumed. My uncle
reckoned upon a fresh supply from subterranean sources, but hitherto we had
met with none. I could not help drawing his attention to this circumstance.

"Are you surprised at this want of springs?" he said.

"More than that, I am anxious about it; we have only water enough for five
days."

"Don't be uneasy, Axel, we shall find more than we want."

"When?"

"When we have left this bed of lava behind us. How could springs break
through such walls as these?"

"But perhaps this passage runs to a very great depth. It seems to me that we
have made no great progress vertically."

"Why do you suppose that?"

"Because if we had gone deep into the crust of earth, we should have
encountered greater heat."

"According to your system," said my uncle. "But what does the thermometer
say?"

"Hardly fifteen degrees (59° Fahr), nine degrees only since our departure."

"Well, what is your conclusion?"

"This is my conclusion. According to exact observations, the increase of
temperature in the interior of the globe advances at the rate of one degree (1 4/5°
Fahr.) for every hundred feet. But certain local conditions may modify this rate.
Thus at Yakoutsk in Siberia the increase of a degree is ascertained to be reached
every 36 feet. This difference depends upon the heat-conducting power of the
rocks. Moreover, in the neighbourhood of an extinct volcano, through gneiss, it
has been observed that the increase of a degree is only attained at every 125 feet.
Let us therefore assume this last hypothesis as the most suitable to our situation,
and calculate."

"Well, do calculate, my boy."

"Nothing is easier," said I, putting down figures in my note book. "Nine
times a hundred and twenty-five feet gives a depth of eleven hundred and
twenty-five feet."

"Very accurate indeed."

"Well?"

"By my observation we are at 10,000 feet below the level of the sea."

"Is that possible?"

"Yes, or figures are of no use."


The Professor's calculations were quite correct. We had already attained a
depth of six thousand feet beyond that hitherto reached by the foot of man, such
as the mines of Kitz Bahl in Tyrol, and those of Wuttembourg in Bohemia.

The temperature, which ought to have been 81° (178° Fahr.) was scarcely
15° (59° Fahr.). Here was cause for reflection.


CHAPTER XIX.


GEOLOGICAL STUDIES IN SITU


Next day, Tuesday, June 30, at 6 a.m., the descent began again.

We were still following the gallery of lava, a real natural staircase, and as
gently sloping as those inclined planes which in some old houses are still found
instead of flights of steps. And so we went on until 12.17, the, precise moment
when we overtook Hans, who had stopped.

"Ah! here we are," exclaimed my uncle, "at the very end of the chimney."

I looked around me. We were standing at the intersection of two roads, both
dark and narrow. Which were we to take? This was a difficulty.

Still my uncle refused to admit an appearance of hesitation, either before me
or the guide; he pointed out the Eastern tunnel, and we were soon all three in it.

Besides there would have been interminable hesitation before this choice of
roads; for since there was no indication whatever to guide our choice, we were
obliged to trust to chance.

The slope of this gallery was scarcely perceptible, and its sections very
unequal. Sometimes we passed a series of arches succeeding each other like the
majestic arcades of a gothic cathedral. Here the architects of the middle ages
might have found studies for every form of the sacred art which sprang from the
development of the pointed arch. A mile farther we had to bow or heads under
corniced elliptic arches in the romanesque style; and massive pillars standing out
from the wall bent under the spring of the vault that rested heavily upon them. In
other places this magnificence gave way to narrow channels between low


structures which looked like beaver's huts, and we had to creep along through
extremely narrow passages.

The heat was perfectly bearable. Involuntarily I began to think of its heat
when the lava thrown out by Snefell was boiling and working through this now
silent road. I imagined the torrents of fire hurled back at every angle in the
gallery, and the accumulation of intensely heated vapours in the midst of this
confined channel.

I only hope, thought I, that this so-called extinct volcano won't take a fancy
in his old age to begin his sports again!

I abstained from communicating these fears to Professor Liedenbrock. He
would never have understood them at all. He had but one idea - forward! He
walked, he slid, he scrambled, he tumbled, with a persistency which one could
not but admire.

By six in the evening, after a not very fatiguing walk, we had gone two
leagues south, but scarcely a quarter of a mile down.

My uncle said it was time to go to sleep. We ate without talking, and went to
sleep without reflection.

Our arrangements for the night were very simple; a railway rug each, into
which we rolled ourselves, was our sole covering. We had neither cold nor
intrusive visits to fear. Travellers who penetrate into the wilds of central Africa,
and into the pathless forests of the New World, are obliged to watch over each
other by night. But we enjoyed absolute safety and utter seclusion; no savages or
wild beasts infested these silent depths.

Next morning, we awoke fresh and in good spirits. The road was resumed.
As the day before, we followed the path of the lava. It was impossible to tell
what rocks we were passing: the tunnel, instead of tending lower, approached
more and more nearly to a horizontal direction, I even fancied a slight rise. But
about ten this upward tendency became so evident, and therefore so fatiguing,
that I was obliged to slacken my pace.

"Well, Axel?" demanded the Professor impatiently.

"Well, I cannot stand it any longer," I replied.

"What! after three hours' walk over such easy ground."

"It may be easy, but it is tiring all the same."

"What, when we have nothing to do but keep going down!"

"Going up, if you please."

"Going up!" said my uncle, with a shrug.

"No doubt, for the last half-hour the inclines have gone the other way, and at
this rate we shall soon arrive upon the level soil of Iceland."

The Professor nodded slowly and uneasily like a man that declines to be


convinced. I tried to resume the conversation. He answered not a word, and gave
the signal for a start. I saw that his silence was nothing but ill-humour.

Still I had courageously shouldered my burden again, and was rapidly
following Hans, whom my uncle preceded. I was anxious not to be left behind.
My greatest care was not to lose sight of my companions. I shuddered at the
thought of being lost in the mazes of this vast subterranean labyrinth.

Besides, if the ascending road did become steeper, I was comforted with the
thought that it was bringing us nearer to the surface. There was hope in this.
Every step confirmed me in it, and I was rejoicing at the thought of meeting my
little Grauben again.

By midday there was a change in the appearance of this wall of the gallery. I
noticed it by a diminution of the amount of light reflected from the sides; solid
rock was appearing in the place of the lava coating. The mass was composed of
inclined and sometimes vertical strata. We were passing through rocks of the
transition or silurian [l] system.

"It is evident," I cried, "the marine deposits formed in the second period,
these shales, limestones, and sandstones. We are turning away from the primary
granite. We are just as if we were people of Hamburg going to Lubeck by way of
Hanover!"

I had better have kept my observations to myself. But my geological instinct
was stronger than my prudence, and uncle Liedenbrock heard my exclamation.

"What's that you are saying?" he asked.

"See," I said, pointing to the varied series of sandstones and limestones, and
the first indication of slate.

"Well?"

"We are at the period when the first plants and animals appeared."

"Do you think so?"

"Look close, and examine."

I obliged the Professor to move his lamp over the walls of the gallery. I
expected some signs of astonishment; but he spoke not a word, and went on.

Had he understood me or not? Did he refuse to admit, out of self-love as an
uncle and a philosopher, that he had mistaken his way when he chose the eastern
tunnel? or was he determined to examine this passage to its farthest extremity? It
was evident that we had left the lava path, and that this road could not possibly
lead to the extinct furnace of Snefell.

Yet I asked myself if I was not depending too much on this change in the
rock. Might I not myself be mistaken? Were we really crossing the layers of rock
which overlie the granite foundation?

[1]The name given by Sir Roderick Murchison to a vast series of


fossiliferous strata, which lies between the non-fossiliferous slaty schists below
and the old red sandstone above. The system is well developed in the region of
Shropshire, etc., once inhabited by the Silures under Caractacus, or Caradoc.
(Tr.)

If I am right, I thought, I must soon find some fossil remains of primitive
life; and then we must yield to evidence. I will look.

I had not gone a hundred paces before incontestable proofs presented
themselves. It could not be otherwise, for in the Silurian age the seas contained
at least fifteen hundred vegetable and animal species. My feet, which had
become accustomed to the indurated lava floor, suddenly rested upon a dust
composed of the debris of plants and shells. In the walls were distinct
impressions of fucoids and lycopodites.

Professor Liedenbrock could not be mistaken, I thought, and yet he pushed
on, with, I suppose, his eyes resolutely shut.

This was only invincible obstinacy. I could hold out no longer. I picked up a
perfectly formed shell, which had belonged to an animal not unlike the
woodlouse: then, joining my uncle, I said:

"Look at this!"

"Very well," said he quietly, "it is the shell of a crustacean, of an extinct
species called a trilobite. Nothing more."

"But don't you conclude --?"

"Just what you conclude yourself. Yes; I do, perfectly. We have left the
granite and the lava. It is possible that I may be mistaken. But I cannot be sure of
that until I have reached the very end of this gallery."

"You are right in doing this, my uncle, and I should quite approve of your
determination, if there were not a danger threatening us nearer and nearer."

"What danger?"

"The want of water."

"Well, Axel, we will put ourselves upon rations."


CHAPTER XX.


THE FIRST SIGNS OF DISTRESS


In fact, we had to ration ourselves. Our provision of water could not last
more than three days. I found that out for certain when supper-time came. And,
to our sorrow, we had little reason to expect to find a spring in these transition
beds.

The whole of the next day the gallery opened before us its endless arcades.
We moved on almost without a word. Hans' silence seemed to be infecting us.

The road was now not ascending, at least not perceptibly. Sometimes, even,
it seemed to have a slight fall. But this tendency, which was very trifling, could
not do anything to reassure the Professor; for there was no change in the beds,
and the transitional characteristics became more and more decided.

The electric light was reflected in sparkling splendour from the schist,
limestone, and old red sandstone of the walls. It might have been thought that we
were passing through a section of Wales, of which an ancient people gave its
name to this system. Specimens of magnificent marbles clothed the walls, some
of a greyish agate fantastically veined with white, others of rich crimson or
yellow dashed with splotches of red; then came dark cherry-coloured marbles
relieved by the lighter tints of limestone.

The greater part of these bore impressions of primitive organisms. Creation
had evidently advanced since the day before. Instead of rudimentary trilobites, I
noticed remains of a more perfect order of beings, amongst others ganoid fishes
and some of those sauroids in which palaeontologists have discovered the
earliest reptile forms. The Devonian seas were peopled by animals of these
species, and deposited them by thousands in the rocks of the newer formation.

It was evident that we were ascending that scale of animal life in which man
fills the highest place. But Professor Liedenbrock seemed not to notice it.

He was awaiting one of two events, either the appearance of a vertical well
opening before his feet, down which our descent might be resumed, or that of
some obstacle which should effectually turn us back on our own footsteps. But
evening came and neither wish was gratified.

On Friday, after a night during which I felt pangs of thirst, our little troop
again plunged into the winding passages of the gallery.

After ten hours' walking I observed a singular deadening of the reflection of
our lamps from the side walls. The marble, the schist, the limestone, and the
sandstone were giving way to a dark and lustreless lining. At one moment, the
tunnel becoming very narrow, I leaned against the wall.

When I removed my hand it was black. I looked nearer, and found we were


in a coal formation.

"A coal mine!" I cried.

"A mine without miners," my uncle replied.

"Who knows?" I asked.

"I know," the Professor pronounced decidedly, "I am certain that this gallery
driven through beds of coal was never pierced by the hand of man. But whether
it be the hand of nature or not does not matter. Supper time is come; let us sup."

Hans prepared some food. I scarcely ate, and I swallowed down the few
drops of water rationed out to me. One flask half full was all we had left to slake
the thirst of three men.

After their meal my two companions laid themselves down upon their rugs,
and found in sleep a solace for their fatigue. But I could not sleep, and I counted
every hour until morning.

On Saturday, at six, we started afresh. In twenty minutes we reached a vast
open space; I then knew that the hand of man had not hollowed out this mine;
the vaults would have been shored up, and, as it was, they seemed to be held up
by a miracle of equilibrium.

This cavern was about a hundred feet wide and a hundred and fifty in height.
A large mass had been rent asunder by a subterranean disturbance. Yielding to
some vast power from below it had broken asunder, leaving this great hollow
into which human beings were now penetrating for the first time.

The whole history of the carboniferous period was written upon these
gloomy walls, and a geologist might with ease trace all its diverse phases. The
beds of coal were separated by strata of sandstone or compact clays, and
appeared crushed under the weight of overlying strata.

At the age of the world which preceded the secondary period, the earth was
clothed with immense vegetable forms, the product of the double influence of
tropical heat and constant moisture; a vapoury atmosphere surrounded the earth,
still veiling the direct rays of the sun.

Thence arises the conclusion that the high temperature then existing was due
to some other source than the heat of the sun. Perhaps even the orb of day may
not have been ready yet to play the splendid part he now acts. There were no
‘climates’ as yet, and a torrid heat, equal from pole to equator, was spread over
the whole surface of the globe. Whence this heat? Was it from the interior of the
earth?

Notwithstanding the theories of Professor Liedenbrock, a violent heat did at
that time brood within the body of the spheroid. Its action was felt to the very
last coats of the terrestrial crust; the plants, unacquainted with the beneficent
influences of the sun, yielded neither flowers nor scent. But their roots drew


vigorous life from the burning soil of the early days of this planet.

There were but few trees. Herbaceous plants alone existed. There were tall
grasses, ferns, lycopods, besides sigillaria, asterophyllites, now scarce plants, but
then the species might be counted by thousands.

The coal measures owe their origin to this period of profuse vegetation. The
yet elastic and yielding crust of the earth obeyed the fluid forces beneath. Thence
innumerable fissures and depressions. The plants, sunk underneath the waters,
formed by degrees into vast accumulated masses.

Then came the chemical action of nature; in the depths of the seas the
vegetable accumulations first became peat; then, acted upon by generated gases
and the heat of fermentation, they underwent a process of complete
mineralization.

Thus were formed those immense coalfields, which nevertheless, are not
inexhaustible, and which three centuries at the present accelerated rate of
consumption will exhaust unless the industrial world will devise a remedy.

These reflections came into my mind whilst I was contemplating the mineral
wealth stored up in this portion of the globe. These no doubt, I thought, will
never be discovered; the working of such deep mines would involve too large an
outlay, and where would be the use as long as coal is yet spread far and wide
near the surface? Such as my eyes behold these virgin stores, such they will be
when this world comes to an end.

But still we marched on, and I alone was forgetting the length of the way by
losing myself in the midst of geological contemplations. The temperature
remained what it had been during our passage through the lava and schists. Only
my sense of smell was forcibly affected by an odour of protocarburet of
hydrogen. I immediately recognised in this gallery the presence of a considerable
quantity of the dangerous gas called by miners firedamp, the explosion of which
has often occasioned such dreadful catastrophes.

Happily, our light was from Ruhmkorff's ingenious apparatus. If
unfortunately we had explored this gallery with torches, a terrible explosion
would have put an end to travelling and travellers at one stroke.

This excursion through the coal mine lasted till night. My uncle scarcely
could restrain his impatience at the horizontal road. The darkness, always deep
twenty yards before us, prevented us from estimating the length of the gallery;
and I was beginning to think it must be endless, when suddenly at six o'clock a
wall very unexpectedly stood before us. Right or left, top or bottom, there was
no road farther; we were at the end of a blind alley. "Very well, it's all right!"
cried my uncle, "now, at any rate, we shall know what we are about. We are not
in Saknussemm's road, and all we have to do is to go back. Let us take a night's


rest, and in three days we shall get to the fork in the road." "Yes," said I, "if we
have any strength left." "Why not?" "Because tomorrow we shall have no water."
"Nor courage either?" asked my uncle severely. I dared make no answer.


CHAPTER XXI.


COMPASSION FUSES THE PROFESSOR'S HEART

Next day we started early. We had to hasten forward. It was a three days'
march to the cross roads.

I will not speak of the sufferings we endured in our return. My uncle bore
them with the angry impatience of a man obliged to own his weakness; Hans
with the resignation of his passive nature; I, I confess, with complaints and
expressions of despair. I had no spirit to oppose this ill fortune.

As I had foretold, the water failed entirely by the end of the first day's
retrograde march. Our fluid aliment was now nothing but gin; but this infernal
fluid burned my throat, and I could not even endure the sight of it. I found the
temperature and the air stifling. Fatigue paralysed my limbs. More than once I
dropped down motionless. Then there was a halt; and my uncle and the Icelander
did their best to restore me. But I saw that the former was struggling painfully
against excessive fatigue and the tortures of thirst.

At last, on Tuesday, July 8, we arrived on our hands and knees, and half
dead, at the junction of the two roads. There I dropped like a lifeless lump,
extended on the lava soil. It was ten in the morning.

Hans and my uncle, clinging to the wall, tried to nibble a few bits of biscuit.
Long moans escaped from my swollen lips.

After some time my uncle approached me and raised me in his arms.

"Poor boy!" said he, in genuine tones of compassion.

I was touched with these words, not being accustomed to see the excitable
Professor in a softened mood. I grasped his trembling hands in mine. He let me
hold them and looked at me. His eyes were moistened.

Then I saw him take the flask that was hanging at his side. To my amazement
he placed it on my lips.

"Drink!" said he.


Had I heard him? Was my uncle beside himself? I stared at, him stupidly, and
felt as if I could not understand him.

"Drink!" he said again.

And raising his flask he emptied it every drop between my lips.

Oh! infinite pleasure! a slender sip of water came to moisten my burning
mouth. It was but one sip but it was enough to recall my ebbing life.

I thanked my uncle with clasped hands.

"Yes," he said, "a draught of water; but it is the very last - you hear! - the
last. I had kept it as a precious treasure at the bottom of my flask. Twenty times,
nay, a hundred times, have I fought against a frightful impulse to drink it off. But
no, Axel, I kept it for you."

"My dear uncle," I said, whilst hot tears trickled down my face.

"Yes, my poor boy, I knew that as soon as you arrived at these cross roads
you would drop half dead, and I kept my last drop of water to reanimate you."

"Thank you, thank you," I said. Although my thirst was only partially
quenched, yet some strength had returned. The muscles of my throat, until then
contracted, now relaxed again; and the inflammation of my lips abated
somewhat; and I was now able to speak. .

"Let us see," I said, "we have now but one thing to do. We have no water; we
must go back."

While I spoke my uncle avoided looking at me; he hung his head down; his
eyes avoided mine.

"We must return,” I exclaimed vehemently; "we must go back on our way to
Snefell. May God give us strength to climb up the crater again!"

"Return!" said my uncle, as if he was rather answering himself than me.

"Yes, return, without the loss of a minute."

A long silence followed.

"So then, Axel," replied the Professor ironically, "you have found no courage
or energy in these few drops of water?"

"Courage?"

"I see you just as feeble-minded as you were before, and still expressing only
despair!"

What sort of a man was this I had to do with, and what schemes was he now
revolving in his fearless mind?

"What! you won't go back?"

"Should I renounce this expedition just when we have the fairest chance of
success! Never!"

"Then must we resign ourselves to destruction?"

"No, Axel, no; go back. Hans will go with you. Leave me to myself!"


"Leave you here!"

"Leave me, I tell you. I have undertaken this expedition. I will carry it out to
the end, and I will not return. Go, Axel, go!"

My uncle was in high state of excitement. His voice, which had for a
moment been tender and gentle, had now become hard and threatening. He was
struggling with gloomy resolutions against impossibilities. I would not leave him
in this bottomless abyss, and on the other hand the instinct of self-preservation
prompted me to fly.

The guide watched this scene with his usual phlegmatic unconcern. Yet he
understood perfectly well what was going on between his two companions. The
gestures themselves were sufficient to show that we were each bent on taking a
different road; but Hans seemed to take no part in a question upon which
depended his life. He was ready to start at a given signal, or to stay, if his master
so willed it.

How I wished at this moment I could have made him understand me. My
words, my complaints, my sorrow would have had some influence over that
frigid nature. Those dangers which our guide could not understand I could have
demonstrated and proved to him. Together we might have over-ruled the
obstinate Professor; if it were needed, we might perhaps have compelled him to
regain the heights of Snefell.

I drew near to Hans. I placed my hand upon his. He made no movement. My
parted lips sufficiently revealed my sufferings. The Icelander slowly moved his
head, and calmly pointing to my uncle said:

"Master."

"Master!" I shouted; "you madman! no, he is not the master of our life; we
must fly, we must drag him. Do you hear me? Do you understand?"

I had seized Hans by the arm. I wished to oblige him to rise. I strove with
him. My uncle interposed.

"Be calm, Axel! you will get nothing from that immovable servant.
Therefore, listen to my proposal."

I crossed my arms, and confronted my uncle boldly.

"The want of water," he said, "is the only obstacle in our way. In this eastern
gallery made up of lavas, schists, and coal, we have not met with a single
particle of moisture. Perhaps we shall be more fortunate if we follow the western
tunnel."

I shook my head incredulously.

"Hear me to the end," the Professor went on with a firm voice. "Whilst you
were lying there motionless, I went to examine the conformation of that gallery.
It penetrates directly downward, and in a few hours it will bring us to the granite


rocks. There we must meet with abundant springs. The nature of the rock assures
me of this, and instinct agrees with logic to support my conviction. Now, this is
my proposal. When Columbus asked of his ships' crews for three days more to
discover a new world, those crews, disheartened and sick as they were,
recognised the justice of the claim, and he discovered America. I am the
Columbus of this nether world, and I only ask for one more day. If in a single
day I have not met with the water that we want, I swear to you we will return to
the surface of the earth."

In spite of my irritation I was moved with these words, as well as with the
violence my uncle was doing to his own wishes in making so hazardous a
proposal.

"Well," I said, "do as you will, and God reward your superhuman energy.
You have now but a few hours to tempt fortune. Let us start!"


CHAPTER XXII.


TOTAL FAILURE OF WATER


This time the descent commenced by the new gallery. Hans walked first as
was his custom.

We had not gone a hundred yards when the Professor, moving his lantern
along the walls, cried:

"Here are primitive rocks. Now we are in the right way. Forward!"

When in its early stages the earth was slowly cooling, its contraction gave
rise in its crust to disruptions, distortions, fissures, and chasms. The passage
through which we were moving was such a fissure, through which at one time
granite poured out in a molten state. Its thousands of windings formed an
inextricable labyrinth through the primeval mass.

As fast as we descended, the succession of beds forming the primitive
foundation came out with increasing distinctness. Geologists consider this
primitive matter to be the base of the mineral crust of the earth, and have


ascertained it to be composed of three different formations, schist, gneiss, and
mica schist, resting upon that unchangeable foundation, the granite.

Never had mineralogists found themselves in so marvellous a situation to
study nature in situ. What the boring machine, an insensible, inert instrument,
was unable to bring to the surface of the inner structure of the globe, we were
able to peruse with our own eyes and handle with our own hands.

Through the beds of schist, coloured with delicate shades of green, ran in
winding course threads of copper and manganese, with traces of platinum and
gold. I thought, what riches are here buried at an unapproachable depth in the
earth, hidden for ever from the covetous eyes of the human race! These treasures
have been buried at such a profound depth by the convulsions of primeval times
that they run no chance of ever being molested by the pickaxe or the spade.

To the schists succeeded gneiss, partially stratified, remarkable for the
parallelism and regularity of its lamina, then mica schists, laid in large plates or
flakes, revealing their lamellated structure by the sparkle of the white shining
mica.

The light from our apparatus, reflected from the small facets of quartz, shot
sparkling rays at every angle, and I seemed to be moving through a diamond,
within which the quickly darting rays broke across each other in a thousand
flashing coruscations.

About six o'clock this brilliant fete of illuminations underwent a sensible
abatement of splendour, then almost ceased. The walls assumed a crystallised
though sombre appearance; mica was more closely mingled with the feldspar
and quartz to form the proper rocky foundations of the earth, which bears
without distortion or crushing the weight of the four terrestrial systems. We were
immured within prison walls of granite.

It was eight in the evening. No signs of water had yet appeared. I was
suffering horribly. My uncle strode on. He refused to stop. He was listening
anxiously for the murmur of distant springs. But, no, there was dead silence.

And now my limbs were failing beneath me. I resisted pain and torture, that I
might not stop my uncle, which would have driven him to despair, for the day
was drawing near to its end, and it was his last.

At last I failed utterly; I uttered a cry and fell.

"Come to me, I am dying."

My uncle retraced his steps. He gazed upon me with his arms crossed; then
these muttered words passed his lips:

"It's all over!"

The last thing I saw was a fearful gesture of rage, and my eyes closed.

When I reopened them I saw my two companions motionless and rolled up


in their coverings. Were they asleep? As for me, I could not get one moment's
sleep. I was suffering too keenly, and what embittered my thoughts was that
there was no remedy. My uncle's last words echoed painfully in my ears: "it's all
over!" For in such a fearful state of debility it was madness to think of ever
reaching the upper world again.


We had above us a league and a half of terrestrial crust. The weight of it
seemed to be crushing down upon my shoulders. I felt weighed down, and I
exhausted myself with imaginary violent exertions to turn round upon my
granite couch.

A few hours passed away. A deep silence reigned around us, the silence of
the grave. No sound could reach us through walls, the thinnest of which were
five miles thick.

Yet in the midst of my stupefaction I seemed to be aware of a noise. It was
dark down the tunnel, but I seemed to see the Icelander vanishing from our sight
with the lamp in his hand.

Why was he leaving us? Was Hans going to forsake us? My uncle was fast
asleep. I wanted to shout, but my voice died upon my parched and swollen lips.
The darkness became deeper, and the last sound died away in the far distance.

"Hans has abandoned us," I cried. "Hans! Hans!"

But these words were only spoken within me. They went no farther. Yet after
the first moment of terror I felt ashamed of suspecting a man of such
extraordinary faithfulness. Instead of ascending he was descending the gallery.
An evil design would have taken him up not down. This reflection restored me
to calmness, and I turned to other thoughts. None but some weighty motive
could have induced so quiet a man to forfeit his sleep. Was he on a journey of
discovery? Had he during the silence of the night caught a sound, a murmuring
of something in the distance, which had failed to affect my hearing?


CHAPTER XXIII.


WATER DISCOVERED


For a whole hour I was trying to work out in my delirious brain the reasons
which might have influenced this seemingly tranquil huntsman. The absurdest
notions ran in utter confusion through my mind. I thought madness was coming
on!


But at last a noise of footsteps was heard in the dark abyss. Hans was
approaching. A flickering light was beginning to glimmer on the wall of our
darksome prison; then it came out full at the mouth of the gallery. Hans
appeared.

He drew close to my uncle, laid his hand upon his shoulder, and gently woke
him. My uncle rose up.

"What is the matter?" he asked.

"Watten!" replied the huntsman.

No doubt under the inspiration of intense pain everybody becomes endowed
with the gift of divers tongues. I did not know a word of Danish, yet instinctively
I understood the word he had uttered.

"Water! water!" I cried, clapping my hands and gesticulating like a madman.

"Water!" repeated my uncle. "Hvar?" he asked, in Icelandic.

"Nedat," replied Hans.

"Where? Down below!" I understood it all. I seized the hunter's hands, and
pressed them while he looked on me without moving a muscle of his
countenance.

The preparations for our departure were not long in making, and we were
soon on our way down a passage inclining two feet in seven. In an hour we had
gone a mile and a quarter, and descended two thousand feet.

Then I began to hear distinctly quite a new sound of something running
within the thickness of the granite wall, a kind of dull, dead rumbling, like
distant thunder. During the first part of our walk, not meeting with the promised
spring, I felt my agony returning; but then my uncle acquainted me with the
cause of the strange noise.

"Hans was not mistaken," he said. "What you hear is the rushing of a
torrent."

"A torrent?” I exclaimed.

"There can be no doubt; a subterranean river is flowing around us."

We hurried forward in the greatest excitement. I was no longer sensible of
my fatigue. This murmuring of waters close at hand was already refreshing me.
It was audibly increasing. The torrent, after having for some time flowed over
our heads, was now running within the left wall, roaring and rushing. Frequently
I touched the wall, hoping to feel some indications of moisture: But there was no
hope here.

Yet another half hour, another half league was passed.

Then it became clear that the hunter had gone no farther. Guided by an
instinct peculiar to mountaineers he had as it were felt this torrent through the
rock; but he had certainly seen none of the precious liquid; he had drunk nothing


himself.

Soon it became evident that if we continued our walk we should widen the
distance between ourselves and the stream, the noise of which was becoming
fainter.

We returned. Hans stopped where the torrent seemed closest. I sat near the
wall, while the waters were flowing past me at a distance of two feet with
extreme violence. But there was a thick granite wall between us and the object of
our desires.

Without reflection, without asking if there were any means of procuring the
water, I gave way to a movement of despair.

Hans glanced at me with, I thought, a smile of compassion.

He rose and took the lamp. I followed him. He moved towards the wall. I
looked on. He applied his ear against the dry stone, and moved it slowly to and
fro, listening intently. I perceived at once that he was examining to find the exact
place where the torrent could be heard the loudest. He met with that point on the
left side of the tunnel, at three feet from the ground.

I was stirred up with excitement. I hardly dared guess what the hunter was
about to do. But I could not but understand, and applaud and cheer him on, when
I saw him lay hold of the pickaxe to make an attack upon the rock.

"We are saved!" I cried.

"Yes," cried my uncle, almost frantic with excitement. "Hans is right. Capital
fellow! Who but he would have thought of it?"

Yes; who but he? Such an expedient, however simple, would never have
entered into our minds. True, it seemed most hazardous to strike a blow of the
hammer in this part of the earth's structure. Suppose some displacement should
occur and crush us all! Suppose the torrent, bursting through, should drown us in
a sudden flood! There was nothing vain in these fancies. But still no fears of
falling rocks or rushing floods could stay us now; and our thirst was so intense
that, to satisfy it, we would have dared the waves of the north Atlantic.

Hans set about the task which my uncle and I together could not have
accomplished. If our impatience had armed our hands with power, we should
have shattered the rock into a thousand fragments. Not so Hans. Full of self
possession, he calmly wore his way through the rock with a steady succession of
light and skilful strokes, working through an aperture six inches wide at the
outside. I could hear a louder noise of flowing waters, and I fancied I could feel
the delicious fluid refreshing my parched lips.

The pick had soon penetrated two feet into the granite partition, and our man
had worked for above an hour. I was in an agony of impatience. My uncle
wanted to employ stronger measures, and I had some difficulty in dissuading


him; still he had just taken a pickaxe in his hand, when a sudden hissing was
heard, and a jet of water spurted out with violence against the opposite wall.

Hans, almost thrown off his feet by the violence of the shock, uttered a cry of
grief and disappointment, of which I soon under-. stood the cause, when
plunging my hands into the spouting torrent, I withdrew them in haste, for the
water was scalding hot.

"The water is at the boiling point," I cried.

"Well, never mind, let it cool," my uncle replied.

The tunnel was filling with steam, whilst a stream was forming, which by
degrees wandered away into subterranean windings, and soon we had the
satisfaction of swallowing our first draught.

Could anything be more delicious than the sensation that our burning
intolerable thirst was passing away, and leaving us to enjoy comfort and
pleasure? But where was this water from? No matter. It was water; and though
still warm, it brought life back to the dying. I kept drinking without stopping,
and almost without tasting.

At last after a most delightful time of reviving energy, I cried, "Why, this is a
chalybeate spring!"

"Nothing could be better for the digestion,” said my uncle. "It is highly
impregnated with iron. It will be as good for us as going to the Spa, or to
Toplitz."

"Well, it is delicious!"

"Of course it is, water should be, found six miles underground. It has an inky
flavour, which is not at all unpleasant. What a capital source of strength Hans
has found for us here. We will call it after his name."

"Agreed," I cried.

And Hansbach it was from that moment.

Hans was none the prouder. After a moderate draught, he went quietly into a
corner to rest.

"Now," I said, "we must not lose this water."

"What is the use of troubling ourselves?" my uncle, replied. "I fancy it will
never fail."

"Never mind, we cannot be sure; let us fill the water bottle and our flasks,
and then stop up the opening.”

My advice was followed so far as getting in a supply; but the stopping up of
the hole was not so easy to accomplish. It was in vain that we took up fragments
of granite, and stuffed them in with tow, we only scalded our hands without
succeeding. The pressure was too great, and our efforts were fruitless.

"It is quite plain," said I, "that the higher body of this water is at a


considerable elevation. The force of the jet shows that."

"No doubt," answered my uncle. "If this column of water is 32,000 feet high
- that is, from the surface of the earth, it is equal to the weight of a thousand
atmospheres. But I have got an idea."

"Well?"

"Why should we trouble ourselves to stop the stream from coming out at
all?"

"Because --" Well, I could not assign a reason.

"When our flasks are empty, where shall we fill them again? Can we tell
that?"

No; there was no certainty.

"Well, let us allow the water to run on. It will flow down, and will both guide
and refresh us."

"That is well planned," I cried. "With this stream for our guide, there is no
reason why we should not succeed in our undertaking."

"Ah, my boy! you agree with me now," cried the Professor, laughing.

"I agree with you most heartily."

"Well, let us rest awhile; and then we will start again."

I was forgetting that it was night. The chronometer soon informed me of that
fact; and in a very short time, refreshed and thankful, we all three fell into a
sound sleep.


CHAPTER XXIV.


WELL SAID, OLD MOLE! CANST THOU WORK I' THE GROUND SO
FAST?

By the next day we had forgotten all our sufferings. At first, I was wondering
that I was no longer thirsty, and I was for asking for the reason. The answer
came in the murmuring of the stream at my feet.

We breakfasted, and drank of this excellent chalybeate water. I felt
wonderfully stronger, and quite decided upon pushing on. Why should not so
firmly convinced a man as my uncle, furnished with so industrious a guide as
Hans, and accompanied by so determined a nephew as myself, go on to final


success? Such were the magnificent plans which struggled for mastery within
me. If it had been proposed to me to return to the summit of Snefell, I should
have indignantly declined.

Most fortunately, all we had to do was to descend.

"Let us start!" I cried, awakening by my shouts the echoes of the vaulted
hollows of the earth.

On Thursday, at 8 a.m., we started afresh. The granite tunnel winding from
side to side, earned us past unexpected turns, and

seemed almost to form a labyrinth; but, on the whole, its direction seemed to
be south-easterly. My uncle never ceased to consult his compass, to keep account
of the ground gone over.

The gallery dipped down a very little way from the horizontal, scarcely more
than two inches in a fathom, and the stream ran gently murmuring at our feet. I
compared it to a friendly genius guiding us underground, and caressed with my
hand the soft naiad, whose comforting voice accompanied our steps. With my
reviving spirits these mythological notions seemed to come unbidden.

As for my uncle, he was beginning to storm against the horizontal road. He
loved nothing better than a vertical path; but this way seemed indefinitely
prolonged, and instead of sliding along the hypothenuse as we were now doing,
he would willingly have dropped down the terrestrial radius. But there was no
help for it, and as long as we were approaching the centre at all we felt that we
must not complain.

From time to time, a steeper path appeared; our naiad then began to tumble
before us with a hoarser murmur, and we went down with her to a greater depth.

On the whole, that day and the next we made considerable way horizontally,
very little vertically.

On Friday evening, the 10th of July, according to our calculations, we were
thirty leagues south-east of Rejkiavik, and at a depth of two leagues and a half.

At our feet there now opened a frightful abyss. My uncle, however, was not
to be daunted, and he clapped his hands at the steepness of the descent.

"This will take us a long way," he cried, "and without much difficulty; for the
projections in the rock form quite a staircase."

The ropes were so fastened by Hans as to guard against accident, and the
descent commenced. I can hardly call it perilous, for I was beginning to be
familiar with this kind of exercise.

This well, or abyss, was a narrow cleft in the mass of the granite, called by
geologists a ‘fault,’ and caused by the unequal cooling of the globe of the earth. If
it had at one time been a passage for eruptive matter thrown out by Snefell, I
still could not understand why no trace was left of its passage. We kept going


down a kind of winding staircase, which seemed almost to have been made by
the hand of man.

Every quarter of an hour we were obliged to halt, to take a little necessary
repose and restore the action of our limbs. We then sat down upon a fragment of
rock, and we talked as we ate and drank from the stream.

Of course, down this fault the Hansbach fell in a cascade, and lost some of
its volume; but there was enough and to spare to slake our thirst. Besides, when
the incline became more gentle, it would of course resume its peaceable course.
At this moment it reminded me of my worthy uncle, in his frequent fits of
impatience and anger, while below it ran with the calmness of the Icelandic
hunter.

On the 6th and 7th of July we kept following the spiral curves of this
singular well, penetrating in actual distance no more than two leagues; but being
carried to a depth of five leagues below the level of the sea. But on the 8th, about
noon, the fault took, towards the south-east, a much gentler slope, one of about
forty-five degrees.

Then the road became monotonously easy. It could not be otherwise, for
there was no landscape to vary the stages of our journey.

On Wednesday, the 15th, we were seven leagues underground, and had
travelled fifty leagues away from Snefell. Although we were tired, our health
was perfect, and the medicine chest had not yet had occasion to be opened.

My uncle noted every hour the indications of the compass, the chronometer,
the aneroid, and the thermometer the very same which he has published in his
scientific report of our journey. It was therefore not difficult to know exactly our
whereabouts. When he told me that we had gone fifty leagues horizontally, I
could not repress an exclamation of astonishment, at the thought that we had
now long left Iceland behind us.

"What is the matter?" he cried.

"I was reflecting that if your calculations are correct we are no longer under
Iceland."

"Do you think so?"

"I am not mistaken," I said, and examining the map, I added, "We have
passed Cape Portland, and those fifty leagues bring us under the wide expanse of
ocean."

"Under the sea," my uncle repeated, rubbing his hands with delight.

"Can it be?" I said. "Is the ocean spread above our heads?"

"Of course, Axel. What can be more natural? At Newcastle are there not coal
mines extending far under the sea?"

It was all very well for the Professor to call this so simple, but I could not


feel quite easy at the thought that the boundless ocean was rolling over my head.
And yet it really mattered very little whether it was the plains and mountains that
covered our heads, or the Atlantic waves, as long as we were arched over by
solid granite. And, besides, I was getting used to this idea; for the tunnel, now
running straight, now winding as capriciously in its inclines as in its turnings,
but constantly preserving its south-easterly direction, and always running deeper,
was gradually carrying us to very great depths indeed.

Four days later, Saturday, the 18th of July, in the evening, we arrived at a
kind of vast grotto; and here my uncle paid Hans his weekly wages, and it was
settled that the next day, Sunday, should be a day of rest.


CHAPTER XXV.


DE PROFUNDIS


I therefore awoke next day relieved from the preoccupation of an immediate
start. Although we were in the very deepest of known depths, there was
something not unpleasant about it. And, besides, we were beginning to get
accustomed to this troglodyte [1] life. I no longer thought of sun, moon, and
stars, trees, houses, and towns, nor of any of those terrestrial superfluities which
are necessaries of men who live upon the earth's surface. Being fossils, we
looked upon all those things as mere jokes.

The grotto was an immense apartment. Along its granite floor ran our
faithful stream. At this distance from its spring the water was scarcely tepid, and
we drank of it with pleasure.

After breakfast the Professor gave a few hours to the arrangement of his
daily notes.

"First," said he, "I will make a calculation to ascertain our exact position. I
hope, after our return, to draw a map of our journey, which will be in reality a
vertical section of the globe, containing the track of our expedition."

"That will be curious, uncle; but are your observations sufficiently accurate


to enable you to do this correctly?"

"Yes; I have everywhere observed the angles and the inclines. I am sure there
is no error. Let us see where we are now. Take your compass, and note the
direction."

I looked, and replied carefully:

[1] tpwgln, a hole; dnw, to creep into. The name of an Ethiopian tribe who
lived in caves and holes. ??????, a hole, and ???, to creep into.

"South-east by east."

"Well," answered the Professor, after a rapid calculation, "I infer that we
have gone eighty-five leagues since we started.!

"Therefore we are under mid-Atlantic?"

"To be sure we are."

"And perhaps at this very moment there is a storm above, and ships over our
heads are being rudely tossed by the tempest."

"Quite probable."

"And whales are lashing the roof of our prison with their tails?"

"It may be, Axel, but they won't shake us here. But let us go back to our
calculation. Here we are eighty-five leagues south-east of Snefell, and I reckon
that we are at a depth of sixteen leagues."

"Sixteen leagues?" I cried.

"No doubt."

"Why, this is the very limit assigned by science to the thickness of the crust
of the earth."

"T don't deny it."

"And here, according to the law of increasing temperature, there ought to be
a heat of 2,732° Fahr.!"

"So there should, my lad."

"And all this solid granite ought to be running in fusion."

"You see that it is not so, and that, as so often happens, facts come to
overthrow theories."

"I am obliged to agree; but, after all, it is surprising."

"What does the thermometer say?"

"Twenty-seven, six tenths (82° Fahr.)."

"Therefore the savants are wrong by 2,705°, and the proportional increase is
a mistake. Therefore Humphry Davy was right, and I am not wrong in following
him. What do you say now?"

"Nothing."

In truth, I had a good deal to say. I gave way in no respect to Davy's theory. I
still held to the central heat, although I did not feel its effects. I preferred to


admit in truth, that this chimney of an extinct volcano, lined with lavas, which
are non-conductors of heat, did not suffer the heat to pass through its walls.

But without stopping to look up new arguments I simply took up our
situation such as it was.

"Well, admitting all your calculations to be quite correct, you must allow me
to draw one rigid result therefrom."

"What is it. Speak freely.!

"At the latitude of Iceland, where we now are, the radius of the earth, the
distance from the centre to the surface is about 1,583 leagues; let us say in round
numbers 1,600 leagues, or 4,800 miles. Out of 1,600 leagues we have gone
twelve!"

"So you Say."

"And these twelve at a cost of 85 leagues diagonally?"

"Exactly so."

"In twenty days?"

“Yes.

"Now, sixteen leagues are the hundredth part of the earth's radius. At this rate
we shall be two thousand days, or nearly five years and a half, in getting to the
centre."

No answer was vouchsafed to this rational conclusion. "Without reckoning,
too, that if a vertical depth of sixteen leagues can be attained only by a diagonal
descent of eighty-four, it follows that we must go eight thousand miles in a
south-easterly direction; so that we shall emerge from some point in the earth's
circumference instead of getting to the centre!"

"Confusion to all your figures, and all your hypotheses besides," shouted my
uncle in a sudden rage. "What is the basis of them all? How do you know that
this passage does not run straight to our destination? Besides, there is a
precedent. What one man has done, another may do."

"I hope so; but, still, I may be permitted -"

"You shall have my leave to hold your tongue, Axel, but not to talk in that
irrational way."

I could see the awful Professor bursting through my uncle's skin, and I took
timely warning.

"Now look at your aneroid. What does that say?"

"It says we are under considerable pressure."

"Very good; so you see that by going gradually down, and getting
accustomed to the density of the atmosphere, we don't suffer at all."

"Nothing, except a little pain in the ears."

"That's nothing, and you may get rid of even that by quick breathing


whenever you feel the pain."

"Exactly so," I said, determined not to say a word that might cross my uncle's
prejudices. "There is even positive pleasure in living in this dense atmosphere.
Have you observed how intense sound is down here?"

"No doubt it is. A deaf man would soon learn to hear perfectly."

"But won't this density augment?"

"Yes; according to a rather obscure law. It is well known that the weight of
bodies diminishes as fast as we descend. You know that it is at the surface of the
globe that weight is most sensibly felt, and that at the centre there is no weight at
all."

"IT am aware of that; but, tell me, will not air at last acquire the density of
water?"

"Of course, under a pressure of seven hundred and ten atmospheres."

"And how, lower down still?"

"Lower down the density will still increase."

"But how shall we go down then."

"Why, we must fill our pockets with stones."

"Well, indeed, my worthy uncle, you are never at a loss for an answer."

I dared venture no farther into the region of probabilities, for I might
presently have stumbled upon an impossibility, which would have brought the
Professor on the scene when he was not wanted.

Still, it was evident that the air, under a pressure which might reach that of
thousands of atmospheres, would at last reach the solid state, and then, even if
our bodies could resist the strain, we should be stopped, and no reasonings
would be able to get us on any farther.

But I did not advance this argument. My uncle would have met it with his
inevitable Saknussemm, a precedent which possessed no weight with me; for
even if the journey of the learned Icelander were really attested, there was one
very simple answer, that in the sixteenth century there was neither barometer or
aneroid and therefore Saknussemm could not tell how far he had gone.

But I kept this objection to myself, and waited the course of events.

The rest of the day was passed in calculations and in conversations. I
remained a steadfast adherent of the opinions of Professor Liedenbrock, and I
envied the stolid indifference of Hans, who, without going into causes and
effects, went on with his eyes shut wherever his destiny guided him.


CHAPTER XXVI.


THE WORST PERIL OF ALL


It must be confessed that hitherto things had not gone on so badly, and that I
had small reason to complain. If our difficulties became no worse, we might
hope to reach our end. And to what a height of scientific glory we should then
attain! I had become quite a Liedenbrock in my reasonings; seriously I had. But
would this state of things last in the strange place we had come to? Perhaps it
might.

For several days steeper inclines, some even frightfully near to the
perpendicular, brought us deeper and deeper into the mass of the interior of the
earth. Some days we advanced nearer to the centre by a league and a half, or
nearly two leagues. These were perilous descents, in which the skill and
marvellous coolness of Hans were invaluable to us. That unimpassioned
Icelander devoted himself with incomprehensible deliberation; and, thanks to
him, we crossed many a dangerous spot which we should never have cleared
alone.

But his habit of silence gained upon him day by day, and was infecting us.
External objects produce decided effects upon the brain. A man shut up between
four walls soon loses the power to associate words and ideas together. How
many prisoners in solitary confinement become idiots, if not mad, for want of
exercise for the thinking faculty!

During the fortnight following our last conversation, no incident occurred
worthy of being recorded. But I have good reason for remembering one very
serious event which took place at this time, and of which I could scarcely now
forget the smallest details.

By the 7th of August our successive descents had brought us to a depth of
thirty leagues; that is, that for a space of thirty leagues there were over our heads
solid beds of rock, ocean, continents, and towns. We must have been two
hundred leagues from Iceland.

On that day the tunnel went down a gentle slope. I was ahead of the others.
My uncle was carrying one of Ruhmkorff's lamps and I the. other. I was
examining the beds of granite.


Suddenly turning round I observed that I was alone.

Well, well, I thought; I have been going too fast, or Hans and my uncle have
stopped on the way. Come, this won't do; I must join them. Fortunately there is
not much of an ascent.

I retraced my steps. I walked for a quarter of an hour. I gazed into the
darkness. I shouted. No reply: my voice was lost in the midst of the cavernous
echoes which alone replied to my call.

I began to feel uneasy. A shudder ran through me.

"Calmly!" I said aloud to myself, "I am sure to find my companions again.
There are not two roads. I was too far ahead. I will return!"

For half an hour I climbed up. I listened for a call, and in that dense
atmosphere a voice could reach very far. But there was a dreary silence in all that
long gallery. I stopped. I could not believe that I was lost. I was only bewildered
for a time, not lost. I was sure I should find my way again.

"Come," I repeated, "since there is but one road, and they are on it, I must
find them again. I have but to ascend still. Unless, indeed, missing me, and
supposing me to be behind, they too should have gone back. But even in this
case I have only to make the greater haste. I shall find them, I am sure."

I repeated these words in the fainter tones of a half-convinced man. Besides,
to associate even such simple ideas with words, and reason with them, was a
work of time.

A doubt then seized upon me. Was I indeed in advance when we became
separated? Yes, to be sure I was. Hans was after me, preceding my uncle. He had
even stopped for a while to strap his baggage better over his shoulders. I could
remember this little incident. It was at that very moment that I must have gone
on.

Besides, I thought, have not I a guarantee that I shall not lose my way, a clue
in the labyrinth, that cannot be broken, my faithful stream? I have but to trace it
back, and I must come upon them.

This conclusion revived my spirits, and I resolved to resume my march
without loss of time.

How I then blessed my uncle's foresight in preventing the hunter from
stopping up the hole in the granite. This beneficent spring, after having satisfied
our thirst on the road, would now be my guide among the windings of the
terrestrial crust.

Before starting afresh I thought a wash would do me good. I stooped to bathe
my face in the Hansbach.

To my stupefaction and utter dismay my feet trod only - the rough dry
granite. The stream was no longer at my feet.


CHAPTER XXVIII.


LOST IN THE BOWELS OF THE EARTH

To describe my despair would be impossible. No words could tell it. I was
buried alive, with the prospect before me of dying of hunger and thirst.

Mechanically I swept the ground with my hands. How dry and hard the rock
seemed to me!

But how had I left the course of the stream? For it was a terrible fact that it
no longer ran at my side. Then I understood the reason of that fearful, silence,
when for the last time I listened to hear if any sound from my companions could
reach my ears. At the moment when I left the right road I had not noticed the
absence of the stream. It is evident that at that moment a deviation had presented
itself before me, whilst the Hansbach, following the caprice of another incline,
had gone with my companions away into unknown depths.

How was I to return? There was not a trace of their footsteps or of my own,
for the foot left no mark upon the granite floor. I racked my brain for a solution
of this impracticable problem. One word described my position. Lost!

Lost at an immeasurable depth! Thirty leagues of rock seemed to weigh upon
my shoulders with a dreadful pressure. I felt crushed.

I tried to carry back my ideas to things on the surface of the earth. I could
scarcely succeed. Hamburg, the house in the K6nigstrasse, my poor Grduben, all
that busy world underneath which I was wandering about, was passing in rapid
confusion before my terrified memory. I could revive with vivid reality all the
incidents of our voyage, Iceland, M. Fridrikssen, Snefell. I said to myself that if,
in such a position as I was now in, I was fool enough to cling to one glimpse of
hope, it would be madness, and that the best thing I could do was to despair.

What human power could restore me to the light of the sun by rending
asunder the huge arches of rock which united over my head, buttressing each
other with impregnable strength? Who could place my feet on the right path, and
bring me back to my company?

"Oh, my uncle!" burst from my lips in the tone of despair.

It was my only word of reproach, for I knew how much he must be suffering


in seeking me, wherever he might be.

When I saw myself thus far removed from all earthly help I had recourse to
heavenly succour. The remembrance of my childhood, the recollection of my
mother, whom I had only known in my tender early years, came back to me, and
I knelt in prayer imploring for the Divine help of which I was so little worthy.

This return of trust in God's providence allayed the turbulence of my fears,
and I was enabled to concentrate upon my situation all the force of my
intelligence.

I had three days' provisions with me and my flask was full. But I could not
remain alone for long. Should I go up or down?

Up, of course; up continually.

I must thus arrive at the point where I had left the stream, that fatal turn in
the road. With the stream at my feet, I might hope to regain the summit of
Snefell.

Why had I not thought of that sooner? Here was evidently a chance of safety.
The most pressing duty was to find out again the course of the Hansbach. I rose,
and leaning upon my iron-pointed stick I ascended the gallery. The slope was
rather steep. I walked on without hope but without indecision, like a man who
has made up his mind.

For half an hour I met with no obstacle. I tried to recognise my way by the
form of the tunnel, by the projections of certain rocks, by the disposition of the
fractures. But no particular sign appeared, and I soon saw that this gallery could
not bring me back to the turning point. It came to an abrupt end. I struck against
an impenetrable wall, and fell down upon the rock.

Unspeakable despair then seized upon me. I lay overwhelmed, aghast! My
last hope was shattered against this granite wall.

Lost in this labyrinth, whose windings crossed each other in all directions, it
was no use to think of flight any longer. Here I must die the most dreadful of
deaths. And, strange to say, the thought came across me that when some day my
petrified remains should be found thirty leagues below the surface in the bowels
of the earth, the discovery might lead to grave scientific discussions.

I tried to speak aloud, but hoarse sounds alone passed my dry lips. I panted
for breath.

In the midst of my agony a new terror laid hold of me. In falling my lamp
had got wrong. I could not set it right, and its light was paling and would soon
disappear altogether.

I gazed painfully upon the luminous current growing weaker and weaker in
the wire coil. A dim procession of moving shadows seemed slowly unfolding
down the darkening walls. I scarcely dared to shut my eyes for one moment, for


fear of losing the least glimmer of this precious light. Every instant it seemed
about to vanish and the dense blackness to come rolling in palpably upon me.

One last trembling glimmer shot feebly up. I watched it in trembling and
anxiety; I drank it in as if I could preserve it, concentrating upon it the full power
of my eyes, as upon the very last sensation of light which they were ever to
experience, and the next moment I lay in the heavy gloom of deep, thick,
unfathomable darkness.

A terrible cry of anguish burst from me. Upon earth, in the midst of the
darkest night, light never abdicates its functions altogether. It is still subtle and
diffusive, but whatever little there may be, the eye still catches that little. Here
there was not an atom; the total darkness made me totally blind.

Then I began to lose my head. I arose with my arms stretched out before me,
attempting painfully to feel my way. I began to run wildly, hurrying through the
inextricable maze, still descending, still running through the substance of the
earth's thick crust, a struggling denizen of geological ‘faults,’ crying, shouting,
yelling, soon bruised by contact with the jagged rock, falling and rising again
bleeding, trying to drink the blood which covered my face, and even waiting for
some rock to shatter my skull against.

I shall never know whither my mad career took me. After the lapse of some
hours, no doubt exhausted, I fell like a lifeless lump at the foot of the wall, and
lost all consciousness.


CHAPTER XXVIIL.


THE RESCUE IN THE WHISPERING GALLERY

When I returned to partial life my face was wet with tears. How long that
state of insensibility had lasted I cannot say. I had no means now of taking
account of time. Never was solitude equal to this, never had any living being
been so utterly forsaken.

After my fall I had lost a good deal of blood. I felt it flowing over me. Ah!
how happy I should have been could I have died, and if death were not yet to be
gone through. I would think no longer. I drove away every idea, and, conquered
by my grief, I rolled myself to the foot of the opposite wall.


Already I was feeling the approach of another faint, and was hoping for
complete annihilation, when a loud noise reached me. It was like the distant
rumble of continuous thunder, and I could hear its sounding undulations rolling
far away into the remote recesses of the abyss.

Whence could this noise proceed? It must be from some phenomenon
proceeding in the great depths amidst which I lay helpless. Was it an explosion
of gas? Was it the fall of some mighty pillar of the globe?

I listened still. I wanted to know if the noise would be repeated. A quarter of
an hour passed away. Silence reigned in this gallery. I could not hear even the
beating of my heart.

Suddenly my ear, resting by chance against the wall, caught, or seemed to
catch, certain vague, indescribable, distant, articulate sounds, as of words.

"This is a delusion," I thought.

But it was not. Listening more attentively, I heard in reality a murmuring of
voices. But my weakness prevented me from understanding what the voices said.
Yet it was language, I was sure of it.

For a moment I feared the words might be my own, brought back by the
echo. Perhaps I had been crying out unknown to myself. I closed my lips firmly,
and laid my ear against the wall again.

"Yes, truly, some one is speaking; those are words!"

Even a few feet from the wall I could hear distinctly. I succeeded in catching
uncertain, strange, undistinguishable words. They came as if pronounced in low
murmured whispers. The word 'forlorad' was several times repeated in a tone of
sympathy and sorrow.

"Help!" I cried with all my might. "Help!"

I listened, I watched in the darkness for an answer, a cry, a mere breath of
sound, but nothing came. Some minutes passed. A whole world of ideas had
opened in my mind. I thought that my weakened voice could never penetrate to
my companions.

"It is they," I repeated. "What other men can be thirty leagues under
ground?"

I again began to listen. Passing my ear over the wall from one place to
another, I found the point where the voices seemed to be best heard. The word
‘forlorad' again returned; then the rolling of thunder which had roused me from
my lethargy.

"No," I said, "no; it is not through such a mass that a voice can be heard. I
am surrounded by granite walls, and the loudest explosion could never be heard
here! This noise comes along the gallery. There must be here some remarkable
exercise of acoustic laws!"


I listened again, and this time, yes this time, I did distinctly hear my name
pronounced across the wide interval.

It was my uncle's own voice! He was talking to the guide. And ‘forlorad' is a
Danish word.

Then I understood it all. To make myself heard, I must speak along this wall,
which would conduct the sound of my voice just as wire conducts electricity.

But there was no time to lose. If my companions moved but a few steps
away, the acoustic phenomenon would cease. I therefore approached the wall,
and pronounced these words as clearly as possible:

"Uncle Liedenbrock!"

I waited with the deepest anxiety. Sound does not travel with great velocity.
Even increased density air has no effect upon its rate of travelling; it merely
augments its intensity. Seconds, which seemed ages, passed away, and at last
these words reached me:

"Axel! Axel! is it you?"


"Yes, yes," I replied.

"My boy, where are you?"

"Lost, in the deepest darkness."

"Where is your lamp?"

"Tis out."

"And the stream?"

"Disappeared."

"Axel, Axel, take courage!"

"Wait! I am exhausted! I can't answer. Speak to me!"

"Courage," resumed my uncle. "Don't speak. Listen to me. We have looked
for you up the gallery and down the gallery. Could not find you. I wept for you,
my poor boy. At last, supposing you were still on the Hansbach, we fired our


guns. Our voices are audible to each other, but our hands cannot touch. But don't
despair, Axel! It is a great thing that we can hear each other."


During this time I had been reflecting. A vague hope was returning to my
heart. There was one thing I must know to begin with. I placed my lips close to
the wall, saying:

"My uncle!"

"My boy!" came to me after a few seconds.

"We must know how far we are apart."

"That is easy."

"You have your chronometer?"

"Yes."

"Well, take it. Pronounce my name, noting exactly the second when you
speak. I will repeat it as soon as it shall come to me, and you will observe the
exact moment when you get my answer."

"Yes; and half the time between my call and your answer will exactly
indicate that which my voice will take in coming to you."

"Just so, my uncle."

"Are you ready?"


"Now, attention. I am going to call your name."


I put my ear to the wall, and as soon as the name 'Axel' came I immediately
replied "Axel," then waited.


"Forty seconds," said my uncle. "Forty seconds between the two words; so
the sound takes twenty seconds in coming. Now, at the rate of 1,120 feet in a


second, this is 22,400 feet, or four miles and a quarter, nearly."


"Four miles and a quarter!" I murmured.


"Tt will soon be over, Axel."
"Must I go up or down?"


"Down - for this reason: We are in a vast chamber, with endless galleries.
Yours must lead into it, for it seems as if all the clefts and fractures of the globe
radiated round this vast cavern. So get up, and begin walking. Walk on, drag
yourself along, if necessary slide down the steep places, and at the end you will
find us ready to receive you. Now begin moving."


These words cheered me up.
"Good bye, uncle." I cried. "I am going. There will be no more voices heard
when once I have started. So good bye!"


"Good bye, Axel, au revoir!"


These were the last words I heard.

This wonderful underground conversation, carried on with a distance of four
miles and a quarter between us, concluded with these words of hope. I thanked
God from my heart, for it was He who had conducted me through those vast
solitudes to the point where, alone of all others perhaps, the voices of my
companions could have reached me.

This acoustic effect is easily explained on scientific grounds. It arose from
the concave form of the gallery and the conducting power of the rock. There are
many examples of this propagation of sounds which remain unheard in the
intermediate space. I remember that a similar phenomenon has been observed in
many places; amongst others on the internal surface of the gallery of the dome of
St. Paul's in London, and especially in the midst of the curious caverns among
the quarries near Syracuse, the most wonderful of which is called Dionysius’ Ear.

These remembrances came into my mind, and I clearly saw that since my
uncle's voice really reached me, there could be no obstacle between us.
Following the direction by which the sound came, of course I should arrive in
his presence, if my strength did not fail me.

I therefore rose; I rather dragged myself than walked. The slope was rapid,
and I slid down.

Soon the swiftness of the descent increased horribly, and threatened to
become a fall. Ino longer had the strength to stop myself.

Suddenly there was no ground under me. I felt myself revolving in air,
striking and rebounding against the craggy projections of a vertical gallery, quite


a well; my head struck against a sharp corner of the rock, and I became
unconscious.


CHAPTER XXIX.


THALATTA! THALATTA!

When I came to myself, I was stretched in half darkness, covered with thick
coats and blankets. My uncle was watching over me, to discover the least sign of
life. At my first sigh he took my hand; when I opened my eyes he uttered a cry
of joy.

"He lives! he lives!" he cried.

"Yes, I am still alive," I answered feebly.

"My dear nephew," said my uncle, pressing me to his breast, "you are saved."

I was deeply touched with the tenderness of his manner as he uttered these
words, and still more with the care with which he watched over me. But such
trials were wanted to bring out the Professor's tenderer qualities.

At this moment Hans came, he saw my hand in my uncle's, and I may safely
say that there was joy in his countenance.

"God dag," said he.

"How do you do, Hans? How are you? And now, uncle, tell me where we are
at the present moment?"

"To-morrow, Axel, to-morrow. Now you are too faint and weak. I have
bandaged your head with compresses which must not be disturbed. Sleep now,
and to-morrow I will tell you all."

"But do tell me what time it is, and what day."

"It is Sunday, the 8th of August, and it is ten at night. You must ask me no
more questions until the 10th."

In truth I was very weak, and my eyes involuntarily closed. I wanted a good
night's rest; and I therefore went off to sleep, with the knowledge that I had been
four long days alone in the heart of the earth.

Next morning, on awakening, I looked round me. My couch, made up of all
our travelling gear, was in a charming grotto, adorned with splendid stalactites,
and the soil of which was a fine sand. It was half light. There was no torch, no


lamp, yet certain mysterious glimpses of light came from without through a
narrow opening in the grotto. I heard too a vague and indistinct noise, something
like the murmuring of waves breaking upon a shingly shore, and at times I
seemed to hear the whistling of wind.

I wondered whether I was awake, whether I dreaming, whether my brain,
crazed by my fall, was not affected by imaginary noises. Yet neither eyes, nor
ears could be so utterly deceived.

It is a ray of daylight, I thought, sliding in through this cleft in the rock! That
is indeed the murmuring of waves! That is the rustling noise of wind. Am I quite
mistaken, or have we returned to the surface of the earth? Has my uncle given up
the expedition, or is it happily terminated?

I was asking myself these unanswerable questions when the Professor
entered.

"Good morning, Axel," he cried cheerily. "I feel sure you are better."

"Yes, I am indeed," said I, sitting up on my couch.

"You can hardly fail to be better, for you have slept quietly. Hans and I
watched you by turns, and we have noticed you were evidently recovering."

"Indeed, I do feel a great deal better, and I will give you a proof of that
presently if you will let me have my breakfast."

"You shall eat, lad. The fever has left you. Hans rubbed your wounds with
some ointment or other of which the Icelanders keep the secret, and they have
healed marvellously. Our hunter is a splendid fellow!"

Whilst he went on talking, my uncle prepared a few provisions, which I
devoured eagerly, notwithstanding his advice to the contrary. All the while I was
overwhelming him with questions which he answered readily.

I then learnt that my providential fall had brought me exactly to the
extremity of an almost perpendicular shaft; and as I had landed in the midst of an
accompanying torrent of stones, the least of which would have been enough to
crush me, the conclusion was that a loose portion of the rock had come down
with me. This frightful conveyance had thus carried me into the arms of my
uncle, where I fell bruised, bleeding, and insensible.

"Truly it is wonderful that you have not been killed a hundred times over.
But, for the love of God, don't let us ever separate again, or we many never see
each other more.”

"Not separate! Is the journey not over, then?" I opened a pair of astonished
eyes, which immediately called for the question:

"What is the matter, Axel?"

"I have a question to ask you. You say that I am safe and sound?"

"No doubt you are."


"And all my limbs unbroken?"

"Certainly."

"And my head?"

"Your head, except for a few bruises, is all right; and it is on your shoulders,
where it ought to be."

"Well, I am afraid my brain is affected."

"Your mind affected!"

"Yes, I fear so. Are we again on the surface of the globe?"

"No, certainly not."

"Then I must be mad; for don't I see the light of day, and don't I hear the
wind blowing, and the sea breaking on the shore?"

"Ah! is that all?"

"Do tell me all about it."

"I can't explain the inexplicable, but you will soon see and understand that
geology has not yet learnt all it has to learn."

"Then let us go," I answered quickly.

"No, Axel; the open air might be bad for you."

"Open air?”

"Yes; the wind is rather strong. You must not expose yourself."

"But I assure you I am perfectly well."

"A little patience, my nephew. A relapse might get us into trouble, and we
have no time to lose, for the voyage may be a long one."

"The voyage!"

"Yes, rest to-day, and to-morrow we will set sail."

"Set sail!" - and I almost leaped up.

What did it all mean? Had we a river, a lake, a sea to depend upon? Was
there a ship at our disposal in some underground harbour?

My curiosity was highly excited, my uncle vainly tried to restrain me. When
he saw that my impatience was doing me harm, he yielded.

I dressed in haste. For greater safety I wrapped myself in a blanket, and came
out of the grotto.


CHAPTER XXX.


A NEW MARE INTERNUM


At first I could hardly see anything. My eyes, unaccustomed to the light,
quickly closed. When I was able to reopen them, I stood more stupefied even
than surprised.

"The sea!" I cried.

"Yes," my uncle replied, "the Liedenbrock Sea; and I don't suppose any other
discoverer will ever dispute my claim to name it after myself as its first
discoverer."

A vast sheet of water, the commencement of a lake or an ocean, spread far
away beyond the range of the eye, reminding me forcibly of that open sea which
drew from Xenophon's ten thousand Greeks, after their long retreat, the
simultaneous cry, "Thalatta! thalatta!" the sea! the sea! The deeply indented
shore was lined with a breadth of fine shining sand, softly lapped by the waves,
and strewn with the small shells which had been inhabited by the first of created
beings. The waves broke on this shore with the hollow echoing murmur peculiar
to vast inclosed spaces. A light foam flew over the waves before the breath of a
moderate breeze, and some of the spray fell upon my face. On this slightly
inclining shore, about a hundred fathoms from the limit of the waves, came
down the foot of a huge wall of vast cliffs, which rose majestically to an
enormous height. Some of these, dividing the beach with their sharp spurs,
formed capes and promontories, worn away by the ceaseless action of the surf.
Farther on the eye discerned their massive outline sharply defined against the
hazy distant horizon.

It was quite an ocean, with the irregular shores of earth, but desert and
frightfully wild in appearance.

If my eyes were able to range afar over this great sea, it was because a
peculiar light brought to view every detail of it. It was not the light of the sun,
with his dazzling shafts of brightness and the splendour of his rays; nor was it
the pale and uncertain shimmer of the moonbeams, the dim reflection of a nobler
body of light. No; the illuminating power of this light, its trembling
diffusiveness, its bright, clear whiteness, and its low temperature, showed that it
must be of electric origin. It was like an aurora borealis, a continuous cosmical
phenomenon, filling a cavern of sufficient extent to contain an ocean.

The vault that spanned the space above, the sky, if it could be called so,
seemed composed of vast plains of cloud, shifting and variable vapours, which


by their condensation must at certain times fall in torrents of rain. I should have
thought that under so powerful a pressure of the atmosphere there could be no
evaporation; and yet, under a law unknown to me, there were broad tracts of
vapour suspended in the air. But then 'the weather was fine.’ The play of the
electric light produced singular effects upon the upper strata of cloud. Deep
shadows reposed upon their lower wreaths; and often, between two separated
fields of cloud, there glided down a ray of unspeakable lustre. But it was not
solar light, and there was no heat. The general effect was sad, supremely
melancholy. Instead of the shining firmament, spangled with its innumerable
stars, shining singly or in clusters, I felt that all these subdued and shaded fights
were ribbed in by vast walls of granite, which seemed to overpower me with
their weight, and that all this space, great as it was, would not be enough for the
march of the humblest of satellites.

Then I remembered the theory of an English captain, who likened the earth
to a vast hollow sphere, in the interior of which the air became luminous because
of the vast pressure that weighed upon it; while two stars, Pluto and Proserpine,
rolled within upon the circuit of their mysterious orbits.

We were in reality shut up inside an immeasurable excavation. Its width
could not be estimated, since the shore ran widening as far as eye could reach,
nor could its length, for the dim horizon bounded the new. As for its height, it
must have been several leagues. Where this vault rested upon its granite base no
eye could tell; but there was a cloud hanging far above, the height of which we
estimated at 12,000 feet, a greater height than that of any terrestrial vapour, and
no doubt due to the great density of the air.

The word cavern does not convey any idea of this immense space; words of
human tongue are inadequate to describe the discoveries of him who ventures
into the deep abysses of earth.

Besides I could not tell upon what geological theory to account for the
existence of such an excavation. Had the cooling of the globe produced it? I
knew of celebrated caverns from the descriptions of travellers, but had never
heard of any of such dimensions as this.

If the grotto of Guachara, in Colombia, visited by Humboldt, had not given
up the whole of the secret of its depth to the philosopher, who investigated it to
the depth of 2,500 feet, it probably did not extend much farther. The immense
mammoth cave in Kentucky is of gigantic proportions, since its vaulted roof
rises five hundred feet [1] above the level of an unfathomable lake and travellers
have explored its ramifications to the extent of forty miles. But what were these
cavities compared to that in which I stood with wonder and admiration, with its
sky of luminous vapours, its bursts of electric light, and a vast sea filling its bed?


My imagination fell powerless before such immensity.

I gazed upon these wonders in silence. Words failed me to express my
feelings. I felt as if I was in some distant planet Uranus or Neptune - and in the
presence of phenomena of which my terrestrial experience gave me no
cognisance. For such novel sensations, new words were wanted; and my
imagination failed to supply them. I gazed, I thought, I admired, with a
stupefaction mingled with a certain amount of fear.

The unforeseen nature of this spectacle brought back the colour to my
cheeks. I was under a new course of treatment with the aid of astonishment, and
my convalescence was promoted by this novel system of therapeutics; besides,
the dense and breezy air invigorated me, supplying more oxygen to my lungs.

It will be easily conceived that after an imprisonment of forty seven days in a
narrow gallery it was the height of physical enjoyment to breathe a moist air
impregnated with saline particles.

[1] One hundred and twenty. (Trans.)

I was delighted to leave my dark grotto. My uncle, already familiar with
these wonders, had ceased to feel surprise.

"You feel strong enough to walk a little way now?" he asked.

"Yes, certainly; and nothing could be more delightful."

"Well, take my arm, Axel, and let us follow the windings of the shore."

I eagerly accepted, and we began to coast along this new sea. On the left
huge pyramids of rock, piled one upon another, produced a prodigious titanic
effect. Down their sides flowed numberless waterfalls, which went on their way
in brawling but pellucid streams. A few light vapours, leaping from rock to rock,
denoted the place of hot springs; and streams flowed softly down to the common
basin, gliding down the gentle slopes with a softer murmur.

Amongst these streams I recognised our faithful travelling companion, the
Hansbach, coming to lose its little volume quietly in the mighty sea, just as if it
had done nothing else since the beginning of the world.

"We shall see it no more," I said, with a sigh.

"What matters," replied the philosopher, "whether this or another serves to
guide us?"

I thought him rather ungrateful.

But at that moment my attention was drawn to an unexpected sight. At a
distance of five hundred paces, at the turn of a high promontory, appeared a high,
tufted, dense forest. It was composed of trees of moderate height, formed like
umbrellas, with exact geometrical outlines. The currents of wind seemed to have
had no effect upon their shape, and in the midst of the windy blasts they stood
unmoved and firm, just like a clump of petrified cedars.


I hastened forward. I could not give any name to these singular creations.
Were they some of the two hundred thousand species of vegetables known
hitherto, and did they claim a place of their own in the lacustrine flora? No;
when we arrived under their shade my surprise turned into admiration. There
stood before me productions of earth, but of gigantic stature, which my uncle
immediately named.

"It is only a forest of mushrooms," said he.

And he was right. Imagine the large development attained by these plants,
which prefer a warm, moist climate. I knew that the Lycopodon giganteum
attains, according to Bulliard, a circumference of eight or nine feet; but here
were pale mushrooms, thirty to forty feet high, and crowned with a cap of equal
diameter. There they stood in thousands. No light could penetrate between their
huge cones, and complete darkness reigned beneath those giants; they formed
settlements of domes placed in close array like the round, thatched roofs of a
central African city.

Yet I wanted to penetrate farther underneath, though a chill fell upon me as
soon as I came under those cellular vaults. For half an hour we wandered from
side to side in the damp shades, and it was a comfortable and pleasant change to
arrive once more upon the sea shore.

But the subterranean vegetation was not confined to these fungi. Farther on
rose groups of tall trees of colourless foliage and easy to recognise. They were
lowly shrubs of earth, here attaining gigantic size; lycopodiums, a hundred feet
high; the huge sigillaria, found in our coal mines; tree ferns, as tall as our fir-
trees in northern latitudes; lepidodendra, with cylindrical forked stems,
terminated by long leaves, and bristling with rough hairs like those of the cactus.

"Wonderful, magnificent, splendid!" cried my uncle. "Here is the entire flora
of the second period of the world - the transition period. These, humble garden
plants with us, were tall trees in the early ages. Look, Axel, and admire it all.
Never had botanist such a feast as this!"

"You are right, my uncle. Providence seems to have preserved in this
immense conservatory the antediluvian plants which the wisdom of philosophers
has so sagaciously put together again."

"It is a conservatory, Axel; but is it not also a menagerie?"

"Surely not a menagerie!"

"Yes; no doubt of it. Look at that dust under your feet; see the bones
scattered on the ground."

"So there are!" I cried; "bones of extinct animals."

I had rushed upon these remains, formed of indestructible phosphates of
lime, and without hesitation I named these monstrous bones, which lay scattered


about like decayed trunks of trees.

"Here is the lower jaw of a mastodon," [1] I said. "These are the molar teeth
of the deinotherium; this femur must have belonged to the greatest of those
beasts, the megatherium. It certainly is a menagerie, for these remains were not
brought here by a deluge. The animals to which they belonged roamed on the
shores of this subterranean sea, under the shade of those arborescent trees. Here
are entire skeletons. And yet I cannot understand the appearance of these
quadrupeds in a granite cavern."

[1] These animals belonged to a late geological period, the Pliocene, just
before the glacial epoch, and therefore could have no connection with the
carboniferous vegetation. (Trans. )

"Why?"

"Because animal life existed upon the earth only in the secondary period,
when a sediment of soil had been deposited by the rivers, and taken the place of
the incandescent rocks of the primitive period."

"Well, Axel, there is a very simple answer to your objection that this soil is
alluvial."

"What! at such a depth below the surface of the earth?"

"No doubt; and there is a geological explanation of the fact. At a certain
period the earth consisted only of an elastic crust or bark, alternately acted on by
forces from above or below, according to the laws of attraction and gravitation.
Probably there were subsidences of the outer crust, when a portion of the
sedimentary deposits was carried down sudden openings."

"That may be," I replied; "but if there have been creatures now extinct in
these underground regions, why may not some of those monsters be now
roaming through these gloomy forests, or hidden behind the steep crags?"

And as this unpleasant notion got hold of me, I surveyed with anxious
scrutiny the open spaces before me; but no living creature appeared upon the
barren strand.

I felt rather tired, and went to sit down at the end of a promontory, at the foot
of which the waves came and beat themselves into spray. Thence my eye could
Sweep every part of the bay; within its extremity a little harbour was formed
between the pyramidal cliffs, where the still waters slept untouched by the
boisterous winds. A brig and two or three schooners might have moored within it
in safety. I almost fancied I should presently see some ship issue from it, full
sail, and take to the open sea under the southern breeze.

But this illusion lasted a very short time. We were the only living creatures in
this subterranean world. When the wind lulled, a deeper silence than that of the
deserts fell upon the arid, naked rocks, and weighed upon the surface of the


ocean. I then desired to pierce the distant haze, and to rend asunder the
mysterious curtain that hung across the horizon. Anxious queries arose to my
lips. Where did that sea terminate? Where did it lead to? Should we ever know
anything about its opposite shores?

My uncle made no doubt about it at all; I both desired and feared.

After spending an hour in the contemplation of this marvellous spectacle, we
returned to the shore to regain the grotto, and I fell asleep in the midst of the
strangest thoughts.


CHAPTER XXXI.


PREPARATIONS FOR A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY

The next morning I awoke feeling perfectly well. I thought a bathe would do
me good, and I went to plunge for a few minutes into the waters of this
mediterranean sea, for assuredly it better deserved this name than any other sea.

I came back to breakfast with a good appetite. Hans was a good caterer for
our little household; he had water and fire at his disposal, so that he was able to
vary our bill of fare now and then. For dessert he gave us a few cups of coffee,
and never was coffee so delicious.

"Now," said my uncle, "now is the time for high tide, and we must not lose
the opportunity to study this phenomenon."

"What! the tide!" I cried. "Can the influence of the sun and moon be felt
down here?"

"Why not? Are not all bodies subject throughout their mass to the power of
universal attraction? This mass of water cannot escape the general law. And in
spite of the heavy atmospheric pressure on the surface, you will see it rise like
the Atlantic itself."

At the same moment we reached the sand on the shore, and the waves were
by slow degrees encroaching on the shore.

"Here is the tide rising," I cried.

"Yes, Axel; and judging by these ridges of foam, you may observe that the
sea will rise about twelve feet."

"This is wonderful," I said.


"No; it is quite natural."

"You may say so, uncle; but to me it is most extraordinary, and I can hardly
believe my eyes. Who would ever have imagined, under this terrestrial crust, an
ocean with ebbing and flowing tides, with winds and storms?"

"Well," replied my uncle, "is there any scientific reason against it?"

"No; I see none, as soon as the theory of central heat is given up." "So then,
thus far," he answered, "the theory of Sir Humphry Davy is confirmed."

"Evidently it is; and now there is no reason why there should not be seas and
continents in the interior of the earth."

"No doubt," said my uncle; "and inhabited too."

"To be sure," said I; "and why should not these waters yield to us fishes of
unknown species?"

"At any rate," he replied, "we have not seen any yet."

"Well, let us make some lines, and see if the bait will draw here as it does in
sublunary regions."

"We will try, Axel, for we must penetrate all secrets of these newly
discovered regions."

"But where are we, uncle? for I have not yet asked you that question, and
your instruments must be able to furnish the answer."

"Horizontally, three hundred and fifty leagues from Iceland."

"So much as that?”

"I am sure of not being a mile out of my reckoning."

"And does the compass still show south-east?"

"Yes; with a westerly deviation of nineteen degrees forty-five minutes, just
as above ground. As for its dip, a curious fact is coming to light, which I have
observed carefully: that the needle, instead of dipping towards the pole as in the
northern hemisphere, on the contrary, rises from it."

"Would you then conclude," I said, "that the magnetic pole is somewhere
between the surface of the globe and the point where we are?"

"Exactly so; and it is likely enough that if we were to reach the spot beneath
the polar regions, about that seventy-first degree where Sir James Ross has
discovered the magnetic pole to be situated, we should see the needle point
straight up. Therefore that mysterious centre of attraction is at no great depth."

I remarked: " It is so; and here is a fact which science has scarcely
suspected."

"Science, my lad, has been built upon many errors; but they are errors which
it was good to fall into, for they led to the truth."

"What depth have we now reached?"

"We are thirty-five leagues below the surface."


"So," I said, examining the map, "the Highlands of Scotland are over our
heads, and the Grampians are raising their rugged summits above us."

"Yes," answered the Professor laughing. "It is rather a heavy weight to bear,
but a solid arch spans over our heads. The great Architect has built it of the best
materials; and never could man have given it so wide a stretch. What are the
finest arches of bridges and the arcades of cathedrals, compared with this far
reaching vault, with a radius of three leagues, beneath which a wide and
tempest-tossed ocean may flow at its ease?"

"Oh, I am not afraid that it will fall down upon my head. But now what are
your plans? Are you not thinking of returning to the surface now?"

"Return! no, indeed! We will continue our journey, everything having gone
on well so far."

"But how are we to get down below this liquid surface?"

"Oh, I am not going to dive head foremost. But if all oceans are properly
speaking but lakes, since they are encompassed by land, of course this internal
sea will be surrounded by a coast of granite, and on the opposite shores we shall
find fresh passages opening."

"How long do you suppose this sea to be?"

"Thirty or forty leagues; so that we have no time to lose, and we shall set sail
to-morrow."

I looked about for a ship.

"Set sail, shall we? But I should like to see my boat first."

"Tt will not be a boat at all, but a good, well-made raft."

"Why," I said, "a raft would be just as hard to make as a boat, and I don't see


"I know you don't see; but you might hear if you would listen. Don't you hear
the hammer at work? Hans is already busy at it."

"What, has he already felled the trees?"

"Oh, the trees were already down. Come, and you will see for yourself."

After half an hour's walking, on the other side of the promontory which
formed the little natural harbour, I perceived Hans at work. In a few more steps I
was at his side. To my great surprise a half-finished raft was already lying on the
sand, made of a peculiar kind of wood, and a great number of planks, straight
and bent, and of frames, were covering the ground, enough almost for a little
fleet.

"Uncle, what wood is this?" I cried.

"It is fir, pine, or birch, and other northern coniferae, mineralised by the
action of the sea. It is called surturbrand, a variety of brown coal or lignite,
found chiefly in Iceland."


"But surely, then, like other fossil wood, it must be as hard as stone, and
cannot float?"

"Sometimes that may happen; some of these woods become true anthracites;
but others, such as this, have only gone through the first stage of fossil
transformation. Just look," added my uncle, throwing into the sea one of those
precious waifs.

The bit of wood, after disappearing, returned to the surface and oscillated to
and fro with the waves.

"Are you convinced?" said my uncle.

"IT am quite convinced, although it is incredible!"

By next evening, thanks to the industry and skill of our guide, the raft was
made. It was ten feet by five; the planks of surturbrand, braced strongly together
with cords, presented an even surface, and when launched this improvised vessel
floated easily upon the waves of the Liedenbrock Sea.


CHAPTER XXXII.


WONDERS OF THE DEEP


On the 13th of August we awoke early. We were now to begin to adopt a
mode of travelling both more expeditious and less fatiguing than hitherto.

A mast was made of two poles spliced together, a yard was made of a third, a
blanket borrowed from our coverings made a tolerable sail. There was no want
of cordage for the rigging, and everything was well and firmly made.

The provisions, the baggage, the instruments, the guns, and a good quantity
of fresh water from the rocks around, all found their proper places on board; and
at six the Professor gave the signal to embark. Hans had fitted up a rudder to
steer his vessel. He took the tiller, and unmoored; the sail was set, and we were
soon afloat. At the moment of leaving the harbour, my uncle, who was
tenaciously fond of naming his new discoveries, wanted to give it a name, and
proposed mine amongst others.


"But I have a better to propose," I said: "Grauben. Let it be called Port
Grdauben; it will look very well upon the map."

"Port Grduben let it be then."

And so the cherished remembrance of my Virlandaise became associated
with our adventurous expedition.

The wind was from the north-west. We went with it at a high rate of speed.
The dense atmosphere acted with great force and impelled us swiftly on.

In an hour my uncle had been able to estimate our progress. At this rate, he
said, we shall make thirty leagues in twenty-four hours, and we shall soon come
in sight of the opposite shore.

I made no answer, but went and sat forward. The northern shore was already
beginning to dip under the horizon. The eastern and western strands spread wide
as if to bid us farewell. Before our eyes lay far and wide a vast sea; shadows of
great clouds swept heavily over its silver-grey surface; the glistening bluish rays
of electric light, here and there reflected by the dancing drops of spray, shot out
little sheaves of light from the track we left in our rear. Soon we entirely lost
sight of land; no object was left for the eye to judge by, and but for the frothy
track of the raft, I might have thought we were standing still.

About twelve, immense shoals of seaweeds came in sight. I was aware of the
great powers of vegetation that characterise these plants, which grow at a depth
of twelve thousand feet, reproduce themselves under a pressure of four hundred
atmospheres, and sometimes form barriers strong enough to impede the course
of a ship. But never, I think, were such seaweeds as those which we saw floating
in immense waving lines upon the sea of Liedenbrock.

Our raft skirted the whole length of the fuci, three or four thousand feet long,
undulating like vast serpents beyond the reach of sight; I found some amusement
in tracing these endless waves, always thinking I should come to the end of
them, and for hours my patience was vying with my surprise.

What natural force could have produced such plants, and what must have
been the appearance of the earth in the first ages of its formation, when, under
the action of heat and moisture, the vegetable kingdom alone was developing on
its surface?

Evening came, and, as on the previous day, I perceived no change in the
luminous condition of the air. It was a constant condition, the permanency of
which might be relied upon.

After supper I laid myself down at the foot of the mast, and fell asleep in the
midst of fantastic reveries.

Hans, keeping fast by the helm, let the raft run on, which, after all, needed no
steering, the wind blowing directly aft.


Since our departure from Port Grduben, Professor Liedenbrock had entrusted
the log to my care; I was to register every observation, make entries of
interesting phenomena, the direction of the wind, the rate of sailing, the way we
made - in a word, every particular of our singular voyage.

I shall therefore reproduce here these daily notes, written, so to speak, as the
course of events directed, in order to furnish an exact narrative of our passage.

Friday, August 14. - Wind steady, N.W. The raft makes rapid way in a direct
line. Coast thirty leagues to leeward. Nothing in sight before us. Intensity of light
the same. Weather fine; that is to say, that the clouds are flying high, are light,
and bathed in a white atmosphere resembling silver in a state of fusion. Therm.
89° Fahr.

At noon Hans prepared a hook at the end of a line. He baited it with a small
piece of meat and flung it into the sea. For two hours nothing was caught. Are
these waters, then, bare of inhabitants? No, there's a pull at the line. Hans draws
it in and brings out a struggling fish.

"A sturgeon," I cried; "a small sturgeon."

The Professor eyes the creature attentively, and his opinion differs from
mine.

The head of this fish was flat, but rounded in front, and the anterior part of its
body was plated with bony, angular scales; it had no teeth, its pectoral fins were
large, and of tail there was none. The animal belonged to the same order as the
sturgeon, but differed from that fish in many essential particulars. After a short
examination my uncle pronounced his opinion.

"This fish belongs to an extinct family, of which only fossil traces are found
in the devonian formations."

"What!" I cried. "Have we taken alive an inhabitant of the seas of primitive
ages?"

"Yes; and you will observe that these fossil fishes have no identity with any
living species. To have in one's possession a living specimen is a happy event for
a naturalist."

"But to what family does it belong?"

"It is of the order of ganoids, of the family of the cephalaspidae; and a
species of pterichthys. But this one displays a peculiarity confined to all fishes
that inhabit subterranean waters. It is blind, and not only blind, but actually has
no eyes at all."

I looked: nothing could be more certain. But supposing it might be a solitary
case, we baited afresh, and threw out our line. Surely this ocean is well peopled
with fish, for in another couple of hours we took a large quantity of
pterichthydes, as well as of others belonging to the extinct family of the


dipterides, but of which my uncle could not tell the species; none had organs of
sight. This unhoped-for catch recruited our stock of provisions.

Thus it is evident that this sea contains none but species known to us in their
fossil state, in which fishes as well as reptiles are the less perfectly and
completely organised the farther back their date of creation.

Perhaps we may yet meet with some of those saurians which science has
reconstructed out of a bit of bone or cartilage. I took up the telescope and
scanned the whole horizon, and found it everywhere a desert sea. We are far
away removed from the shores.

I gaze upward in the air. Why should not some of the strange birds restored
by the immortal Cuvier again flap their 'sail-broad vans' in this dense and heavy
atmosphere? There are sufficient fish for their support. I survey the whole space
that stretches overhead; it is as desert as the shore was.

Still my imagination carried me away amongst the wonderful speculations of
palaeontology. Though awake I fell into a dream. I thought I could see floating
on the surface of the waters enormous chelonia, preadamite tortoises, resembling
floating islands. Over the dimly lighted strand there trod the huge mammals of
the first ages of the world, the leptotherium (slender beast), found in the caverns
of Brazil; the merycotherium (ruminating beast), found in the 'drift' of iceclad
Siberia. Farther on, the pachydermatous lophiodon (crested toothed), a gigantic
tapir, hides behind the rocks to dispute its prey with the anoplotherium (unarmed
beast), a strange creature, which seemed a compound of horse, rhinoceros,
camel, and hippopotamus. The colossal mastodon (nipple-toothed) twists and
untwists his trunk, and brays and pounds with his huge tusks the fragments of
rock that cover the shore; whilst the megatherium (huge beast), buttressed upon
his enormous hinder paws, grubs in the soil, awaking the sonorous echoes of the
granite rocks with his tremendous roarings. Higher up, the protopitheca - the first
monkey that appeared on the globe - is climbing up the steep ascents. Higher yet,
the pterodactyle (wing-fingered) darts in irregular zigzags to and fro in the heavy
air. In the uppermost regions of the air immense birds, more powerful than the
cassowary, and larger than the ostrich, spread their vast breadth of wings and
strike with their heads the granite vault that bounds the sky.

All this fossil world rises to life again in my vivid imagination. I return to the
scriptural periods or ages of the world, conventionally called 'days,' long before
the appearance of man, when the unfinished world was as yet unfitted for his
support. Then mydream backed even farther still into the ages before the
creation of living beings. The mammals disappear, then the birds vanish, then the
reptiles of the secondary period, and finally the fish, the crustaceans, molluscs,
and articulated beings. Then the zoophytes of the transition period also return to


nothing. I am the only living thing in the world: all life is concentrated in my
beating heart alone. There are no more seasons; climates are no more; the heat of
the globe continually increases and neutralises that of the sun. Vegetation
becomes accelerated. I glide like a shade amongst arborescent ferns, treading
with unsteady feet the coloured marls and the particoloured clays; I lean for
support against the trunks of immense conifers; I lie in the shade of
sphenophylla (wedge-leaved), asterophylla (star-leaved), and lycopods, a
hundred feet high.

Ages seem no more than days! I am passed, against my will, in retrograde
order, through the long series of terrestrial changes. Plants disappear; granite
rocks soften; intense heat converts solid bodies into thick fluids; the waters again
cover the face of the earth; they boil, they rise in whirling eddies of steam; white
and ghastly mists wrap round the shifting forms of the earth, which by
imperceptible degrees dissolves into a gaseous mass, glowing fiery red and
white, as large and as shining as the sun.

And I myself am floating with wild caprice in the midst of this nebulous
mass of fourteen hundred thousand times the volume of the earth into which it
will one day be condensed, and carried forward amongst the planetary bodies.
My body is no longer firm and terrestrial; it is resolved into its constituent
atoms, subtilised, volatilised. Sublimed into imponderable vapour, I mingle and
am lost in the endless foods of those vast globular volumes of vaporous mists,
which roll upon their flaming orbits through infinite space.

But is it not a dream? Whither is it carrying me? My feverish hand has vainly
attempted to describe upon paper its strange and wonderful details. I have
forgotten everything that surrounds me. The Professor, the guide, the raft - are all
gone out of my ken. An illusion has laid hold upon me.

"What is the matter?" my uncle breaks in.

My staring eyes are fixed vacantly upon him.

"Take care, Axel, or you will fall overboard."

At that moment I felt the sinewy hand of Hans seizing me vigorously. But for
him, carried away by my dream, I should have thrown myself into the sea.

"Is he mad?" cried the Professor.

"What is it all about?" at last I cried, returning to myself.

"Do you feel ill?" my uncle asked.

"No; but I have had a strange hallucination; it is over now. Is all going on
right?"

"Yes, it is a fair wind and a fine sea; we are sailing rapidly along, and if I am
not out in my reckoning, we shall soon land."

At these words I rose and gazed round upon the horizon, still everywhere


bounded by clouds alone.


CHAPTER XXXIIL.


A BATTLE OF MONSTERS


Saturday, August 15. - The sea unbroken all round. No land in sight. The
horizon seems extremely distant.

My head is still stupefied with the vivid reality of my dream.

My uncle has had no dreams, but he is out of temper. He examines the
horizon all round with his glass, and folds his arms with the air of an injured
man.

I remark that Professor Liedenbrock has a tendency to relapse into an
impatient mood, and I make a note of it in my log. All my danger and sufferings
were needed to strike a spark of human. feeling out of him; but now that I am
well his nature has resumed its sway. And yet, what cause was there for anger? Is
not the voyage prospering as favourably as possible under the circumstances? Is
not the raft spinning along with marvellous speed?

"-You seem anxious, my uncle," I said, seeing him continually with his glass
to his eye.

"Anxious! No, not at all."

"Impatient, then?"

"One might be, with less reason than now."

"Yet we are going very fast."

"What does that signify? I am not complaining that the rate is slow, but that
the sea is so wide."

I then remembered that the Professor, before starting, had estimated the
length of this underground sea at thirty leagues. Now we had made three times
the distance, yet still the southern coast was not in sight.

"We are not descending as we ought to be," the Professor declares. "We are
losing time, and the fact is, I have not come all this way to take a little sail upon


a pond on a raft."

He called this sea a pond, and our long voyage, taking a little sail!

"But," I remarked, "since we have followed the road that Saknussemm has
shown us -"

"That is just the question. Have we followed that road? Did Saknussemm
meet this sheet of water? Did he cross it? Has not the stream that we followed
led us altogether astray?"

"At any rate we cannot feel sorry to have come so far. This prospect is
magnificent, and -"

"But I don't care for prospects. I came with an object, and I mean to attain it.
Therefore don't talk to me about views and prospects."

I take this as my answer, and I leave the Professor to bite his lips with
impatience. At six in the evening Hans asks for his wages, and his three rix
dollars are counted out to him.

Sunday, August 16. - Nothing new. Weather unchanged. The wind freshens.
On awaking, my first thought was to observe the intensity of the light. I was
possessed with an apprehension lest the electric light should grow dim, or fail
altogether. But there seemed no reason to fear. The shadow of the raft was
clearly outlined upon the surface of the waves.

Truly this sea is of infinite width. It must be as wide as the Mediterranean or
the Atlantic - and why not?

My uncle took soundings several times. He tied the heaviest of our pickaxes
to a long rope which he let down two hundred fathoms. No bottom yet; and we
had some difficulty in hauling up our plummet.

But when the pick was shipped again, Hans pointed out on its surface deep
prints as if it had been violently compressed between two hard bodies.

I looked at the hunter.

"Tdnder," said he.

I could not understand him, and turned to my uncle who was entirely
absorbed in his calculations. I had rather not disturb him while he is quiet. I
return to the Icelander. He by a snapping motion of his jaws conveys his ideas to
me.

"Teeth!" I cried, considering the iron bar with more attention.

Yes, indeed, those are the marks of teeth imprinted upon the metal! The jaws
which they arm must be possessed of amazing strength. Is there some monster
beneath us belonging to the extinct races, more voracious than the shark, more
fearful in vastness than the whale? I could not take my eyes off this indented iron
bar. Surely will my last night's dream be realised?

These thoughts agitated me all day, and my imagination scarcely calmed


down after several hours' sleep.

Monday, August 17. - I am trying to recall the peculiar instincts of the
monsters of the preadamite world, who, coming next in succession after the
molluscs, the crustaceans and le fishes, preceded the animals of mammalian race
upon the earth. The world then belonged to reptiles. Those monsters held the
mastery in the seas of the secondary period. They possessed a_ perfect
organisation, gigantic proportions, prodigious strength. The saurians of our day,
the alligators and the crocodiles, are but feeble reproductions of their forefathers
of primitive ages.

I shudder as I recall these monsters to my remembrance. No human eye has
ever beheld them living. They burdened this earth a thousand ages before man
appeared, but their fossil remains, found in the argillaceous limestone called by
the English the lias, have enabled their colossal structure to be perfectly built up
again and anatomically ascertained.

I saw at the Hamburg museum the skeleton of one of these creatures thirty
feet in length. Am I then fated - I, a denizen of earth - to be placed face to face
with these representatives of long extinct families? No; surely it cannot be! Yet
the deep marks of conical teeth upon the iron pick are certainly those of the
crocodile.

My eyes are fearfully bent upon the sea. I dread to see one of these monsters
darting forth from its submarine caverns. I suppose Professor Liedenbrock was
of my opinion too, and even shared my fears, for after having examined the pick,
his eyes traversed the ocean from side to side. What a very bad notion that was
of his, I thought to myself, to take soundings just here! He has disturbed some
monstrous beast in its remote den, and if we are not attacked on our voyage -

I look at our guns and see that they are all right. My uncle notices it, and
looks on approvingly.

Already widely disturbed regions on the surface of the water indicate some
commotion below. The danger is approaching. We must be on the look out.

Tuesday, August 18. - Evening came, or rather the time came when sleep
weighs down the weary eyelids, for there is no night here, and the ceaseless light
wearies the eyes with its persistency just as if we were sailing under an arctic
sun. Hans was at the helm. During his watch I slept.

Two hours afterwards a terrible shock awoke me. The raft was heaved up on
a watery mountain and pitched down again, at a distance of twenty fathoms.

"What is the matter?" shouted my uncle. "Have we struck land?"

Hans pointed with his finger at a dark mass six hundred yards away, rising
and falling alternately with heavy plunges. I looked and cried:

"It is an enormous porpoise."


"Yes," replied my uncle, "and there is a sea lizard of vast size."

"And farther on a monstrous crocodile. Look at its vast jaws and its rows of
teeth! It is diving down!"

"There's a whale, a whale!" cried the Professor. "I can see its great fins. See
how he is throwing out air and water through his blowers."

And in fact two liquid columns were rising to a considerable height above
the sea. We stood amazed, thunderstruck, at the presence of such a herd of
marine monsters. They were of supernatural dimensions; the smallest of them
would have crunched our raft, crew and all, at one snap of its huge jaws.

Hans wants to tack to get away from this dangerous neighbourhood; but he
sees on the other hand enemies not less terrible; a tortoise forty feet long, and a
serpent of thirty, lifting its fearful head and gleaming eyes above the flood.

Flight was out of the question now. The reptiles rose; they wheeled around
our little raft with a rapidity greater than that of express trains. They described
around us gradually narrowing circles. I took up my rifle. But what could a ball
do against the scaly armour with which these enormous beasts were clad?

We stood dumb with fear. They approach us close: on one side the crocodile,
on the other the serpent. The remainder of the sea monsters have disappeared. I
prepare to fire. Hans stops me by a gesture. The two monsters pass within a
hundred and fifty yards of the raft, and hurl themselves the one upon the other,
with a fury which prevents them from seeing us.

At three hundred yards from us the battle was fought. We could distinctly
observe the two monsters engaged in deadly conflict. But it now seems to me as
if the other animals were taking part in the fray - the porpoise, the whale, the
lizard, the tortoise. Every moment I seem to see one or other of them. I point
them to the Icelander. He shakes his head negatively.

"Tva," says he.

"What two? Does he mean that there are only two animals?"

"He is right," said my uncle, whose glass has never left his eye.

"Surely you must be mistaken," I cried.

"No: the first of those monsters has a porpoise's snout, a lizard's head, a
crocodile's teeth; and hence our mistake. It is the ichthyosaurus (the fish lizard),
the most terrible of the ancient monsters of the deep."

"And the other?"

"The other is a plesiosaurus (almost lizard), a serpent, armoured with the
carapace and the paddles of a turtle; he is the dreadful enemy of the other."

Hans had spoken truly. Two monsters only were creating all this commotion;
and before my eyes are two reptiles of the primitive world. I can distinguish the
eye of the ichthyosaurus glowing like a red-hot coal, and as large as a man's


head. Nature has endowed it with an optical apparatus of extreme power, and
capable of resisting the pressure of the great volume of water in the depths it
inhabits. It has been appropriately called the saurian whale, for it has both the
swiftness and the rapid movements of this monster of our own day. This one is
not less than a hundred feet long, and I can judge of its size when it sweeps over
the waters the vertical coils of its tail. Its jaw is enormous, and according to
naturalists it is armed with no less than one hundred and eighty-two teeth.

The plesiosaurus, a serpent with a cylindrical body and a short tail, has four
flappers or paddles to act like oars. Its body is entirely covered with a thick
armour of scales, and its neck, as flexible as a swan's, rises thirty feet above the
waves.

Those huge creatures attacked each other with the greatest animosity. They
heaved around them liquid mountains, which rolled even to our raft and rocked it
perilously. Twenty times we were near capsizing. Hissings of prodigious force
are heard. The two beasts are fast locked together; I cannot distinguish the one
from the other. The probable rage of the conqueror inspires us with intense fear.

One hour, two hours, pass away. The struggle continues with unabated
ferocity. The combatants alternately approach and recede from our raft. We
remain motionless, ready to fire. Suddenly the ichthyosaurus and the
plesiosaurus disappear below, leaving a whirlpool eddying in the water. Several
minutes pass by while the fight goes on under water.

All at once an enormous head is darted up, the head of the plesiosaurus. The
monster is wounded to death. I no longer see his scaly armour. Only his long
neck shoots up, drops again, coils and uncoils, droops, lashes the waters like a
gigantic whip, and writhes like a worm that you tread on. The water is splashed
for a long way around. The spray almost blinds us. But soon the reptile's agony
draws to an end; its movements become fainter, its contortions cease to be so
violent, and the long serpentine form lies a lifeless log on the labouring deep.

As for the ichthyosaurus - has he returned to his submarine cavern? or will
he reappear on the surface of the sea?


CHAPTER XXXIV.


THE GREAT GEYSER


Wednesday, August 19. - Fortunately the wind blows violently, and has
enabled us to flee from the scene of the late terrible struggle. Hans keeps at his
post at the helm. My uncle, whom the absorbing incidents of the combat had
drawn away from his contemplations, began again to look impatiently around
him.

The voyage resumes its uniform tenor, which I don't care to break with a
repetition of such events as yesterday's.

Thursday, Aug. 20. - Wind N.N.E., unsteady and fitful. Temperature high.
Rate three and a half leagues an hour.

About noon a distant noise is heard. I note the fact without being able to
explain it. It is a continuous roar.

"In the distance," says the Professor, "there is a rock or islet, against which
the sea is breaking."

Hans climbs up the mast, but sees no breakers. The ocean’ is smooth and
unbroken to its farthest limit.

Three hours pass away. The roarings seem to proceed from a very distant
waterfall.

I remark upon this to my uncle, who replies doubtfully: "Yes, I am convinced
that I am right." Are we, then, speeding forward to some cataract which will cast
us down an abyss? This method of getting on may please the Professor, because
it is vertical; but for my part I prefer the more ordinary modes of horizontal
progression.

At any rate, some leagues to the windward there must be some noisy
phenomenon, for now the roarings are heard with increasing loudness. Do they
proceed from the sky or the ocean?

I look up to the atmospheric vapours, and try to fathom their depths. The sky
is calm and motionless. The clouds have reached the utmost limit of the lofty
vault, and there lie still bathed in the bright glare of the electric light. It is not
there that we must seek for the cause of this phenomenon. Then I examine the
horizon, which is unbroken and clear of all mist. There is no change in its aspect.
But if this noise arises from a fall, a cataract, if all this ocean flows away
headlong into a lower basin yet, if that deafening roar is produced by a mass of
falling water, the current must needs accelerate, and its increasing speed will
give me the measure of the peril that threatens us. I consult the current: there is
none. I throw an empty bottle into the sea: it lies still.

About four Hans rises, lays hold of the mast, climbs to its top. Thence his


eye sweeps a large area of sea, and it is fixed upon a point. His countenance
exhibits no surprise, but his eye is immovably steady.

"He sees something," says my uncle.

"T believe he does."

Hans comes down, then stretches his arm to the south, saying:

"Dere nere!"

"Down there?" repeated my uncle.

Then, seizing his glass, he gazes attentively for a minute, which seems to me
an age.

"Yes, yes!" he cried. "I see a vast inverted cone rising from the surface."

"Is it another sea beast?"

"Perhaps it is."

"Then let us steer farther westward, for we know something of the danger of
coming across monsters of that sort."

"Let us go straight on," replied my uncle.

I appealed to Hans. He maintained his course inflexibly.

Yet, if at our present distance from the animal, a distance of twelve leagues at
the least, the column of water driven through its blowers may be distinctly seen,
it must needs be of vast size. The commonest prudence would counsel
immediate flight; but we did not come so far to be prudent.

Imprudently, therefore, we pursue our way. The nearer we approach, the
higher mounts the jet of water. What monster can possibly fill itself with such a
quantity of water, and spurt it up so continuously?

At eight in the evening we are not two leagues distant from it. Its body -
dusky, enormous, hillocky - lies spread upon the sea like an islet. Is it illusion or
fear? Its length seems to me a couple of thousand yards. What can be this
cetacean, which neither Cuvier nor Blumenbach knew anything about? It lies
motionless, as if asleep; the sea seems unable to move it in the least; it is the
waves that undulate upon its sides. The column of water thrown up to a height of
five hundred feet falls in rain with a deafening uproar. And here are we scudding
like lunatics before the wind, to get near to a monster that a hundred whales a
day would not satisfy!

Terror seizes upon me. I refuse to go further. I will cut the halliards if
necessary! I am in open mutiny against the Professor, who vouchsafes no
answer.

Suddenly Hans rises, and pointing with his finger at the menacing object, he
says:

"Holm."

"An island!" cries my uncle.


"That's not an island!" I cried sceptically.

"It's nothing else," shouted the Professor, with a loud laugh.

"But that column of water?"

"Geyser," said Hans.

"No doubt it is a geyser, like those in Iceland."

At first I protest against being so widely mistaken as to have taken an island
for a marine monster. But the evidence is against me, and I have to confess my
error. It is nothing worse than a natural phenomenon.

As we approach nearer the dimensions of the liquid column become
magnificent. The islet resembles, with a most deceiving likeness, an enormous
cetacean, whose head dominates the waves at a height of twenty yards. The
geyser, a word meaning ‘fury,’ rises majestically from its extremity. Deep and
heavy explosions are heard from time to time, when the enormous jet, possessed
with more furious violence, shakes its plumy crest, and springs with a bound till
it reaches the lowest stratum of the clouds. It stands alone. No steam vents, no
hot springs surround it, and all the volcanic power of the region is concentrated
here. Sparks of electric fire mingle with the dazzling sheaf of lighted fluid, every
drop of which refracts the prismatic colours.

"Let us land," said the Professor.

"But we must carefully avoid this waterspout, which would sink our raft in a
moment."

Hans, steering with his usual skill, brought us to the other extremity of the
islet.

I leaped up on the rock; my uncle lightly followed, while our hunter
remained at his post, like a man too wise ever to be astonished.

We walked upon granite mingled with siliceous tufa. The soil shivers and
shakes under our feet, like the sides of an overheated boiler filled with steam
struggling to get loose. We come in sight of a small central basin, out of which
the geyser springs. I plunge a register thermometer into the boiling water. It
marks an intense heat of 325°, which is far above the boiling point; therefore this
water issues from an ardent furnace, which is not at all in harmony with
Professor Liedenbrock's theories. I cannot help making the remark.

"Well," he replied, "how does that make against my doctrine?"

"Oh, nothing at all," I said, seeing that I was going in opposition to
immovable obstinacy.

Still I am constrained to confess that hitherto we have been wonderfully
favoured, and that for some reason unknown to myself we have accomplished
our journey under singularly favourable conditions of temperature. But it seems
manifest to me that some day we shall reach a region where the central heat


attains its highest limits, and goes beyond a point that can be registered by our
thermometers.

"That is what we shall see." So says the Professor, who, having named this
volcanic islet after his nephew, gives the signal to embark again.

For some minutes I am still contemplating the geyser. I notice that it throws
up its column of water with variable force: sometimes sending it to a great
height, then again to a lower, which I attribute to the variable pressure of the
steam accumulated in its reservoir.

At last we leave the island, rounding away past the low rocks on its southern
shore. Hans has taken advantage of the halt to refit his rudder.

But before going any farther I make a few observations, to calculate the
distance we have gone over, and note them in my journal. We have crossed two
hundred and seventy leagues of sea since leaving Port Grduben; and we are six
hundred and twenty leagues from Iceland, under England. [1]

[1] This distance carries the travellers as far as under the Pyrenees if the
league measures three miles. (Trans.)


CHAPTER XXXV.


AN ELECTRIC STORM


Friday, August 21. - On the morrow the magnificent geyser has disappeared.
The wind has risen, and has rapidly carried us away from Axel Island. The
roarings become lost in the distance.

The weather - if we may use that term - will change before long. The
atmosphere is charged with vapours, pervaded with the electricity generated by
the evaporation of saline waters. The clouds are sinking lower, and assume an
olive hue. The electric light can scarcely penetrate through the dense curtain
which has dropped over the theatre on which the battle of the elements is about
to be waged.

I feel peculiar sensations, like many creatures on earth at the approach of


violent atmospheric changes. The heavily voluted cumulus clouds lower
gloomily and threateningly; they wear that implacable look which I have
sometimes noticed at the outbreak of a great storm. The air is heavy; the sea is
calm.

In the distance the clouds resemble great bales of cotton, piled up in
picturesque disorder. By degrees they dilate, and gain in huge size what they lose
in number. Such is their ponderous weight that they cannot rise from the horizon;
but, obeying an impulse from higher currents, their dense consistency slowly
yields. The gloom upon them deepens; and they soon present to our view a
ponderous mass of almost level surface. From time to time a fleecy tuft of mist,
with yet some gleaming light left upon it, drops down upon the dense floor of
grey, and loses itself in the opaque and impenetrable mass.

The atmosphere is evidently charged and surcharged with electricity. My
whole body is saturated; my hair bristles just as when you stand upon an
insulated stool under the action of an electrical machine. It seems to me as if my
companions, the moment they touched me, would receive a severe shock like
that from an electric eel.

At ten in the morning the symptoms of storm become aggravated. The wind
never lulls but to acquire increased strength; the vast bank of heavy clouds is a
huge reservoir of fearful windy gusts and rushing storms.

I am loth to believe these atmospheric menaces, and yet I cannot help
muttering:

"Here's some very bad weather coming on."

The Professor made no answer. His temper is awful, to judge from the
working of his features, as he sees this vast length of ocean unrolling before him
to an indefinite extent. He can only spare time to shrug his shoulders viciously.

"There's a heavy storm coming on," I cried, pointing towards the horizon.
"Those clouds seem as if they were going to crush the sea."

A deep silence falls on all around. The lately roaring winds are hushed into a
dead calm; nature seems to breathe no more, and to be sinking into the stillness
of death. On the mast already I see the light play of a lambent St. Elmo's fire; the
outstretched sail catches not a breath of wind, and hangs like a sheet of lead. The
rudder stands motionless in a sluggish, waveless sea. But if we have now ceased
to advance why do we yet leave that sail loose, which at the first shock of the
tempest may capsize us in a moment?

"Let us reef the sail and cut the mast down!" I cried. "That will be safest."

"No, no! Never!" shouted my impetuous uncle. "Never! Let the wind catch
us if it will! What I want is to get the least glimpse of rock or shore, even if our
raft should be smashed into shivers!"


The words were hardly out of his mouth when a sudden change took place in
the southern sky. The piled-up vapours condense into water; and the air, put into
violent action to supply the vacuum left by the condensation of the mists, rouses
itself into a whirlwind. It rushes on from the farthest recesses of the vast cavern.
The darkness deepens; scarcely can I jot down a few hurried notes. The helm
makes a bound. My uncle falls full length; I creep close to him. He has laid a
firm hold upon a rope, and appears to watch with grim satisfaction this awful
display of elemental strife.

Hans stirs not. His long hair blown by the pelting storm, and laid flat across
his immovable countenance, makes him a strange figure; for the end of each lock
of loose flowing hair is tipped with little luminous radiations. This frightful
mask of electric sparks suggests to me, even in this dizzy excitement, a
comparison with preadamite man, the contemporary of the ichthyosaurus and the
megatherium. [1]

[1] Rather of the mammoth and the mastodon. (Trans.)

The mast yet holds firm. The sail stretches tight like a bubble ready to burst.
The raft flies at a rate that I cannot reckon, but not so fast as the foaming clouds
of spray which it dashes from side to side in its headlong speed.

"The sail! the sail!" I cry, motioning to lower it.

"No!" replies my uncle.

"Nej!" repeats Hans, leisurely shaking his head.

But now the rain forms a rushing cataract in front of that horizon toward
which we are running with such maddening speed. But before it has reached us
the rain cloud parts asunder, the sea boils, and the electric fires are brought into
violent action by a mighty chemical power that descends from the higher
regions. The most vivid flashes of lightning are mingled with the violent crash of
continuous thunder. Ceaseless fiery arrows dart in and out amongst the flying
thunder-clouds; the vaporous mass soon glows with incandescent heat;
hailstones rattle fiercely down, and as they dash upon our iron tools they too
emit gleams and flashes of lurid light. The heaving waves resemble fiery
volcanic hills, each belching forth its own interior flames, and every crest is
plumed with dancing fire. My eyes fail under the dazzling light, my ears are
stunned with the incessant crash of thunder. I must be bound to the mast, which
bows like a reed before the mighty strength of the storm.

(Here my notes become vague and indistinct. I have only been able to find a
few which I seem to have jotted down almost unconsciously. But their very
brevity and their obscurity reveal the intensity of the excitement which
dominated me, and describe the actual position even better than my memory
could do.)


Sunday, 23. - Where are we? Driven forward with a swiftness that cannot be
measured.

The night was fearful; no abatement of the storm. The din and uproar are
incessant; our ears are bleeding; to exchange a word is impossible.

The lightning flashes with intense brilliancy, and never seems to cease for a
moment. Zigzag streams of bluish white fire dash down upon the sea and
rebound, and then take an upward flight till they strike the granite vault that
overarches our heads. Suppose that solid roof should crumble down upon our
heads! Other flashes with incessant play cross their vivid fires, while others
again roll themselves into balls of living fire which explode like bombshells, but
the music of which scarcely-adds to the din of the battle strife that almost
deprives us of our senses of hearing and sight; the limit of intense loudness has
been passed within which the human ear can distinguish one sound from another.
If all the powder magazines in the world were to explode at once, we should hear
no more than we do now.

From the under surface of the clouds there are continual emissions of lurid
light; electric matter is in continual evolution from their component molecules;
the gaseous elements of the air need to be slaked with moisture; for innumerable
columns of water rush upwards into the air and fall back again in white foam.

Whither are we flying? My uncle lies full length across the raft.

The heat increases. I refer to the thermometer; it indicates . . . (the figure is
obliterated).

Monday, August 24. - Will there be an end to it? Is the atmospheric
condition, having once reached this density, to become final?

We are prostrated and worn out with fatigue. But Hans is as usual. The raft
bears on still to the south-east. We have made two hundred leagues since we left
Axel Island.

At noon the violence of the storm redoubles. We are obliged to secure as fast
as possible every article that belongs to our cargo. Each of us is lashed to some
part of the raft. The waves rise above our heads.

For three days we have never been able to make each other hear a word. Our
mouths open, our lips move, but not a word can be heard. We cannot even make
ourselves heard by approaching our mouth close to the ear.

My uncle has drawn nearer to me. He has uttered a few words. They seem to
be 'We are lost'; but I am not sure.

At last I write down the words: "Let us lower the sail."

He nods his consent.

Scarcely has he lifted his head again before a ball of fire has bounded over
the waves and lighted on board our raft. Mast and sail flew up in an instant


together, and I saw them carried up to prodigious height, resembling in
appearance a pterodactyle, one of those strong birds of the infant world.

We lay there, our blood running cold with unspeakable terror. The fireball,
half of it white, half azure blue, and the size of a ten-inch shell, moved slowly
about the raft, but revolving on its own axis with astonishing velocity, as if
whipped round by the force of the whirlwind. Here it comes, there it glides, now
it is up the ragged stump of the mast, thence it lightly leaps on the provision bag,
descends with a light bound, and just skims the powder magazine. Horrible! we
shall be blown up; but no, the dazzling disk of mysterious light nimbly leaps
aside; it approaches Hans, who fixes his blue eye upon it steadily; it threatens the
head of my uncle, who falls upon his knees with his head down to avoid it. And
now my turn comes; pale and trembling under the blinding splendour and the
melting heat, it drops at my feet, spinning silently round upon the deck; I try to
move my foot away, but cannot.

A suffocating smell of nitrogen fills the air, it enters the throat, it fills the
lungs. We suffer stifling pains.

Why am I unable to move my foot? Is it riveted to the planks? Alas! the fall
upon our fated raft of this electric globe has magnetised every iron article on
board. The instruments, the tools, our guns, are clashing and clanking violently
in their collisions with each other; the nails of my boots cling tenaciously to a
plate of iron let into the timbers, and I cannot draw my foot away from the spot.
At last by a violent effort I release myself at the instant when the ball in its
gyrations was about to seize upon it, and carry me off my feet ....

Ah! what a flood of intense and dazzling light! the globe has burst, and we
are deluged with tongues of fire!

Then all the light disappears. I could just see my uncle at full length on the
raft, and Hans still at his helm and spitting fire under the action of the electricity
which has saturated him.

But where are we going to? Where?

Tuesday, August 25. - I recover from a long swoon. The storm continues to
roar and rage; the lightnings dash hither and thither, like broods of fiery serpents
filling all the air. Are we still under the sea? Yes, we are borne at incalculable
speed. We have been carried under England, under the channel, under France,
perhaps under the whole of Europe.

A fresh noise is heard! Surely it is the sea breaking upon the rocks! But then .


CHAPTER XXXVI.


CALM PHILOSOPHIC DISCUSSIONS


Here I end what I may call my log, happily saved from the wreck, and I
resume my narrative as before.

What happened when the raft was dashed upon the rocks is more than I can
tell. I felt myself hurled into the waves; and if I escaped from death, and if my
body was not torn over the sharp edges of the rocks, it was because the powerful
arm of Hans came to my rescue.

The brave Icelander carried me out of the reach of the waves, over a burning
sand where I found myself by the side of my uncle.

Then he returned to the rocks, against which the furious waves were beating,
to save what he could. I was unable to speak. I was shattered with fatigue and
excitement; I wanted a whole hour to recover even a little.

But a deluge of rain was still falling, though with that violence which
generally denotes the near cessation of a storm. A few overhanging rocks
afforded us some shelter from the storm. Hans prepared some food, which I
could not touch; and each of us, exhausted with three sleepless nights, fell into a
broken and painful sleep.

The next day the weather was splendid. The sky and the sea had sunk into
sudden repose. Every trace of the awful storm had disappeared. The exhilarating
voice of the Professor fell upon my ears as I awoke; he was ominously cheerful.

"Well, my boy," he cried, "have you slept well?"

Would not any one have thought that we were still in our cheerful little house
on the Kénigstrasse and that I was only just coming down to breakfast, and that I
was to be married to Grduben that day?

Alas! if the tempest had but sent the raft a little more east, we should have
passed under Germany, under my beloved town of Hamburg, under the very
street where dwelt all that I loved most in the world. Then only forty leagues
would have separated us! But they were forty leagues perpendicular of solid
granite wall, and in reality we were a thousand leagues asunder!

All these painful reflections rapidly crossed my mind before I could answer
my uncle's question.

"Well, now," he repeated, "won't you tell me how you have slept?"


"Oh, very well," I said. "I am only a little knocked up, but I shall soon be
better."

"Oh," says my uncle, "that's nothing to signify. You are only a little bit tired."

"But you, uncle, you seem in very good spirits this morning."

"Delighted, my boy, delighted. We have got there."

"To our journey's end?"

"No; but we have got to the end of that endless sea. Now we shall go by land,
and really begin to go down! down! down!"

"But, my dear uncle, do let me ask you one question."

"Of course, Axel."

"How about returning?"

"Returning? Why, you are talking about the return before the arrival."

"No, I only want to know how that is to be managed."

"In the simplest way possible. When we have reached the centre of the globe,
either we shall find some new way to get back, or we shall come back like
decent folks the way we came. I feel pleased at the thought that it is sure not to
be shut against us."

"But then we shall have to refit the raft."

"Of course."

"Then, as to provisions, have we enough to last?"

"Yes; to be sure we have. Hans is a clever fellow, and I am sure he must have
saved a large part of our cargo. But still let us go and make sure."

We left this grotto which lay open to every wind. At the same time I
cherished a trembling hope which was a fear as well. It seemed to me impossible
that the terrible wreck of the raft should not have destroyed everything on board.
On my arrival on the shore I found Hans surrounded by an assemblage of articles
all arranged in good order. My uncle shook hands with him with a lively
gratitude. This man, with almost superhuman devotion, had been at work all the
while that we were asleep, and had saved the most precious of the articles at the
risk of his life.

Not that we had suffered no losses. For instance, our firearms; but we might
do without them. Our stock of powder had remained uninjured after having
risked blowing up during the storm.

"Well," cried the Professor, "as we have no guns we cannot hunt, that's all."

"Yes, but how about the instruments?"

"Here is the aneroid, the most useful of all, and for which I would have given
all the others. By means of it I can calculate the depth and know when we have
reached the centre; without it we might very likely go beyond, and come out at
the antipodes!"


Such high spirits as these were rather too strong.

"But where is the compass? I asked.

"Here it is, upon this rock, in perfect condition, as well as the thermometers
and the chronometer. The hunter is a splendid fellow."

There was no denying it. We had all our instruments. As for tools and
appliances, there they all lay on the ground - ladders, ropes, picks, spades, etc.

Still there was the question of provisions to be settled, and I asked - "How
are we off for provisions?"

The boxes containing these were in a line upon the shore, in a perfect state of
preservation; for the most part the sea had spared them, and what with biscuits,
salt meat, spirits, and salt fish, we might reckon on four months' supply.

"Four months!" cried the Professor. "We have time to go and to return; and
with what is left I will give a grand dinner to my friends at the Johanneeum."

I ought by this time to have been quite accustomed to my uncle's ways; yet
there was always something fresh about him to astonish me.

"Now," said he, "we will replenish our supply of water with the rain which
the storm has left in all these granite basins; therefore we shall have no reason to
fear anything from thirst. As for the raft, I will recommend Hans to do his best to
repair it, although I don't expect it will be of any further use to us."

"How so?" I cried.

"An idea of my own, my lad. I don't think we shall come out by the way that
we went in."

I stared at the Professor with a good deal of mistrust. I asked, was he not
touched in the brain? And yet there was method in his madness.

"And now let us go to breakfast," said he.

I followed him to a headland, after he had given his instructions to the
hunter. There preserved meat, biscuit, and tea made us an excellent meal, one of
the best I ever remember. Hunger, the fresh air, the calm quiet weather, after the
commotions we had gone through, all contributed to give me a good appetite.

Whilst breakfasting I took the opportunity to put to my uncle the question
where we were now.

"That seems to me," I said, "rather difficult to make out."

"Yes, it is difficult," he said, "to calculate exactly; perhaps even impossible,
since during these three stormy days I have been unable to keep any account of
the rate or direction of the raft; but still we may get an approximation."

"The last observation," I remarked, "was made on the island, when the
geyser was -"

"You mean Axel Island. Don't decline the honour of having given your name
to the first island ever discovered in the central parts of the globe."


"Well," said I, "let it be Axel Island. Then we had cleared two hundred and
seventy leagues of sea, and we were six hundred leagues from Iceland."

"Very well," answered my uncle; "let us start from that point and count four
days' storm, during which our rate cannot have been less than eighty leagues in
the twenty-four hours."

"That is right; and this would make three hundred leagues more."

"Yes, and the Liedenbrock sea would be six hundred leagues from shore to
shore. Surely, Axel, it may vie in size with the Mediterranean itself."

"Especially," I replied, "if it happens that we have only crossed it in its
narrowest part. And it is a curious circumstance," I added, "that if my
computations are right, and we are nine hundred leagues from Rejkiavik, we
have now the Mediterranean above our head."

"That is a good long way, my friend. But whether we are under Turkey or the
Atlantic depends very much upon the question in what direction we have been
moving. Perhaps we have deviated."

"No, I think not. Our course has been the same all along, and I believe this
shore is south-east of Port Grauben."

"Well," replied my uncle, "we may easily ascertain this by consulting the
compass. Let us go and see what it says."

The Professor moved towards the rock upon which Hans had laid down the
instruments. He was gay and full of spirits; he rubbed his hands, he studied his
attitudes. I followed him, curious to know if I was right in my estimate. As soon
as we had arrived at the rock my uncle took the compass, laid it horizontally, and
questioned the needle, which, after a few oscillations, presently assumed a fixed
position. My uncle looked, and looked, and looked again. He rubbed his eyes,
and then turned to me thunderstruck with some unexpected discovery.

"What is the matter?" I asked.

He motioned to me to look. An exclamation of astonishment burst from me.
The north pole of the needle was turned to what we supposed to be the south. It
pointed to the shore instead of to the open sea! I shook the box, examined it
again, it was in perfect condition. In whatever position I placed the box the
needle pertinaciously returned to this unexpected quarter. Therefore there
seemed no reason to doubt that during the storm there had been a sudden change
of wind unperceived by us, which had brought our raft back to the shore which
we thought we had left so long a distance behind us.


CHAPTER XXXVII.


THE LIEDENBROCK MUSEUM OF GEOLOGY


How shall I describe the strange series of passions which in succession shook
the breast of Professor Liedenbrock? First stupefaction, then incredulity, lastly a
downright burst of rage. Never had I seen the man so put out of countenance and
so disturbed. The fatigues of our passage across, the dangers met, had all to be
begun over again. We had gone backwards instead of forwards!

But my uncle rapidly recovered himself.

"Aha! will fate play tricks upon me? Will the elements lay plots against me?
Shall fire, air, and water make a combined attack against me? Well, they shall
know what a determined man can do. I will not yield. I will not stir a single foot
backwards, and it will be seen whether man or nature is to have the upper hand!"

Erect upon the rock, angry and threatening, Otto Liedenbrock was a rather
grotesque fierce parody upon the fierce Achilles defying the lightning. But I
thought it my duty to interpose and attempt to lay some restraint upon this
unmeasured fanaticism.

"Just listen to me," I said firmly. "Ambition must have a limit somewhere;
we cannot perform impossibilities; we are not at all fit for another sea voyage;
who would dream of undertaking a voyage of five hundred leagues upon a heap
of rotten planks, with a blanket in rags for a sail, a stick for a mast, and fierce
winds in our teeth? We cannot steer; we shall be buffeted by the tempests, and
we should be fools and madmen to attempt to cross a second time."

I was able to develop this series of unanswerable reasons for ten minutes
without interruption; not that the Professor was paying any respectful attention
to his nephew's arguments, but because he was deaf to all my eloquence.

"To the raft!" he shouted.

Such was his only reply. It was no use for me to entreat, supplicate, get
angry, or do anything else in the way of opposition; it would only have been
opposing a will harder than the granite rock.

Hans was finishing the repairs of the raft. One would have thought that this
strange being was guessing at my uncle's intentions. With a few more pieces of
surturbrand he had refitted our vessel. A sail already hung from the new mast,
and the wind was playing in its waving folds.

The Professor said a few words to the guide, and immediately he put


everything on board and arranged every necessary for our departure. The air was
clear - and the north-west wind blew steadily.

What could I do? Could I stand against the two? It was impossible? If Hans
had but taken my side! But no, it was not to be. The Icelander seemed to have
renounced all will of his own and made a vow to forget and deny himself. I
could get nothing out of a servant so feudalised, as it were, to his master. My
only course was to proceed.

I was therefore going with as much resignation as I could find to resume my
accustomed place on the raft, when my uncle laid his hand upon my shoulder.

"We shall not sail until to-morrow," he said.

I made a movement intended to express resignation.

"I must neglect nothing," he said; "and since my fate has driven me on this
part of the coast, I will not leave it until I have examined it."

To understand what followed, it must be borne in mind that, through
circumstances hereafter to be explained, we were not really where the Professor
supposed we were. In fact we were not upon the north shore of the sea.

"Now let us start upon fresh discoveries," I said.

And leaving Hans to his work we started off together. The space between the
water and the foot of the cliffs was considerable. It took half an hour to bring us
to the wall of rock. We trampled under our feet numberless shells of all the
forms and sizes which existed in the earliest ages of the world. I also saw
immense carapaces more than fifteen feet in diameter. They had been the
coverings of those gigantic glyptodons or armadilloes of the pleiocene period, of
which the modern tortoise is but a miniature representative. [1] The soil was
besides this scattered with stony fragments, boulders rounded by water action,
and ridged up in successive lines. I was therefore led to the conclusion that at
one time the sea must have covered the ground on which we were treading. On
the loose and scattered rocks, now out of the reach of the highest tides, the
waves had left manifest traces of their power to wear their way in the hardest
stone.

This might up to a certain point explain the existence of an ocean forty
leagues beneath the surface of the globe. But in my opinion this liquid mass
would be lost by degrees farther and farther within the interior of the earth, and it
certainly had its origin in the waters of the ocean overhead, which had made
their way hither through some fissure. Yet it must be believed that that fissure is
now closed, and that all this cavern or immense reservoir was filled in a very
short time. Perhaps even this water, subjected to the fierce action of central heat,
had partly been resolved into vapour. This would explain the existence of those
clouds suspended over our heads and the development of that electricity which


raised such tempests within the bowels of the earth.

This theory of the phenomena we had witnessed seemed satisfactory to me;
for however great and stupendous the phenomena of nature, fixed physical laws
will or may always explain them.

We were therefore walking upon sedimentary soil, the deposits of the waters
of former ages. The Professor was carefully examining every little fissure in the
rocks. Wherever he saw a hole he always wanted to know the depth of it. To him
this was important.

We had traversed the shores of the Liedenbrock sea for a mile when we
observed a sudden change in the appearance of the soil. It seemed upset,
contorted, and convulsed by a violent upheaval of the lower strata. In many
places depressions or elevations gave witness to some tremendous power
effecting the dislocation of strata.

[1] The glyptodon and armadillo are mammalian; the tortoise is a chelonian,
a reptile, distinct classes of the animal kingdom; therefore the latter cannot be a
representative of the former. (Trans.)

We moved with difficulty across these granite fissures and chasms mingled
with silex, crystals of quartz, and alluvial deposits, when a field, nay, more than
a field, a vast plain, of bleached bones lay spread before us. It seemed like an
immense cemetery, where the remains of twenty ages mingled their dust
together. Huge mounds of bony fragments rose stage after stage in the distance.
They undulated away to the limits of the horizon, and melted in the distance in a
faint haze. There within three square miles were accumulated the materials for a
complete history of the animal life of ages, a history scarcely outlined in the too
recent strata of the inhabited world.

But an impatient curiosity impelled our steps; crackling and rattling, our feet
were trampling on the remains of prehistoric animals and interesting fossils, the
possession of which is a matter of rivalry and contention between the museums
of great cities. A thousand Cuviers could never have reconstructed the organic
remains deposited in this magnificent and unparalleled collection.

I stood amazed. My uncle had uplifted his long arms to the vault which was
our sky; his mouth gaping wide, his eyes flashing behind his shining spectacles,
his head balancing with an up-and-down motion, his whole attitude denoted
unlimited astonishment. Here he stood facing an immense collection of scattered
leptotheria, mericotheria, lophiodia, anoplotheria, megatheria, mastodons,
protopithece, pterodactyles, and all sorts of extinct monsters here assembled
together for his special satisfaction. Fancy an enthusiastic bibliomaniac suddenly
brought into the midst of the famous Alexandrian library burnt by Omar and
restored by a miracle from its ashes! just such a crazed enthusiast was my uncle,


Professor Liedenbrock.

But more was to come, when, with a rush through clouds of bone dust, he
laid his hand upon a bare skull, and cried with a voice trembling with
excitement:

"Axel! Axel! a human head!"

"A human skull?" I cried, no less astonished.

"Yes, nephew. Aha! M. Milne-Edwards! Ah! M. de Quatrefages, how I wish
you were standing here at the side of Otto Liedenbrock!"


CHAPTER XXXVIIL.


THE PROFESSOR IN HIS CHAIR AGAIN

To understand this apostrophe of my uncle's, made to absent French savants,
it will be necessary to allude to an event of high importance in a paleontological
point of view, which had occurred a little while before our departure.

On the 28th of March, 1863, some excavators working under the direction of
M. Boucher de Perthes, in the stone quarries of Moulin Quignon, near Abbeville,
in the department of Somme, found a human jawbone fourteen feet beneath the
surface. It was the first fossil of this nature that had ever been brought to light.
Not far distant were found stone hatchets and flint arrow-heads stained and
encased by lapse of time with a uniform coat of rust.

The noise of this discovery was very great, not in France alone, but in
England and in Germany. Several savants of the French Institute, and amongst
them MM. Milne-Edwards and de Quatrefages, saw at once the importance of
this discovery, proved to demonstration the genuineness of the bone in question,
and became the most ardent defendants in what the English called this ‘trial of a
jawbone.’ To the geologists of the United Kingdom, who believed in the
certainty of the fact - Messrs. Falconer, Busk, Carpenter, and others - scientific
Germans were soon joined, and amongst them the forwardest, the most fiery, and
the most enthusiastic, was my uncle Liedenbrock.

Therefore the genuineness of a fossil human relic of the quaternary period
seemed to be incontestably proved and admitted.

It is true that this theory met with a most obstinate opponent in M. Elie de
Beaumont. This high authority maintained that the soil of Moulin Quignon was
not diluvial at all, but was of much more recent formation; and, agreeing in that


with Cuvier, he refused to admit that the human species could be contemporary
with the animals of the quaternary period. My uncle Liedenbrock, along with the
great body of the geologists, had maintained his ground, disputed, and argued,
until M. Elie de Beaumont stood almost alone in his opinion.

We knew all these details, but we were not aware that since our departure the
question had advanced to farther stages. Other similar maxillaries, though
belonging to individuals of various types and different nations, were found in the
loose grey soil of certain grottoes in France, Switzerland, and Belgium, as well
as weapons, tools, earthen utensils, bones of children and adults. The existence
therefore of man in the quaternary period seemed to become daily more certain.

Nor was this all. Fresh discoveries of remains in the pleiocene formation had
emboldened other geologists to refer back the human species to a higher
antiquity still. It is true that these remains were not human bones, but objects
bearing the traces of his handiwork, such as fossil leg-bones of animals,
sculptured and carved evidently by the hand of man.

Thus, at one bound, the record of the existence of man receded far back into
the history of the ages past; he was a predecessor of the mastodon; he was a
contemporary of the southern elephant; he lived a hundred thousand years ago,
when, according to geologists, the pleiocene formation was in progress.

Such then was the state of paleontological science, and what we knew of it
was sufficient to explain our behaviour in the presence of this stupendous
Golgotha. Any one may now understand the frenzied excitement of my uncle,
when, twenty yards farther on, he found himself face to face with a primitive
man!

It was a perfectly recognisable human body. Had some particular soil, like
that of the cemetery St. Michel, at Bordeaux, preserved it thus for so many ages?
It might be so. But this dried corpse, with its parchment-like skin drawn tightly
over the bony frame, the limbs still preserving their shape, sound teeth, abundant
hair, and finger and toe nails of frightful length, this desiccated mummy startled
us by appearing just as it had lived countless ages ago. I stood mute before this
apparition of remote antiquity. My uncle, usually so garrulous, was struck dumb
likewise. We raised the body. We stood it up against a rock. It seemed to stare at
us out of its empty orbits. We sounded with our knuckles his hollow frame.

After some moments’ silence the Professor was himself again. Otto
Liedenbrock, yielding to his nature, forgot all the circumstances of our eventful
journey, forgot where we were standing, forgot the vaulted cavern which
contained us. No doubt he was in mind back again in his Johanneum, holding
forth to his pupils, for he assumed his learned air; and addressing himself to an
imaginary audience, he proceeded thus:


"Gentlemen, I have the honour to introduce to you a man of the quaternary or
post-tertiary system. Eminent geologists have denied his existence, others no less
eminent have affirmed it. The St. Thomases of paleontology, if they were here,
might now touch him with their fingers, and would be obliged to acknowledge
their error. I am quite aware that science has to be on its guard with discoveries
of this kind. I know what capital enterprising individuals like Barnum have made
out of fossil men. I have heard the tale of the kneepan of Ajax, the pretended
body of Orestes claimed to have been found by the Spartans, and of the body of
Asterius, ten cubits long, of which Pausanias speaks. I have read the reports of
the skeleton of Trapani, found in the fourteenth century, and which was at the
time identified as that of Polyphemus; and the history of the giant unearthed in
the sixteenth century near Palermo. You know as well as I do, gentlemen, the
analysis made at Luceme in 1577 of those huge bones which the celebrated Dr.
Felix Plater affirmed to be those of a giant nineteen feet high. I have gone
through the treatises of Cassanion, and all those memoirs, pamphlets, answers,
and rejoinders published respecting the skeleton of Teutobochus, the invader of
Gaul, dug out of a sandpit in the Dauphiné, in 1613. In the eighteenth century I
would have stood up for Scheuchzer's preadamite man against Peter Campet. I
have perused a writing, entitled Gigan -"

Here my uncle's unfortunate infirmity met him - that of being unable in
public to pronounce hard words.

"The pamphlet entitled Gigan -"

He could get no further.

"Giganteo -"

It was not to be done. The unlucky word would not come out. At the
Johanneum there would have been a laugh.

"Gigantosteologie,” at last the Professor burst out, between two words which
I shall not record here.

Then rushing on with renewed vigour, and with great animation:

"Yes, gentlemen, I know all these things, and more. I know that Cuvier and
Blumenbach have recognised in these bones nothing more remarkable than the
bones of the mammoth and other mammals of the post-tertiary period. But in the
presence of this specimen to doubt would be to insult science. There stands the
body! You may see it, touch it. It is not a mere skeleton; it is an entire body,
preserved for a purely anthropological end and purpose."

I was good enough not to contradict this startling assertion.

"If I could only wash it in a solution of sulphuric acid," pursued my uncle, "I
should be able to clear it from all the earthy particles and the shells which are
incrusted about it. But I do not possess that valuable solvent. Yet, such as it is,


the body shall tell us its own wonderful story."

Here the Professor laid hold of the fossil skeleton, and handled it with the
skill of a dexterous showman.

"You see," he said, "that it is not six feet long, and that we are still separated
by a long interval from the pretended race of giants. As for the family to which it
belongs, it is evidently Caucasian. It is the white race, our own. The skull of this
fossil is a regular oval, or rather ovoid. It exhibits no prominent cheekbones, no
projecting jaws. It presents no appearance of that prognathism which diminishes
the facial angle. [1] Measure that angle. It is nearly ninety degrees. But I will go
further in my deductions, and I will affirm that this specimen of the human
family is of the Japhetic race, which has since spread from the Indies to the
Atlantic. Don't smile, gentlemen."

Nobody was smiling; but the learned Professor was frequently disturbed by
the broad smiles provoked by his learned eccentricities.

"Yes," he pursued with animation, "this is a fossil man, the contemporary of
the mastodons whose remains fill this amphitheatre. But if you ask me how he
came there, how those strata on which he lay slipped down into this enormous
hollow in the globe, I confess I cannot answer that question. No doubt in the
post-tertiary period considerable commotions were still disturbing the crust of
the earth. The long-continued cooling of the globe produced chasms, fissures,
clefts, and faults, into which, very probably, portions of the upper earth may
have fallen. I make no rash assertions; but there is the man surrounded by his
own works, by hatchets, by flint arrow-heads, which are the characteristics of the
stone age. And unless he came here, like myself, as a tourist on a visit and as a
pioneer of science, I can entertain no doubt of the authenticity of his remote
origin."

[1] The facial angle is formed by two lines, one touching the brow and the
front teeth, the other from the orifice of the ear to the lower line of the nostrils.
The greater this angle, the higher intelligence denoted by the formation of the
skull. Prognathism is that projection of the jawbones which sharpens or lessons
this angle, and which is illustrated in the negro countenance and in the lowest
savages.

The Professor ceased to speak, and the audience broke out into loud and
unanimous applause. For of course my uncle was right, and wiser men than his
nephew would have had some trouble to refute his statements.

Another remarkable thing. This fossil body was not the only one in this
immense catacomb. We came upon other bodies at every step amongst this
mortal dust, and my uncle might select the most curious of these specimens to
demolish the incredulity of sceptics.


In fact it was a wonderful spectacle, that of these generations of men and
animals commingled in a common cemetery. Then one very serious question
arose presently which we scarcely dared to suggest. Had all those creatures
slided through a great fissure in the crust of the earth, down to the shores of the
Liedenbrock sea, when they were dead and turning to dust, or had they lived and
grown and died here in this subterranean world under a false sky, just like
inhabitants of the upper earth? Until the present time we had seen alive only
marine monsters and fishes. Might not some living man, some native of the
abyss, be yet a wanderer below on this desert strand?


CHAPTER XXXIX.


FOREST SCENERY ILLUMINATED BY
ELETRICITY


For another half hour we trod upon a pavement of bones. We pushed on,
impelled by our burning curiosity. What other marvels did this cavern contain?
What new treasures lay here for science to unfold? I was prepared for any
surprise, my imagination was ready for any astonishment however astounding.

We had long lost sight of the sea shore behind the hills of bones. The rash
Professor, careless of losing his way, hurried me forward. We advanced in
silence, bathed in luminous electric fluid. By some phenomenon which I am
unable to explain, it lighted up all sides of every object equally. Such was its
diffusiveness, there being no central point from which the light emanated, that
shadows no longer existed. You might have thought yourself under the rays of a
vertical sun in a tropical region at noonday and the height of summer. No vapour
was visible. The rocks, the distant mountains, a few isolated clumps of forest
trees in the distance, presented a weird and wonderful aspect under these totally
new conditions of a universal diffusion of light. We were like Hoffmann's
shadowless man.

After walking a mile we reached the outskirts of a vast forest, but not one of
those forests of fungi which bordered Port Grduben.

Here was the vegetation of the tertiary period in its fullest blaze of


magnificence. Tall palms, belonging to species no longer living, splendid
palmacites, firs, yews, cypress trees, thujas, representatives of the conifers. were
linked together by a tangled network of long climbing plants. A soft carpet of
moss and hepaticas luxuriously clothed the soil. A few sparkling streams ran
almost in silence under what would have been the shade of the trees, but that
there was no shadow. On their banks grew tree-ferns similar to those we grow in
hothouses. But a remarkable feature was the total absence of colour in all those
trees, shrubs, and plants, growing without the life-giving heat and light of the
sun. Everything seemed mixed-up and confounded in one uniform silver grey or
light brown tint like that of fading and faded leaves. Not a green leaf anywhere,
and the flowers - which were abundant enough in the tertiary period, which first
gave birth to flowers - looked like brown-paper flowers, without colour or scent.

My uncle Liedenbrock ventured to penetrate under this colossal grove. I
followed him, not without fear. Since nature had here provided vegetable
nourishment, why should not the terrible mammals be there too? I perceived in
the broad clearings left by fallen trees, decayed with age, leguminose plants,
acerineee, rubicee and many other eatable shrubs, dear to ruminant animals at
every period. Then I observed, mingled together in confusion, trees of countries
far apart on the surface of the globe. The oak and the palm were growing side by
side, the Australian eucalyptus leaned against the Norwegian pine, the birch-tree
of the north mingled its foliage with New Zealand kauris. It was enough to
distract the most ingenious classifier of terrestrial botany.

Suddenly I halted. I drew back my uncle.

The diffused light revealed the smallest object in the dense and distant
thickets. I had thought I saw - no! I did see, with my own eyes, vast colossal
forms moving amongst the trees. They were gigantic animals; it was a herd of
mastodons - not fossil remains, but living and resembling those the bones of
which were found in the marshes of Ohio in 1801. I saw those huge elephants
whose long, flexible trunks were grouting and turning up the soil under the trees
like a legion of serpents. I could hear the crashing noise of their long ivory tusks
boring into the old decaying trunks. The boughs cracked, and the leaves torn
away by cartloads went down the cavernous throats of the vast brutes.

So, then, the dream in which I had had a vision of the prehistoric world, of
the tertiary and post-tertiary periods, was now realised. And there we were
alone, in the bowels of the earth, at the mercy of its wild inhabitants!

My uncle was gazing with intense and eager interest.

"Come on!" said he, seizing my arm. "Forward! forward!"

"No, I will not!" I cried. "We have no firearms. What could we do in the
midst of a herd of these four-footed giants? Come away, uncle - come! No


human being may with safety dare the anger of these monstrous beasts."

"No human creature?" replied my uncle in a lower voice. "You are wrong,
Axel. Look, look down there! I fancy I see a living creature similar to ourselves:
it is aman!"

I looked, shaking my head incredulously. But though at first I was
unbelieving I had to yield to the evidence of my senses.

In fact, at a distance of a quarter of a mile, leaning against the trunk of a
gigantic kauri, stood a human being, the Proteus of those subterranean regions, a
new son of Neptune, watching this countless herd of mastodons.

Immanis pecoris custos, immanior ipse. [1]

[1] "The shepherd of gigantic herds, and huger still himself."

Yes, truly, huger still himself. It was no longer a fossil being like him whose
dried remains we had easily lifted up in the field of bones; it was a giant, able to
control those monsters. In stature he was at least twelve feet high. His head,
huge and unshapely as a buffalo's, was half hidden in the thick and tangled
growth of his unkempt hair. It most resembled the mane of the primitive
elephant. In his hand he wielded with ease an enormous bough, a staff worthy of
this shepherd of the geologic period.

We stood petrified and speechless with amazement. But he might see us! We
must fly!

"Come, do come!" I said to my uncle, who for once allowed himself to be
persuaded.

In another quarter of an hour our nimble heels had carried us beyond the
reach of this horrible monster.

And yet, now that I can reflect quietly, now that my spirit has grown calm
again, now that months have slipped by since this strange and supernatural
meeting, what am I to think? what am I to believe? I must conclude that it was
impossible that our senses had been deceived, that our eyes did not see what we
supposed they saw. No human being lives in this subterranean world; no
generation of men dwells in those inferior caverns of the globe, unknown to and
unconnected with the inhabitants of its surface. It is absurd to believe it!

I had rather admit that it may have been some animal whose structure
resembled the human, some ape or baboon of the early geological ages, some
protopitheca, or some mesopitheca, some early or middle ape like that
discovered by Mr. Lartet in the bone cave of Sansau. But this creature surpassed
in stature all the measurements known in modern paleontology. But that a man,
a living man, and therefore whole generations doubtless besides, should be
buried there in the bowels of the earth, is impossible.

However, we had left behind us the luminous forest, dumb with


astonishment, overwhelmed and struck down with a terror which amounted to
stupefaction. We kept running on for fear the horrible monster might be on our
track. It was a flight, a fall, like that fearful pulling and dragging which is
peculiar to nightmare. Instinctively we got back to the Liedenbrock sea, and I
cannot say into what vagaries my mind would not have carried me but for a
circumstance which brought me back to practical matters.

Although I was certain that we were now treading upon a soil not hitherto
touched by our feet, I often perceived groups of rocks which reminded me of
those about Port Grauben. Besides, this seemed to confirm the indications of the
needle, and to show that we had against our will returned to the north of the
Liedenbrock sea. Occasionally we felt quite convinced. Brooks and waterfalls
were tumbling everywhere from the projections in the rocks. I thought I
recognised the bed of surturbrand, our faithful Hansbach, and the grotto in which
I had recovered life and consciousness. Then a few paces farther on, the
arrangement of the cliffs, the appearance of an unrecognised stream, or the
strange outline of a rock, carne to throw me again into doubt.

I communicated my doubts to my uncle. Like myself, he hesitated; he could
recognise nothing again amidst this monotonous scene.

"Evidently," said I, "we have not landed again at our original starting point,
but the storm has carried us a little higher, and if we follow the shore we shall
find Port Grauben."

"If that is the case it will be useless to continue our exploration, and we had
better return to our raft. But, Axel, are you not mistaken?"

"It is difficult to speak decidedly, uncle, for all these rocks are so very much
alike. Yet I think I recognise the promontory at the foot of which Hans
constructed our launch. We must be very near the little port, if indeed this is not
it," I added, examining a creek which I thought I recognised.

"No, Axel, we should at least find our own traces and I see nothing -"

"But I do see," I cried, darting upon an object lying on the sand.

And I showed my uncle a rusty dagger which I had just picked up.

"Come," said he, "had you this weapon with you?"


"I! No, certainly! But you, perhaps -"

"Not that I am aware," said the Professor. "I have never had this object in my
possession."

"Well, this is strange!"

"No, Axel, it is very simple. The Icelanders often wear arms of this kind.
This must have belonged to Hans, and he has lost it."

I shook my head. Hans had never had an object like this in his possession.

"Did it not belong to some preadamite warrior?" I cried, "to some living
man, contemporary with the huge cattle-driver? But no. This is not a relic of the
stone age. It is not even of the iron age. This blade is steel -"

My uncle stopped me abruptly on my way to a dissertation which would
have taken me a long way, and said coolly:

"Be calm, Axel, and reasonable. This dagger belongs to the sixteenth
century; it is a poniard, such as gentlemen carried in their belts to give the coup
de grace. Its origin is Spanish. It was never either yours, or mine, or the hunter's,
nor did it belong to any of those human beings who may or may not inhabit this
inner world. See, it was never jagged like this by cutting men's throats; its blade
is coated with a rust neither a day, nor a year, nor a hundred years old."

The Professor was getting excited according to his wont, and was allowing
his imagination to run away with him.

"Axel, we are on the way towards the grand discovery. This blade has been
left on the strand for from one to three hundred years, and has blunted its edge
upon the rocks that fringe this subterranean sea!"

"But it has not come alone. It has not twisted itself out of shape; some one
has been here before us!

"Yes - a man has."

"And who was that man?"

"A man who has engraved his name somewhere with that dagger. That man
wanted once more to mark the way to the centre of the earth. Let us look about:
look about!"

And, wonderfully interested, we peered all along the high wall, peeping into
every fissure which might open out into a gallery.

And so we arrived at a place where the shore was much narrowed. Here the
sea came to lap the foot of the steep cliff, leaving a passage no wider than a
couple of yards. Between two boldly projecting rocks appeared the mouth of a
dark tunnel.

There, upon a granite slab, appeared two mysterious graven letters, half eaten
away by time. They were the initials of the bold and daring traveller:

[Runic initials appear here]


"A. S.," shouted my uncle. "Arne Saknussemm! Ame Saknussemm
everywhere!"


CHAPTER XL.


PREPARATIONS FOR BLASTING A PASSAGE TO THE CENTRE OF
THE EARTH

Since the start upon this marvellous pilgrimage I had been through so many
astonishments that I might well be excused for thinking myself well hardened
against any further surprise. Yet at the sight of these two letters, engraved on this
spot three hundred years ago, I stood aghast in dumb amazement. Not only were
the initials of the learned alchemist visible upon the living rock, but there lay the
iron point with which the letters had been engraved. I could no longer doubt of
the existence of that wonderful traveller and of the fact of his unparalleled
journey, without the most glaring incredulity.

Whilst these reflections were occupying me, Professor Liedenbrock had
launched into a somewhat rhapsodical eulogium, of which Arne Saknussemm
was, of course, the hero.

"Thou marvellous genius!" he cried, "thou hast not forgotten one indication
which might serve to lay open to mortals the road through the terrestrial crust;
and thy fellow-creatures may even now, after the lapse of three centuries, again
trace thy footsteps through these deep and darksome ways. You reserved the
contemplation of these wonders for other eyes besides your own. Your name,
graven from stage to stage, leads the bold follower of your footsteps to the very
centre of our planet's core, and there again we shall find your own name written
with your own hand. I too will inscribe my name upon this dark granite page.
But for ever henceforth let this cape that advances into the sea discovered by
yourself be known by your own illustrious name - Cape Saknussemm."

Such were the glowing words of panegyric which fell upon my attentive ear,
and I could not resist the sentiment of enthusiasm with which I too was infected.
The fire of zeal kindled afresh in me. I forgot everything. I dismissed from my
mind the past perils of the journey, the future danger of our return. That which
another had done I supposed we might also do, and nothing that was not
superhuman appeared impossible to me.

"Forward! forward!" I cried.


I was already darting down the gloomy tunnel when the Professor stopped
me; he, the man of impulse, counselled patience and coolness.

"Let us first return to Hans," he said, "and bring the raft to this spot."

I obeyed, not without dissatisfaction, and passed out rapidly among the rocks
on the shore.

I said: "Uncle, do you know it seems to me that circumstances have
wonderfully befriended us hitherto?"

"You think so, Axel?"

"No doubt; even the tempest has put us on the right way. Blessings on that
storm! It has brought us back to this coast from which fine weather would have
carried us far away. Suppose we had touched with our prow (the prow of a
rudder!) the southern shore of the Liedenbrock sea, what would have become of
us? We should never have seen the name of Saknussemm, and we should at this
moment be imprisoned on a rockbound, impassable coast."

"Yes, Axel, it is providential that whilst supposing we were steering south we
should have just got back north at Cape Saknussemm. I must say that this is
astonishing, and that I feel I have no way to explain it."

"What does that signify, uncle? Our business is not to explain facts, but to
use them!"

"Certainly; but -"

"Well, uncle, we are going to resume the northern route, and to pass under
the north countries of Europe - under Sweden, Russia, Siberia: who knows
where? -instead of burrowing under the deserts of Africa, or perhaps the waves
of the Atlantic; and that is all I want to know."

"Yes, Axel, you are right. It is all for the best, since we have left that weary,
horizontal sea, which led us nowhere. Now we shall go down, down, down! Do
you know that it is now only 1,500 leagues. to the centre of the globe?"

"Is that all?" I cried. "Why, that's nothing. Let us start: march!"

All this crazy talk was going on still when we met the hunter. Everything
was made ready for our instant departure. Every bit of cordage was put on board.
We took our places, and with our sail set, Hans steered us along the coast to
Cape Saknussemm.

The wind was unfavourable to a species of launch not calculated for shallow
water. In many places we were obliged to push ourselves along with iron-pointed
sticks. Often the sunken rocks just beneath the surface obliged us to deviate from
our straight course. At last, after three hours' sailing, about six in the evening we
reached a place suitable for our landing. I jumped ashore, followed by my uncle
and the Icelander. This short passage had not served to cool my ardour. On the
contrary, I even proposed to burn ‘our ship,' to prevent the possibility of return;


but my uncle would not consent to that. I thought him singularly lukewarm.

"At least," I said, "don't let us lose a minute."

"Yes, yes, lad," he replied; "but first let us examine this new gallery, to see if
we shall require our ladders."

My uncle put his Ruhmkorff's apparatus in action; the raft moored to the
shore was left alone; the mouth of the tunnel was not twenty yards from us; and
our party, with myself at the head, made for it without a moment's delay.

The aperture, which was almost round, was about five feet in diameter; the
dark passage was cut out in the live rock and lined with a coat of the eruptive
matter which formerly issued from it; the interior was level with the ground
outside, so that we were able to enter without difficulty. We were following a
horizontal plane, when, only six paces in, our progress was interrupted by an
enormous block just across our way.

"Accursed rock!" I cried in a passion, finding myself suddenly confronted by
an impassable obstacle.

Right and left we searched in vain for a way, up and down, side to side; there
was no getting any farther. I felt fearfully disappointed, and I would not admit
that the obstacle was final. I stopped, I looked underneath the block: no opening.
Above: granite still. Hans passed his lamp over every portion of the barrier in
vain. We must give up all hope of passing it.

I sat down in despair. My uncle strode from side to side in the narrow
passage.

"But how was it with Saknussemm?" I cried.

"Yes," said my uncle, "was he stopped by this stone barrier?"

"No, no," I replied with animation. "This fragment of rock has been shaken
down by some shock or convulsion, or by one of those magnetic storms which
agitate these regions, and has blocked up the passage which lay open to him.
Many years have elapsed since the return of Saknussemm to the surface and the
fall of this huge fragment. Is it not evident that this gallery was once the way
open to the course of the lava, and that at that time there must have been a free
passage? See here are recent fissures grooving and channelling the granite roof.
This roof itself is formed of fragments of rock carried down, of enormous stones,
as if by some giant's hand; but at one time the expulsive force was greater than
usual, and this block, like the falling keystone of a ruined arch, has slipped down
to the ground and blocked up the way. It is only an accidental obstruction, not
met by Saknussemm, and if we don't destroy it we shall be unworthy to reach the
centre of the earth."

Such was my sentence! The soul of the Professor had passed into me. The
genius of discovery possessed me wholly. I forgot the past, I scorned the future. I


gave not a thought to the things of the surface of this globe into which I had
dived; its cities and its sunny plains, Hamburg and the K6nigstrasse, even poor
Grauben, who must have given us up for lost, all were for the time dismissed
from the pages of my memory.

"Well," cried my uncle, "let us make a way with our pickaxes."

"Too hard for the pickaxe."

"Well, then, the spade."

"That would take us too long."

"What, then?"

"Why gunpowder, to be sure! Let us mine the obstacle and blow it up."

"Oh, yes, it is only a bit of rock to blast!"

"Hans, to work!" cried my uncle.

The Icelander returned to the raft and soon came back with an iron bar which
he made use of to bore a hole for the charge. This was no easy work. A hole was
to be made large enough to hold fifty pounds of guncotton, whose expansive
force is four times that of gunpowder.

I was terribly excited. Whilst Hans was at work I was actively helping my
uncle to prepare a slow match of wetted powder encased in linen.

"This will do it," I said.

"Tt will," replied my uncle.

By midnight our mining preparations were over; the charge was rammed into
the hole, and the slow match uncoiled along the gallery showed its end outside
the opening.

A spark would now develop the whole of our preparations into activity.

"Tomorrow," said the Professor.

I had to be resigned and to wait six long hours.


CHAPTER XLI.


THE GREAT EXPLOSION AND THE RUSH DOWN BELOW

The next day, Thursday, August 27, is a well-remembered date in our
subterranean journey. It never returns to my memory without sending through
me a shudder of horror and a palpitation of the heart. From that hour we had no
further occasion for the exercise of reason, or judgment, or skill, or contrivance.
We were henceforth to be hurled along, the playthings of the fierce elements of


the deep.

At six we were afoot. The moment drew near to clear a way by blasting
through the opposing mass of granite.

I begged for the honour of lighting the fuse. This duty done, I was to join my
companions on the raft, which had not yet been unloaded; we should then push
off as far as we could and avoid the dangers arising from the explosion, the
effects of which were not likely to be confined to the rock itself.

The fuse was calculated to burn ten minutes before setting fire to the mine. I
therefore had sufficient time to get away to the raft.

I prepared to fulfil my task with some anxiety.

After a hasty meal, my uncle and the hunter embarked whilst I remained on
shore. I was supplied with a lighted lantern to set fire to the fuse. "Now go," said
my uncle, "and return immediately to us." "Don't be uneasy," I replied. "I will
not play by the way." I immediately proceeded to the mouth of the tunnel. I
opened my lantern. I laid hold of the end of the match. The Professor stood,
chronometer in hand. "Ready?" he cried.

" Ay."

"Fire!"

I instantly plunged the end of the fuse into the lantern. It spluttered and
flamed, and I ran at the top of my speed to the raft.

"Come on board quickly, and let us push off."

Hans, with a vigorous thrust, sent us from the shore. The raft shot twenty
fathoms out to sea.

It was a moment of intense excitement. The Professor was watching the hand
of the chronometer.

"Five minutes more!" he said. "Four! Three!"

My pulse beat half-seconds.

"Two! One! Down, granite rocks; down with you."

What took place at that moment? I believe I did not hear the dull roar of the
explosion. But the rocks suddenly assumed a new arrangement: they rent
asunder like a curtain. I saw a bottomless pit open on the shore. The sea, lashed
into sudden fury, rose up in an enormous billow, on the ridge of which the
unhappy raft was uplifted bodily in the air with all its crew and cargo.

We all three fell down flat. In less than a second we were in deep,
unfathomable darkness. Then I felt as if not only myself but the raft also had no
support beneath. I thought it was sinking; but it was not so. I wanted to speak to
my uncle, but the roaring of the waves prevented him from hearing even the
sound of my voice.

In spite of darkness, noise, astonishment, and terror, I then understood what


had taken place.

On the other side of the blown-up rock was an abyss. The explosion had
caused a kind of earthquake in this fissured and abysmal region; a great gulf had
opened; and the sea, now changed into a torrent, was hurrying us along into it.

I gave myself up for lost.

An hour passed away - two hours, perhaps - I cannot tell. We clutched each
other fast, to save ourselves from being thrown off the raft. We felt violent
shocks whenever we were borne heavily against the craggy projections. Yet
these shocks were not very frequent, from which I concluded that the gully was
widening. It was no doubt the same road that Saknussemm had taken; but instead
of walking peaceably down it, as he had done, we were carrying a whole sea
along with us.

These ideas, it will be understood, presented themselves to my mind in a
vague and undetermined form. I had difficulty in associating any ideas together
during this headlong race, which seemed like a vertical descent. To judge by the
air which was whistling past me and made a whizzing in my ears, we were
moving faster than the fastest express trains. To light a torch under these’
conditions would have been impossible; and our last electric apparatus had been
shattered by the force of the explosion.

I was therefore much surprised to see a clear light shining near me. It lighted
up the calm and unmoved countenance of Hans. The skilful huntsman had
succeeded in lighting the lantern; and although it flickered so much as to
threaten to go out, it threw a fitful light across the awful darkness.

I was right in my supposition. It was a wide gallery. The dim light could not
show us both its walls at once. The fall of the waters which were carrying us
away exceeded that of the swiftest rapids in American rivers. Its surface seemed
composed of a sheaf of arrows hurled with inconceivable force; I cannot convey
my impressions by a better comparison. The raft, occasionally seized by an eddy,
spun round as it still flew along. When it approached the walls of the gallery I
threw on them the light of the lantern, and I could judge somewhat of the
velocity of our speed by noticing how the jagged projections of the rocks spun
into endless ribbons and bands, so that we seemed confined within a network of
shifting lines. I supposed we were running at the rate of thirty leagues an hour.

My uncle and I gazed on each other with haggard eyes, clinging to the stump
of the mast, which had snapped asunder at the first shock of our great
catastrophe. We kept our backs to the wind, not to be stifled by the rapidity of a
movement which no human power could check.

Hours passed away. No change in our situation; but a discovery came to
complicate matters and make them worse.


In seeking to put our cargo into somewhat better order, I found that the
greater part of the articles embarked had disappeared at the moment of the
explosion, when the sea broke in upon us with such violence. I wanted to know
exactly what we had saved, and with the lantern in my hand I began my
examination. Of our instruments none were saved but the compass and the
chronometer; our stock of ropes and ladders was reduced to the bit of cord rolled
round the stump of the mast! Not a spade, not a pickaxe, not a hammer was left
us; and, irreparable disaster! we had only one day's provisions left.

I searched every nook and comer, every crack and cranny in the raft. There
was nothing. Our provisions were reduced to one bit of salt meat and a few
biscuits.

I stared at our failing supplies stupidly. I refused to take in the gravity of our
loss. And yet what was the use of troubling myself. If we had had provisions
enough for months, how could we get out of the abyss into which we were being
hurled by an irresistible torrent? Why should we fear the horrors of famine,
when death was swooping down upon us in a multitude of other forms? Would
there be time left to die of starvation?

Yet by an inexplicable play of the imagination I forgot my present dangers,
to contemplate the threatening future. Was there any chance of escaping from the
fury of this impetuous torrent, and of returning to the surface of the globe? I
could not form the slightest conjecture how or when. But one chance in a
thousand, or ten thousand, is still a chance; whilst death from starvation would
leave us not the smallest hope in the world.

The thought came into my mind to declare the whole truth to my uncle, to
show him the dreadful straits to which we were reduced, and to calculate how
long we might yet expect to live. But I had the courage to preserve silence. I
wished to leave him cool and self-possessed.

At that moment the light from our lantern began to sink by little and little,
and then went out entirely. The wick had burnt itself out. Black night reigned
again; and there was no hope left of being able to dissipate the palpable
darkness. We had yet a torch left, but we could not have kept it alight. Then, like
a child, I closed my eyes firmly, not to see the darkness.

After a considerable lapse of time our speed redoubled. I could perceive it by
the sharpness of the currents that blew past my face. The descent became
steeper. I believe we were no longer sliding, but falling down. I had an
impression that we were dropping vertically. My uncle's hand, and the vigorous
arm of Hans, held me fast.

Suddenly, after a space of time that I could not measure, I felt a shock. The
raft had not struck against any hard resistance, but had suddenly been checked in


its fall. A waterspout, an immense liquid column, was beating upon the surface
of the waters. I was suffocating! I was drowning!

But this sudden flood was not of long duration. In a few seconds I found
myself in the air again, which I inhaled with all the force of my lungs. My uncle
and Hans were still holding me fast by the arms; and the raft was still carrying
us.


CHAPTER XLII.


HEADLONG SPEED UPWARD THROUGH THE HORRORS OF
DARKNESS

It might have been, as I guessed, about ten at night. The first of my senses
which came into play after this last bout was that of hearing. All at once I could
hear; and it was a real exercise of the sense of hearing. I could hear the silence in
the gallery after the din which for hours had stunned me. At last these words of
my uncle's came to me like a vague murmuring:

"We are going up.”

"What do you mean?" I cried.

"Yes, we are going up - up!"

I stretched out my arm. I touched the wall, and drew back my hand bleeding.
We were ascending with extreme rapidity.

"The torch! The torch!" cried the Professor.

Not without difficulty Hans succeeded in lighting the torch; and the flame,
preserving its upward tendency, threw enough light to show us what kind of a
place we were in.

"Just as I thought," said the Professor "We are in a tunnel not four-and-
twenty feet in diameter The water had reached the bottom of the gulf. It is now
rising to its level, and carrying us with it."

"Where to?”

"T cannot tell; but we must be ready for anything. We are mounting at a speed
which seems to me of fourteen feet in a second, or ten miles an hour. At this rate
we shall get on."

"Yes, if nothing stops us; if this well has an aperture. But suppose it to be
stopped. If the air is condensed by the pressure of this column of water we shall
be crushed."


"Axel," replied the Professor with perfect coolness, "our situation is almost
desperate; but there are some chances of deliverance, and it is these that I am
considering. If at every instant we may perish, so at every instant we may be
saved. Let us then be prepared to seize upon the smallest advantage."

"But what shall we do now?"

"Recruit our strength by eating."

At these words I fixed a haggard eye upon my uncle. That which I had been
so unwilling to confess at last had to be told.

"Eat, did you say?"

"Yes, at once."

The Professor added a few words in Danish, but Hans shook his head
mournfully.

"What!" cried my uncle. "Have we lost our provisions?"

"Yes; here is all we have left; one bit of salt meat for the three."

My uncle stared at me as if he could not understand.

"Well," said I, "do you think we have any chance of being saved?"

My question was unanswered.

An hour passed away. I began to feel the pangs of a violent hunger. My
companions were suffering too, and not one of us dared touch this wretched
remnant of our goodly store.

But now we were mounting up with excessive speed. Sometimes the air
would cut our breath short, as is experienced by aeronauts ascending too rapidly.
But whilst they suffer from cold in proportion to their rise, we were beginning to
feel a contrary effect. The heat was increasing in a manner to cause us the most
fearful anxiety, and certainly the temperature was at this moment at the height of
100° Fahr.

What could be the meaning of such a change? Up to this time facts had
supported the theories of Davy and of Liedenbrock; until now particular
conditions of non-conducting rocks, electricity and magnetism, had tempered the
laws of nature, giving us only a moderately warm climate, for the theory of a
central fire remained in my estimation the only one that was true and explicable.
Were we then turning back to where the phenomena of central heat ruled in all
their rigour and would reduce the most refractory rocks to the state of a molten
liquid? I feared this, and said to the Professor:

"If we are neither drowned, nor shattered to pieces, nor starved to death,
there is still the chance that we may be burned alive and reduced to ashes."

At this he shrugged his shoulders and returned to his thoughts.

Another hour passed, and, except some slight increase in the temperature,
nothing new had happened.


"Come," said he, "we must determine upon something."

"Determine on what?" said I.

"Yes, we must recruit our strength by carefully rationing ourselves, and so
prolong our existence by a few hours. But we shall be reduced to very great
weakness at last."

"And our last hour is not far off."

"Well, if there is a chance of safety, if a moment for active exertion presents
itself, where should we find the required strength if we allowed ourselves to be
enfeebled by hunger?"

"Well, uncle, when this bit of meat has been devoured what shall we have
left?"

"Nothing, Axel, nothing at all. But will it do you any more good to devour it
with your eyes than with your teeth? Your reasoning has in it neither sense nor
energy."

"Then don't you despair?" I cried irritably.

"No, certainly not," was the Professor's firm reply.

"What! do you think there is any chance of safety left?"

"Yes, I do; as long as the heart beats, as long as body and soul keep together,
I cannot admit that any creature endowed with a will has need to despair of life."

Resolute words these! The man who could speak so, under such
circumstances, was of no ordinary type.

"Finally, what do you mean to do?" I asked.

"Eat what is left to the last crumb, and recruit our fading strength. This meal
will be our last, perhaps: so let it be! But at any rate we shall once more be men,
and not exhausted, empty bags."

"Well, let us consume it then," I cried.

My uncle took the piece of meat and the few biscuits which had escaped
from the general destruction. He divided them into three equal portions and gave
one to each. This made about a pound of nourishment for each. The Professor ate
his greedily, with a kind of feverish rage. I ate without pleasure, almost with
disgust; Hans quietly, moderately, masticating his small mouthfuls without any
noise, and relishing them with the calmness of a man above all anxiety about the
future. By diligent search he had found a flask of Hollands; he offered it to us
each in turn, and this generous beverage cheered us up slightly.

"Fortrdfflig," said Hans, drinking in his turn.

"Excellent," replied my uncle.

A glimpse of hope had returned, although without cause. But our last meal
was over, and it was now five in the morning.

Man is so constituted that health is a purely negative state. Hunger once


satisfied, it is difficult for a man to imagine the horrors of starvation; they cannot
be understood without being felt.

Therefore it was that after our long fast these few mouthfuls of meat and
biscuit made us triumph over our past agonies.

But as soon as the meal was done, we each of us fell deep into thought. What
was Hans thinking of - that man of the far West, but who seemed ruled by the
fatalist doctrines of the East?

As for me, my thoughts were made up of remembrances, and they carried me
up to the surface of the globe of which I ought never to have taken leave. The
house in the K6énigstrasse, my poor dear Grduben, that kind soul Martha, flitted
like visions before my eyes, and in the dismal moanings which from time to time
reached my ears I thought I could distinguish the roar of the traffic of the great
cities upon earth.

My uncle still had his eye upon his work. Torch in hand, he tried to gather
some idea of our situation from the observation of the strata. This calculation
could, at best, be but a vague approximation; but a learned man is always a
philosopher when he succeeds in remaining cool, and assuredly Professor
Liedenbrock possessed this quality to a surprising degree.

I could hear him murmuring geological terms. I could understand them, and
in spite of myself I felt interested in this last geological study.

"Eruptive granite," he was saying. "We are still in the primitive period. But
we are going up, up, higher still. Who can tell?"

Ah! who can tell? With his hand he was examining the perpendicular wall,
and in a few more minutes he continued:

"This is gneiss! here is mica schist! Ah! presently we shall come to the
transition period, and then -"

What did the Professor mean? Could he be trying to measure the thickness of
the crust of the earth that lay between us and the world above? Had he any
means of making this calculation? No, he had not the aneroid, and no guessing
could supply its place.

Still the temperature kept rising, and I felt myself steeped in a broiling
atmosphere. I could only compare it to the heat of a furnace at the moment when
the molten metal is running into the mould. Gradually we had been obliged to
throw aside our coats and waistcoats, the. lightest covering became
uncomfortable and even painful.

"Are we rising into a fiery furnace?" I cried at one moment when the heat
was redoubling.

"No," replied my uncle, "that is impossible -quite impossible!"

"Yet," I answered, feeling the wall, "this well is burning hot."


At the same moment, touching the water, I had to withdraw my hand in
haste.

"The water is scalding,” I cried.

This time the Professor's only answer was an angry gesture.

Then an unconquerable terror seized upon me, from which I could no longer
get free. I felt that a catastrophe was approaching before which the boldest spirit
must quail. A dim, vague notion laid hold of my mind, but which was fast
hardening into certainty. I tried to repel it, but it would return. I dared not
express it in plain terms. Yet a few involuntary observations confirmed me in my
view. By the flickering light of the torch I could distinguish contortions in the
granite beds; a phenomenon was unfolding in which electricity would play the
principal part; then this unbearable heat, this boiling water! I consulted the
compass.

The compass had lost its properties! it had ceased to act properly!


CHAPTER XLIII.


SHOT OUT OF A VOLCANO AT LAST!

Yes: our compass was no longer a guide; the needle flew from pole to pole
with a kind of frenzied impulse; it ran round the dial, and spun hither and thither
as if it were giddy or intoxicated.

I knew quite well that according to the best received theories the mineral
covering of the globe is never at absolute rest; the changes brought about by the
chemical decomposition of its component parts, the agitation caused by great
liquid torrents, and the magnetic currents, are continually tending to disturb it -
even when living beings upon its surface may fancy that all is quiet below. A
phenomenon of this kind would not have greatly alarmed me, or at any rate it
would not have given rise to dreadful apprehensions.

But other facts, other circumstances, of a peculiar nature, came to reveal to
me by degrees the true state of the case. There came incessant and continuous
explosions. I could only compare them to the loud rattle of along train of
chariots driven at full speed over the stones, or a roar of unintermitting thunder.

Then the disordered compass, thrown out of gear by the electric currents,
confirmed me in a growing conviction. The mineral crust of the globe threatened
to burst up, the granite foundations to come together with a crash, the fissure


through which we were helplessly driven would be filled up, the void would be
full of crushed fragments of rock, and we poor wretched mortals were to be
buried and annihilated in this dreadful consummation.

"My uncle," I cried, "we are lost now, utterly lost!"

"What are you in a fright about now?" was the calm rejoinder. "What is the
matter with you?"

"The matter? Look at those quaking walls! look at those shivering rocks.
Don't you feel the burning heat? Don't you see how the water boils and bubbles?
Are you blind to the dense vapours and steam growing thicker and denser every
minute? See this agitated compass needle. It is an earthquake that is threatening
us."

My undaunted uncle calmly shook his head.

"Do you think," said he, "an earthquake is coming?"

"T do."

"Well, I think you are mistaken."

"What! don't you recognise the symptoms?"

"Of an earthquake? no! I am looking out for something better."

"What can you mean? Explain?"

"It is an eruption, Axel."

"An eruption! Do you mean to affirm that we are running up the shaft of a
volcano?"

"I believe we are," said the indomitable Professor with an air of perfect self-
possession; "and it is the best thing that could possibly happen to us under our
circumstances."

The best thing! Was my uncle stark mad? What did the man mean? and what
was the use of saying facetious things at a time like this?

"What!" I shouted. "Are we being taken up in an eruption? Our fate has flung
us here among burning lavas, molten rocks, boiling waters, and all kinds of
volcanic matter; we are going to be pitched out, expelled, tossed up, vomited,
spit out high into the air, along with fragments of rock, showers of ashes and
scoria, in the midst of a towering rush of smoke and flames; and it is the best
thing that could happen to us!"

"Yes," replied the Professor, eyeing me over his spectacles, "I don't see any
other way of reaching the surface of the earth."

I pass rapidly over the thousand ideas which passed through my mind. My
uncle was right, undoubtedly right; and never had he seemed to me more daring
and more confirmed in his notions than at this moment when he was calmly
contemplating the chances of being shot out of a volcano!

In the meantime up we went; the night passed away in continual ascent; the


din and uproar around us became more and more intensified; I was stifled and
stunned; I thought my last hour was approaching; and yet imagination is such a
strong thing that even in this supreme hour I was occupied with strange and
almost childish speculations. But I was the victim, not the master, of my own
thoughts.

It was very evident that we were being hurried upward upon the crest of a
wave of eruption; beneath our raft were boiling waters, and under these the more
sluggish lava was working its way up in a heated mass, together with shoals of
fragments of rock which, when they arrived at the crater, would be dispersed in
all directions high and low. We were imprisoned in the shaft or chimney of some
volcano. There was no room to doubt of that.

But this time, instead of Snefell, an extinct volcano, we were inside one in
full activity. I wondered, therefore, where could this mountain be, and in what
part of the world we were to be shot out.

I made no doubt but that it would be in some northern region. Before its
disorders set in, the needle had never deviated from that direction. From Cape
Saknussemm we had been carried due north for hundreds of leagues. Were we
under Iceland again? Were we destined to be thrown up out of Hecla, or by
which of the seven other fiery craters in that island? Within a radius of five
hundred leagues to the west I remembered under this parallel of latitude only the
imperfectly known volcanoes of the north-east coast of America. To the east
there was only one in the 80th degree of north latitude, the Esk in Jan Mayen
Island, not far from Spitzbergen! Certainly there was no lack of craters, and there
were some capacious enough to throw out a whole army! But I wanted to know
which of them was to serve us for an exit from the inner world.

Towards morning the ascending movement became accelerated. If the heat
increased, instead of diminishing, as we approached nearer to the surface of the
globe, this effect was due to local causes alone, and those volcanic. The manner
of our locomotion left no doubt in my mind. An enormous force, a force of
hundreds of atmospheres, generated by the extreme pressure of confined
vapours, was driving us irresistibly forward. But to what numberless dangers it
exposed us!

Soon lurid lights began to penetrate the vertical gallery which widened as we
went up. Right and left I could see deep channels, like huge tunnels, out of
which escaped dense volumes of smoke; tongues of fire lapped the walls, which
crackled and sputtered under the intense heat.

"See, see, my uncle!" I cried.

"Well, those are only sulphureous flames and vapours, which one must
expect to see in an eruption. They are quite natural."


"But suppose they should wrap us round."

"But they won't wrap us round."

"But we shall be stifled."

"We shall, not be stifled at all. The gallery is widening, and if it becomes
necessary, we shall abandon the raft, and creep into a crevice."

"But the water - the rising water?"

"There is no more water, Axel; only a lava paste, which is bearing us up on
its surface to the top of the crater."

The liquid column had indeed disappeared, to give place to dense and still
boiling eruptive matter of all kinds. The temperature was becoming unbearable.
A thermometer exposed to this atmosphere would have marked 150°. The
perspiration streamed from my body. But for the rapidity of our ascent we should
have been suffocated.

But the Professor gave up his idea of abandoning the raft, and it was well he
did. However roughly joined together, those planks afforded us a firmer support
than we could have found anywhere else.

About eight in the morning a new incident occurred. The upward movement
ceased. The raft lay motionless.

"What is this?" I asked, shaken by this sudden stoppage as if by a shock.

"Tt is a halt," replied my uncle.

"Is the eruption checked?" I asked.

"T hope not."

I rose, and tried to look around me. Perhaps the raft itself, stopped in its
course by a projection, was staying the volcanic torrent. If this were the case we
should have to release it as soon as possible.

But it was not so. The blast of ashes, scorix, and rubbish had ceased to rise.

"Has the eruption stopped?" I cried.

"Ah!" said my uncle between his clenched teeth, "you are afraid. But don't
alarm yourself - this lull cannot last long. It has lasted now five minutes, and in a
short time we shall resume our journey to the mouth of the crater."

As he spoke, the Professor continued to consult his chronometer, and he was
again right in his prognostications. The raft was soon hurried and driven forward
with a rapid but irregular movement, which lasted about ten minutes, and then
stopped again.

"Very good," said my uncle; "in ten minutes more we shall be off again, for
our present business lies with an intermittent volcano. It gives us time now and
then to take breath."

This was perfectly true. When the ten minutes were over we started off again
with renewed and increased speed. We were obliged to lay fast hold of the


planks of the raft, not to be thrown off. Then again the paroxysm was over.

I have since reflected upon this singular phenomenon without being able to
explain it. At any rate it was clear that we were not in the main shaft of the
volcano, but in a lateral gallery where there were felt recurrent tunes of reaction.

How often this operation was repeated I cannot say. All I know is, that at
each fresh impulse we were hurled forward with a greatly increased force, and
we seemed as if we were mere projectiles. During the short halts we were stifled
with the heat; whilst we were being projected forward the hot air almost stopped
my breath. I thought for a moment how delightful it would be to find myself
carried suddenly into the arctic regions, with a cold 30° below the freezing point.
My overheated brain conjured up visions of white plains of cool snow, where I
might roll and allay my feverish heat. Little by littke my brain, weakened by so
many constantly repeated shocks, seemed to be giving way altogether. But for
the strong arm of Hans I should more than once have had my head broken
against the granite roof of our burning dungeon.

I have therefore no exact recollection of what took place during the
following hours. I have a confused impression left of continuous explosions,
loud detonations, a general shaking of the rocks all around us, and of a spinning
movement with which our raft was once whirled helplessly round. It rocked
upon the lava torrent, amidst a dense fall of ashes. Snorting flames darted their
fiery tongues at us. There were wild, fierce puffs of stormy wind from below,
resembling the blasts of vast iron furnaces blowing all at one time; and I caught
a glimpse of the figure of Hans lighted up by the fire; and all the feeling I had
left was just what I imagine must be the feeling of an unhappy criminal doomed
to be blown away alive from the mouth of a cannon, just before the trigger is
pulled, and the flying limbs and rags of flesh and skin fill the quivering air and
spatter the blood-stained ground.


CHAPTER XLIV.


SUNNY LANDS IN THE BLUE MEDITERRANEAN

When I opened my eyes again I felt myself grasped by the belt with the
strong hand of our guide. With the other arm he supported my uncle. I was not
seriously hurt, but I was shaken and bruised and battered all over. I found myself
lying on the sloping side of a mountain only two yards from a gaping gulf, which


would have swallowed me up had I leaned at all that way. Hans had saved me
from death whilst I lay rolling on the edge of the crater.

"Where are we?" asked my uncle irascibly, as if he felt much injured by
being landed upon the earth again.

The hunter shook his head in token of complete ignorance.

"Is it Iceland?" I asked.

"Nej," replied Hans.

"What! Not Iceland?" cried the Professor.

"Hans must be mistaken," I said, raising myself up.

This was our final surprise after all the astonishing events of our wonderful
journey. I expected to see a white cone covered with the eternal snow of ages
rising from the midst of the barren deserts of the icy north, faintly lighted with
the pale rays of the arctic sun, far away in the highest latitudes known; but
contrary to all our expectations, my uncle, the Icelander, and myself were sitting
half-way down a mountain baked under the burning rays of a southern sun,
which was blistering us with the heat, and blinding us with the fierce light of his
nearly vertical rays.

I could not believe my own eyes; but the heated air and the sensation of
burning left me no room for doubt. We had come out of the crater half naked,
and the radiant orb to which we had been strangers for two months was lavishing
upon us out of his blazing splendours more of his light and heat than we were
able to receive with comfort.

When my eyes had become accustomed to the bright light to which they had
been so long strangers, I began to use them to set my imagination right. At least I
would have it to be Spitzbergen, and I was in no humour to give up this notion.

The Professor was the first to speak, and said:

"Well, this is not much like Iceland."

"But is it Jan Mayen?" I asked.

"Nor that either," he answered. "This is no northern mountain; here are no
granite peaks capped with snow. Look, Axel, look!"

Above our heads, at a height of five hundred feet or more, we saw the crater
of a volcano, through. which, at intervals of fifteen minutes or so, there issued
with loud explosions lofty columns of fire, mingled with pumice stones, ashes,
and flowing lava. I could feel the heaving of the mountain, which seemed to
breathe like a huge whale, and puff out fire and wind from its vast blowholes.
Beneath, down a pretty steep declivity, ran streams of lava for eight or nine
hundred feet, giving the mountain a height of about 1,300 or 1,400 feet. But the
base of the mountain was hidden in a perfect bower of rich verdure, amongst
which I was able to distinguish the olive, the fig, and vines, covered with their


luscious purple bunches.

I was forced to confess that there was nothing arctic here.

When the eye passed beyond these green surroundings it rested on a wide,
blue expanse of sea or lake, which appeared to enclose this enchanting island,
within a compass of only a few leagues. Eastward lay a pretty little white seaport
town or village, with a few houses scattered around it, and in the harbour of
which a few vessels of peculiar rig were gently swayed by the softly swelling
waves. Beyond it, groups of islets rose from the smooth, blue waters, but in such
numbers that they seemed to dot the sea like a shoal. To the west distant coasts
lined the dim horizon, on some rose blue mountains of smooth, undulating
forms; on a more distant coast arose a prodigious cone crowned on its summit
with a snowy plume of white cloud. To the northward lay spread a vast sheet of
water, sparkling and dancing under the hot, bright rays, the uniformity broken
here and there by the topmast of a gallant ship appearing above the horizon, or a
swelling sail moving slowly before the wind.

This unforeseen spectacle was most charming to eyes long used to
underground darkness.

"Where are we? Where are we?" I asked faintly.

Hans closed his eyes with lazy indifference. What did it matter to him? My
uncle looked round with dumb surprise.

"Well, whatever mountain this may be," he said at last, "it is very hot here.
The explosions are going on still, and I don't think it would look well to have
come out by an eruption, and then to get our heads broken by bits of falling rock.
Let us get down. Then we shall know better what we are about. Besides, I am
starving, and parching with thirst."

Decidedly the Professor was not given to contemplation. For my part, I could
for another hour or two have forgotten my hunger and my fatigue to enjoy the
lovely scene before me; but I had to follow my companions.

The slope of the volcano was in many places of great steepness. We slid
down screes of ashes, carefully avoiding the lava streams which glided
sluggishly by us like fiery serpents. As we went I chattered and asked all sorts of
questions as to our whereabouts, for L was too much excited not to talk a great
deal.

"We are in Asia," I cried, "on the coasts of India, in the Malay Islands, or in
Oceania. We have passed through half the globe, and come out nearly at the
antipodes."

"But the compass?" said my uncle.

"Ay, the compass!" I said, greatly puzzled. "According to the compass we
have gone northward."


"Has it lied?"

"Surely not. Could it lie?"

"Unless, indeed, this is the North Pole!"

"Oh, no, it is not the Pole; but -"

Well, here was something that baffled us completely. I could not tell what to
Say.

But now we were coming into that delightful greenery, and I was suffering
greatly from hunger and thirst. Happily, after two hours' walking, a charming
country lay open before us, covered with olive trees, pomegranate trees, and
delicious vines, all of which seemed to belong to anybody who pleased to claim
them. Besides, in our state of destitution and famine we were not likely to be
particular. Oh, the inexpressible pleasure of pressing those cool, sweet fruits to
our lips, and eating grapes by mouthfuls off the rich, full bunches! Not far off, in
the grass, under the delicious shade of the trees, I discovered a spring of fresh,
cool water, in which we luxuriously bathed our faces, hands, and feet.

Whilst we were thus enjoying the sweets of repose a child appeared out of a
grove of olive trees.

"Ah!" I cried, "here is an inhabitant of this happy land!"

It was but a poor boy, miserably ill-clad, a sufferer from poverty, and our
aspect seemed to alarm him a great deal; in fact, only half clothed, with ragged
hair and beards, we were a suspicious-looking party; and if the people of the
country knew anything about thieves, we were very likely to frighten them.

Just as the poor little wretch was going to take to his heels, Hans caught hold
of him, and brought him to us, kicking and struggling.

My uncle began to encourage him as well as he could, and said to him in
good German:

"Was heiszt diesen Berg, mein Knablein? Sage mir geschwind!"

("What is this mountain called, my little friend?")

The child made no answer.

"Very well," said my uncle. "I infer that we are not in Germany."

He put the same question in English.

We got no forwarder. I was a good deal puzzled.

"Is the child dumb?" cried the Professor, who, proud of his knowledge of
many languages, now tried French: "Comment appellet-on cette montagne, mon
enfant?"

Silence still.

"Now let us try Italian," said my uncle; and he said:

"Dove noi siamo?"

"Yes, where are we?" I impatiently repeated.


But there was no answer still.

"Will you speak when you are told?" exclaimed my uncle, shaking the urchin
by the ears. "Come si noma questa isola?"

"STROMBOLI," replied the little herdboy, slipping out of Hans' hands, and
scudding into the plain across the olive trees.

We were hardly thinking of that. Stromboli! What an effect this unexpected
name produced upon my mind! We were in the midst of the Mediterranean Sea,
on an island of the A‘olian archipelago, in the ancient Strongyle, where Aolus
kept the winds and the storms chained up, to be let loose at his will. And those
distant blue mountains in the east were the mountains of Calabria. And that
threatening volcano far away in the south was the fierce Etna.

"Stromboli, Stromboli!" I repeated.

My uncle kept time to my exclamations with hands and feet, as well as with
words. We seemed to be chanting in chorus!

What a journey we had accomplished! How marvellous! Having entered by
one volcano, we had issued out of another more than two thousand miles from
Snefell and from that barren, far-away Iceland! The strange chances of our
expedition had carried us into the heart of the fairest region in the world. We had
exchanged the bleak regions of perpetual snow and of impenetrable barriers of
ice for those of brightness and 'the rich hues of all glorious things.’ We had left
over our heads the murky sky and cold fogs of the frigid zone to revel under the
azure sky of Italy!

After our delicious repast of fruits and cold, clear water we set off again to
reach the port of Stromboli. It would not have been wise to tell how we came
there. The superstitious Italians would have set us down for fire-devils vomited
out of hell; so we presented ourselves in the humble guise of shipwrecked
mariners. It was not so glorious, but it was safer.

On my way I could hear my uncle murmuring: "But the compass! that
compass! It pointed due north. How are we to explain that fact?"

"My opinion is," I replied disdainfully, "that it is best not to explain it. That
is the easiest way to shelve the difficulty."

"Indeed, sir! The occupant of a professorial chair at the Johanneum unable
to explain the reason of a cosmical phenomenon! Why, it would be simply
disgraceful!"

And as he spoke, my uncle, half undressed, in rags, a perfect scarecrow, with
his leathern belt around him, settling his spectacles upon his nose and looking
learned and imposing, was himself again, the terrible German professor of
mineralogy.

One hour after we had left the grove of olives, we arrived at the little port of


San Vicenzo, where Hans claimed his thirteen week's wages, which was counted
out to him with a hearty shaking of hands all round.

At that moment, if he did not share our natural emotion, at least his
countenance expanded in a manner very unusual with him, and while with the
ends of his fingers he lightly pressed our hands, I believe he smiled.


CHAPTER XLV.


ALL'S WELL THAT ENDS WELL

Such is the conclusion of a history which I cannot expect everybody to
believe, for some people will believe nothing against the testimony of their own
experience. However, I am indifferent to their incredulity, and they may believe
as much or as little as they please.

The Stromboliotes received us kindly as shipwrecked mariners. They gave us
food and clothing. After waiting forty-eight hours, on the 31 st of August, a
small craft took us to Messina, where a few days' rest completely removed the
effect of our fatigues.

On Friday, September the 4th, we embarked on the steamer Volturno,
employed by the French Messageries Imperiales, and in three days more we
were at Marseilles, having no care on our minds except that abominable
deceitful compass, which we had mislaid somewhere and could not now
examine; but its inexplicable behaviour exercised my mind fearfully. On the 9th
of September, in the evening, we arrived at Hamburg.

I cannot describe to you the astonishment of Martha or the joy of Grauben.

"Now you are a hero, Axel," said to me my blushing fiancée, my betrothed,
"you will not leave me again!"

I looked tenderly upon her, and she smiled through her tears.

How can I describe the extraordinary sensation produced by the return of
Professor Liedenbrock? Thanks to Martha's ineradicable tattling, the news that
the Professor had gone to discover a way to the centre of the earth had spread
over the whole civilised world. People refused to believe it, and when they saw
him they would not believe him any the more. Still, the appearance of Hans, and
sundry pieces of intelligence derived from Iceland, tended to shake the
confidence of the unbelievers.

Then my uncle became a great man, and I was now the nephew of a great


man -which is not a privilege to be despised.

Hamburg gave a grand fete in our honour. A public audience was given to the
Professor at the Johanneum, at which he told all about our expedition, with only
one omission, the unexplained and inexplicable behaviour of our compass. On
the same day, with much state, he deposited in the archives of the city the now
famous document of Saknussemm, and expressed his regret that circumstances
over which he had no control had prevented him from following to the very
centre of the earth the track of the learned Icelander. He was modest
notwithstanding his glory, and he was all the more famous for his humility.

So much honour could not but excite envy. There were those who envied him
his fame; and as his theories, resting upon known facts, were in opposition to the
systems of science upon the question of the central fire, he sustained with his
pen and by his voice remarkable discussions with the learned of every country.

For my part I cannot agree with his theory of gradual cooling: in spite of
what I have seen and felt, I believe, and always shall believe, in the central heat.
But I admit that certain circumstances not yet sufficiently understood may tend
to modify in places the action of natural phenomena.

While these questions were being debated with great animation, my uncle
met with a real sorrow. Our faithful Hans, in spite of our entreaties, had left
Hamburg; the man to whom we owed all our success and our lives too would not
suffer us to reward him as we could have wished. He was seized with the mal de
pays, a complaint for which we have not even a name in English.

"Farval," said he one day; and with that simple word he left us and sailed for
Rejkiavik, which he reached in safety.

We were strongly attached to our brave eider-down hunter; though far away
in the remotest north, he will never be forgotten by those whose lives he
protected, and certainly I shall not fail to endeavour to see him once more before
I die.

To conclude, I have to add that this ‘Journey into the Interior of the Earth’
created a wonderful sensation in the world. It was translated into all civilised
languages. The leading newspapers extracted the most interesting passages,
which were commented upon, picked to pieces, discussed, attacked, and
defended with equal enthusiasm and determination, both by believers and
sceptics. Rare privilege! my uncle enjoyed during his lifetime the glory he had
deservedly won; and he may even boast the distinguished honour of an offer
from Mr. Barnum, to exhibit him on most advantageous terms in all the principal
cities in the United States!

But there was one 'dead fly’ amidst all this glory and honour; one fact, one
incident, of the journey remained a mystery. Now to a man eminent for his


learning, an unexplained phenomenon is an unbearable hardship. Well! it was yet
reserved for my uncle to be completely happy.

One day, while arranging a collection of minerals in his cabinet, I noticed in
a comer this unhappy compass, which we had long lost sight of; I opened it, and
began to watch it.

It had been in that corner for six months, little mindful of the trouble it was
giving.

Suddenly, to my intense astonishment, I noticed a strange fact, and I uttered a
cry of surprise.

"What is the matter?" my uncle asked.

"That compass!"

"Well?"

"See, its poles are reversed!"

"Reversed?"

"Yes, they point the wrong way."

My uncle looked, he compared, and the house shook with his triumphant
leap of exultation.

A light broke in upon his spirit and mine.

"See there," he cried, as soon as he was able to speak. "After our arrival at
Cape Saknussemm the north pole of the needle of this confounded compass
began to point south instead of north."

"Evidently!"

"Here, then, is the explanation of our mistake. But what phenomenon could
have caused this reversal of the poles?"

"The reason is evident, uncle."

"Tell me, then, Axel."

"During the electric storm on the Liedenbrock sea, that ball of fire, which
magnetised all the iron on board, reversed the poles of our magnet!"

"Aha! aha!" shouted the Professor with a loud laugh. "So it was just an
electric joke!"

From that day forth the Professor was the most glorious of savants, and I was
the happiest of men; for my pretty Virlandaise, resigning her place as ward, took
her position in the old house on the K6nigstrasse in the double capacity of niece
to my uncle and wife to a certain happy youth. What is the need of adding that
the illustrious Otto Liedenbrock, corresponding member of all the scientific,
geographical, and mineralogical societies of all the civilised world, was now her
uncle and mine?


AROUND THE WORLD IN EIGHTY DAYS


By Jules Verne


Chapter I


IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG AND PASSEPARTOUT ACCEPT EACH
OTHER, THE ONE AS MASTER, THE OTHER AS MAN

Mr. Phileas Fogg lived, in 1872, at No. 7, Saville Row, Burlington Gardens,
the house in which Sheridan died in 1814. He was one of the most noticeable
members of the Reform Club, though he seemed always to avoid attracting
attention; an enigmatical personage, about whom little was known, except that
he was a polished man of the world. People said that he resembled Byron--at
least that his head was Byronic; but he was a bearded, tranquil Byron, who might
live on a thousand years without growing old.

Certainly an Englishman, it was more doubtful whether Phileas Fogg was a
Londoner. He was never seen on 'Change, nor at the Bank, nor in the counting-
rooms of the "City"; no ships ever came into London docks of which he was the
owner; he had no public employment; he had never been entered at any of the
Inns of Court, either at the Temple, or Lincoln's Inn, or Gray's Inn; nor had his
voice ever resounded in the Court of Chancery, or in the Exchequer, or the
Queen's Bench, or the Ecclesiastical Courts. He certainly was not a
manufacturer; nor was he a merchant or a gentleman farmer. His name was
strange to the scientific and learned societies, and he never was known to take
part in the sage deliberations of the Royal Institution or the London Institution,
the Artisan's Association, or the Institution of Arts and Sciences. He belonged, in
fact, to none of the numerous societies which swarm in the English capital, from
the Harmonic to that of the Entomologists, founded mainly for the purpose of
abolishing pernicious insects.

Phileas Fogg was a member of the Reform, and that was all.

The way in which he got admission to this exclusive club was simple
enough.

He was recommended by the Barings, with whom he had an open credit. His
cheques were regularly paid at sight from his account current, which was always
flush.

Was Phileas Fogg rich? Undoubtedly. But those who knew him best could
not imagine how he had made his fortune, and Mr. Fogg was the last person to
whom to apply for the information. He was not lavish, nor, on the contrary,
avaricious; for, whenever he knew that money was needed for a noble, useful, or
benevolent purpose, he supplied it quietly and sometimes anonymously. He was,
in short, the least communicative of men. He talked very little, and seemed all


the more mysterious for his taciturn manner. His daily habits were quite open to
observation; but whatever he did was so exactly the same thing that he had
always done before, that the wits of the curious were fairly puzzled.

Had he travelled? It was likely, for no one seemed to know the world more
familiarly; there was no spot so secluded that he did not appear to have an
intimate acquaintance with it. He often corrected, with a few clear words, the
thousand conjectures advanced by members of the club as to lost and unheard-of
travellers, pointing out the true probabilities, and seeming as if gifted with a sort
of second sight, so often did events justify his predictions. He must have
travelled everywhere, at least in the spirit.

It was at least certain that Phileas Fogg had not absented himself from
London for many years. Those who were honoured by a better acquaintance with
him than the rest, declared that nobody could pretend to have ever seen him
anywhere else. His sole pastimes were reading the papers and playing whist. He
often won at this game, which, as a silent one, harmonised with his nature; but
his winnings never went into his purse, being reserved as a fund for his charities.
Mr. Fogg played, not to win, but for the sake of playing. The game was in his
eyes a contest, a struggle with a difficulty, yet a motionless, unwearying
struggle, congenial to his tastes.

Phileas Fogg was not known to have either wife or children, which may
happen to the most honest people; either relatives or near friends, which is
certainly more unusual. He lived alone in his house in Saville Row, whither none
penetrated. A single domestic sufficed to serve him. He breakfasted and dined at
the club, at hours mathematically fixed, in the same room, at the same table,
never taking his meals with other members, much less bringing a guest with him;
and went home at exactly midnight, only to retire at once to bed. He never used
the cosy chambers which the Reform provides for its favoured members. He
passed ten hours out of the twenty-four in Saville Row, either in sleeping or
making his toilet. When he chose to take a walk it was with a regular step in the
entrance hall with its mosaic flooring, or in the circular gallery with its dome
supported by twenty red porphyry Ionic columns, and illumined by blue painted
windows. When he breakfasted or dined all the resources of the club--its
kitchens and pantries, its buttery and dairy--aided to crowd his table with their
most succulent stores; he was served by the gravest waiters, in dress coats, and
shoes with swan-skin soles, who proffered the viands in special porcelain, and
on the finest linen; club decanters, of a lost mould, contained his sherry, his port,
and his cinnamon-spiced claret; while his beverages were refreshingly cooled
with ice, brought at great cost from the American lakes.

If to live in this style is to be eccentric, it must be confessed that there is


something good in eccentricity.

The mansion in Saville Row, though not sumptuous, was exceedingly
comfortable. The habits of its occupant were such as to demand but little from
the sole domestic, but Phileas Fogg required him to be almost superhumanly
prompt and regular. On this very 2nd of October he had dismissed James Forster,
because that luckless youth had brought him shaving-water at eighty-four
degrees Fahrenheit instead of eighty-six; and he was awaiting his successor, who
was due at the house between eleven and half-past.

Phileas Fogg was seated squarely in his armchair, his feet close together like
those of a grenadier on parade, his hands resting on his knees, his body straight,
his head erect; he was steadily watching a complicated clock which indicated the
hours, the minutes, the seconds, the days, the months, and the years. At exactly
half-past eleven Mr. Fogg would, according to his daily habit, quit Saville Row,
and repair to the Reform.

A rap at this moment sounded on the door of the cosy apartment where
Phileas Fogg was seated, and James Forster, the dismissed servant, appeared.

"The new servant," said he.

A young man of thirty advanced and bowed.

"You are a Frenchman, I believe," asked Phileas Fogg, "and your name is
John?"

"Jean, if monsieur pleases," replied the newcomer, "Jean Passepartout, a
surname which has clung to me because I have a natural aptness for going out of
one business into another. I believe I'm honest, monsieur, but, to be outspoken,
I've had several trades. I've been an itinerant singer, a circus-rider, when I used
to vault like Leotard, and dance on a rope like Blondin. Then I got to be a
professor of gymnastics, so as to make better use of my talents; and then I was a
sergeant fireman at Paris, and assisted at many a big fire. But I quitted France
five years ago, and, wishing to taste the sweets of domestic life, took service as a
valet here in England. Finding myself out of place, and hearing that Monsieur
Phileas Fogg was the most exact and settled gentleman in the United Kingdom, I
have come to monsieur in the hope of living with him a tranquil life, and
forgetting even the name of Passepartout."

"Passepartout suits me," responded Mr. Fogg. "You are well recommended to
me; I hear a good report of you. You know my conditions?"

"Yes, Monsieur."

"Good! What time is it?"

"Twenty-two minutes after eleven," returned Passepartout, drawing an
enormous silver watch from the depths of his pocket.

"You are too slow," said Mr. Fogg.


"Pardon me, monsieur, it is impossible--"

"You are four minutes too slow. No matter; it's enough to mention the error.
Now from this moment, twenty-nine minutes after eleven, a.m., this Wednesday,
2nd October, you are in my service."

Phileas Fogg got up, took his hat in his left hand, put it on his head with an
automatic motion, and went off without a word.

Passepartout heard the street door shut once; it was his new master going out.
He heard it shut again; it was his predecessor, James Forster, departing in his
turn. Passepartout remained alone in the house in Saville Row.


Chapter II


IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT IS CONVINCED THAT HE HAS AT LAST
FOUND HIS IDEAL

"Faith," muttered Passepartout, somewhat flurried, "I've seen people at
Madame Tussaud's as lively as my new master!"

Madame Tussaud's "people," let it be said, are of wax, and are much visited
in London; speech is all that is wanting to make them human.

During his brief interview with Mr. Fogg, Passepartout had been carefully
observing him. He appeared to be a man about forty years of age, with fine,
handsome features, and a tall, well-shaped figure; his hair and whiskers were
light, his forehead compact and unwrinkled, his face rather pale, his teeth
magnificent. His countenance possessed in the highest degree what
physiognomists call "repose in action," a quality of those who act rather than
talk. Calm and phlegmatic, with a clear eye, Mr. Fogg seemed a perfect type of
that English composure which Angelica Kauffmann has so skilfully represented
on canvas. Seen in the various phases of his daily life, he gave the idea of being
perfectly well-balanced, as exactly regulated as a Leroy chronometer. Phileas
Fogg was, indeed, exactitude personified, and this was betrayed even in the
expression of his very hands and feet; for in men, as well as in animals, the limbs
themselves are expressive of the passions.

He was so exact that he was never in a hurry, was always ready, and was
economical alike of his steps and his motions. He never took one step too many,
and always went to his destination by the shortest cut; he made no superfluous
gestures, and was never seen to be moved or agitated. He was the most
deliberate person in the world, yet always reached his destination at the exact
moment.

He lived alone, and, so to speak, outside of every social relation; and as he
knew that in this world account must be taken of friction, and that friction
retards, he never rubbed against anybody.

As for Passepartout, he was a true Parisian of Paris. Since he had abandoned
his own country for England, taking service as a valet, he had in vain searched
for a master after his own heart. Passepartout was by no means one of those pert
dunces depicted by Moliere with a bold gaze and a nose held high in the air; he
was an honest fellow, with a pleasant face, lips a trifle protruding, soft-mannered
and serviceable, with a good round head, such as one likes to see on the
shoulders of a friend. His eyes were blue, his complexion rubicund, his figure


almost portly and well-built, his body muscular, and his physical powers fully
developed by the exercises of his younger days. His brown hair was somewhat
tumbled; for, while the ancient sculptors are said to have known eighteen
methods of arranging Minerva's tresses, Passepartout was familiar with but one
of dressing his own: three strokes of a large-tooth comb completed his toilet.

It would be rash to predict how Passepartout's lively nature would agree with
Mr. Fogg. It was impossible to tell whether the new servant would turn out as
absolutely methodical as his master required; experience alone could solve the
question. Passepartout had been a sort of vagrant in his early years, and now
yeamed for repose; but so far he had failed to find it, though he had already
served in ten English houses. But he could not take root in any of these; with
chagrin, he found his masters invariably whimsical and irregular, constantly
running about the country, or on the look-out for adventure. His last master,
young Lord Longferry, Member of Parliament, after passing his nights in the
Haymarket taverns, was too often brought home in the morning on policemen's
shoulders. Passepartout, desirous of respecting the gentleman whom he served,
ventured a mild remonstrance on such conduct; which, being ill-received, he
took his leave. Hearing that Mr. Phileas Fogg was looking for a servant, and that
his life was one of unbroken regularity, that he neither travelled nor stayed from
home overnight, he felt sure that this would be the place he was after. He
presented himself, and was accepted, as has been seen.

At half-past eleven, then, Passepartout found himself alone in the house in
Saville Row. He begun its inspection without delay, scouring it from cellar to
garret. So clean, well-arranged, solemn a mansion pleased him; it seemed to him
like a snail's shell, lighted and warmed by gas, which sufficed for both these
purposes. When Passepartout reached the second story he recognised at once the
room which he was to inhabit, and he was well satisfied with it. Electric bells
and speaking-tubes afforded communication with the lower stories; while on the
mantel stood an electric clock, precisely like that in Mr. Fogg's bedchamber, both
beating the same second at the same instant. "That's good, that'll do," said
Passepartout to himself.

He suddenly observed, hung over the clock, a card which, upon inspection,
proved to be a programme of the daily routine of the house. It comprised all that
was required of the servant, from eight in the morning, exactly at which hour
Phileas Fogg rose, till half-past eleven, when he left the house for the Reform
Club--all the details of service, the tea and toast at twenty-three minutes past
eight, the shaving-water at thirty-seven minutes past nine, and the toilet at
twenty minutes before ten. Everything was regulated and foreseen that was to be
done from half-past eleven a.m. till midnight, the hour at which the methodical


gentleman retired.

Mr. Fogg's wardrobe was amply supplied and in the best taste. Each pair of
trousers, coat, and vest bore a number, indicating the time of year and season at
which they were in turn to be laid out for wearing; and the same system was
applied to the master's shoes. In short, the house in Saville Row, which must
have been a very temple of disorder and unrest under the illustrious but
dissipated Sheridan, was cosiness, comfort, and method idealised. There was no
study, nor were there books, which would have been quite useless to Mr. Fogg;
for at the Reform two libraries, one of general literature and the other of law and
politics, were at his service. A moderate-sized safe stood in his bedroom,
constructed so as to defy fire as well as burglars; but Passepartout found neither
arms nor hunting weapons anywhere; everything betrayed the most tranquil and
peaceable habits.

Having scrutinised the house from top to bottom, he rubbed his hands, a
broad smile overspread his features, and he said joyfully, "This is just what I
wanted! Ah, we shall get on together, Mr. Fogg and I! What a domestic and
regular gentleman! A real machine; well, I don't mind serving a machine."


Chapter ITI


IN WHICH A CONVERSATION TAKES PLACE WHICH SEEMS
LIKELY TO COST PHILEAS FOGG DEAR

Phileas Fogg, having shut the door of his house at half-past eleven, and
having put his right foot before his left five hundred and seventy-five times, and
his left foot before his right five hundred and seventy-six times, reached the
Reform Club, an imposing edifice in Pall Mall, which could not have cost less
than three millions. He repaired at once to the dining-room, the nine windows of
which open upon a tasteful garden, where the trees were already gilded with an
autumn colouring; and took his place at the habitual table, the cover of which
had already been laid for him. His breakfast consisted of a side-dish, a broiled
fish with Reading sauce, a scarlet slice of roast beef garnished with mushrooms,
a rhubarb and gooseberry tart, and a morsel of Cheshire cheese, the whole being
washed down with several cups of tea, for which the Reform is famous. He rose
at thirteen minutes to one, and directed his steps towards the large hall, a
sumptuous apartment adorned with lavishly-framed paintings. A flunkey handed
him an uncut Times, which he proceeded to cut with a skill which betrayed
familiarity with this delicate operation. The perusal of this paper absorbed
Phileas Fogg until a quarter before four, whilst the Standard, his next task,
occupied him till the dinner hour. Dinner passed as breakfast had done, and Mr.
Fogg reappeared in the reading-room and sat down to the Pall Mall at twenty
minutes before six. Half an hour later several members of the Reform came in
and drew up to the fireplace, where a coal fire was steadily burning. They were
Mr. Fogg's usual partners at whist: Andrew Stuart, an engineer; John Sullivan
and Samuel Fallentin, bankers; Thomas Flanagan, a brewer; and Gauthier Ralph,
one of the Directors of the Bank of England--all rich and highly respectable
personages, even in a club which comprises the princes of English trade and
finance.

"Well, Ralph," said Thomas Flanagan, "what about that robbery?"

"Oh," replied Stuart, "the Bank will lose the money."

"On the contrary," broke in Ralph, "I hope we may put our hands on the
robber. Skilful detectives have been sent to all the principal ports of America and
the Continent, and he'll be a clever fellow if he slips through their fingers."

"But have you got the robber's description?" asked Stuart.

"In the first place, he is no robber at all," returned Ralph, positively.

"What! a fellow who makes off with fifty-five thousand pounds, no robber?"


"No."

"Perhaps he's a manufacturer, then."

"The Daily Telegraph says that he is a gentleman."

It was Phileas Fogg, whose head now emerged from behind his newspapers,
who made this remark. He bowed to his friends, and entered into the
conversation. The affair which formed its subject, and which was town talk, had
occurred three days before at the Bank of England. A package of banknotes, to
the value of fifty-five thousand pounds, had been taken from the principal
cashier's table, that functionary being at the moment engaged in registering the
receipt of three shillings and sixpence. Of course, he could not have his eyes
everywhere. Let it be observed that the Bank of England reposes a touching
confidence in the honesty of the public. There are neither guards nor gratings to
protect its treasures; gold, silver, banknotes are freely exposed, at the mercy of
the first comer. A keen observer of English customs relates that, being in one of
the rooms of the Bank one day, he had the curiosity to examine a gold ingot
weighing some seven or eight pounds. He took it up, scrutinised it, passed it to
his neighbour, he to the next man, and so on until the ingot, going from hand to
hand, was transferred to the end of a dark entry; nor did it return to its place for
half an hour. Meanwhile, the cashier had not so much as raised his head. But in
the present instance things had not gone so smoothly. The package of notes not
being found when five o'clock sounded from the ponderous clock in the
"drawing office," the amount was passed to the account of profit and loss. As
soon as the robbery was discovered, picked detectives hastened off to Liverpool,
Glasgow, Havre, Suez, Brindisi, New York, and other ports, inspired by the
proffered reward of two thousand pounds, and five per cent. on the sum that
might be recovered. Detectives were also charged with narrowly watching those
who arrived at or left London by rail, and a judicial examination was at once
entered upon.

There were real grounds for supposing, as the Daily Telegraph said, that the
thief did not belong to a professional band. On the day of the robbery a well-
dressed gentleman of polished manners, and with a well-to-do air, had been
observed going to and fro in the paying room where the crime was committed. A
description of him was easily procured and sent to the detectives; and some
hopeful spirits, of whom Ralph was one, did not despair of his apprehension.
The papers and clubs were full of the affair, and everywhere people were
discussing the probabilities of a successful pursuit; and the Reform Club was
especially agitated, several of its members being Bank officials.

Ralph would not concede that the work of the detectives was likely to be in
vain, for he thought that the prize offered would greatly stimulate their zeal and


activity. But Stuart was far from sharing this confidence; and, as they placed
themselves at the whist-table, they continued to argue the matter. Stuart and
Flanagan played together, while Phileas Fogg had Fallentin for his partner. As
the game proceeded the conversation ceased, excepting between the rubbers,
when it revived again.

"T maintain," said Stuart, "that the chances are in favour of the thief, who
must be a shrewd fellow."

"Well, but where can he fly to?" asked Ralph. "No country is safe for him."

"Pshaw!"

"Where could he go, then?"

"Oh, I don't know that. The world is big enough."

"It was once," said Phileas Fogg, in a low tone. "Cut, sir," he added, handing
the cards to Thomas Flanagan.

The discussion fell during the rubber, after which Stuart took up its thread.

"What do you mean by ‘once’? Has the world grown smaller?"

"Certainly," returned Ralph. "I agree with Mr. Fogg. The world has grown
smaller, since a man can now go round it ten times more quickly than a hundred
years ago. And that is why the search for this thief will be more likely to
succeed."

"And also why the thief can get away more easily."

"Be so good as to play, Mr. Stuart," said Phileas Fogg.

But the incredulous Stuart was not convinced, and when the hand was
finished, said eagerly: "You have a strange way, Ralph, of proving that the world
has grown smaller. So, because you can go round it in three months--"

"In eighty days," interrupted Phileas Fogg.

"That is true, gentlemen," added John Sullivan. "Only eighty days, now that
the section between Rothal and Allahabad, on the Great Indian Peninsula
Railway, has been opened. Here is the estimate made by the Daily Telegraph:

From London to Suez via Mont Cenis and Brindisi, by rail and steamboats
sant sase 7 days From Suez to Bombay, by steamer .................... 13 " From
Bombay to Calcutta, by rail ................... 3" From Calcutta to Hong Kong, by
SteaMef ...........5. 13" From Hong Kong to Yokohama (Japan), by steamer ..... 6"
From Yokohama to San Francisco, by steamer ......... 22" From San Francisco to
New York, by rail ............. 7" From New York to London, by steamer and rail
waibaake Qo Sees TOLL sazeataustnauaasaeucsseneasins OUSUYS.

"Yes, in eighty days!" exclaimed Stuart, who in his excitement made a false
deal. "But that doesn't take into account bad weather, contrary winds,
shipwrecks, railway accidents, and so on."

"All included," returned Phileas Fogg, continuing to play despite the


discussion.

"But suppose the Hindoos or Indians pull up the rails," replied Stuart;
"suppose they stop the trains, pillage the luggage-vans, and scalp the
passengers!"

"All included," calmly retorted Fogg; adding, as he threw down the cards,
"Two trumps."

Stuart, whose turn it was to deal, gathered them up, and went on: "You are
right, theoretically, Mr. Fogg, but practically--"

"Practically also, Mr. Stuart."

"I'd like to see you do it in eighty days."

"Tt depends on you. Shall we go?"

"Heaven preserve me! But I would wager four thousand pounds that such a
journey, made under these conditions, is impossible."

"Quite possible, on the contrary," returned Mr. Fogg.

"Well, make it, then!"

"The journey round the world in eighty days?"

"Yes."

"IT should like nothing better."

"When?"

"At once. Only I warn you that I shall do it at your expense."

"It's absurd!" cried Stuart, who was beginning to be annoyed at the
persistency of his friend. "Come, let's go on with the game."

"Deal over again, then," said Phileas Fogg. "There's a false deal."

Stuart took up the pack with a feverish hand; then suddenly put them down
again.

"Well, Mr. Fogg," said he, "it shall be so: I will wager the four thousand on
ie?

"Calm yourself, my dear Stuart," said Fallentin. "It's only a joke."

"When I say I'll wager," returned Stuart, "I mean it." "All right," said Mr.
Fogg; and, turning to the others, he continued: "I have a deposit of twenty
thousand at Baring's which I will willingly risk upon it."

"Twenty thousand pounds!" cried Sullivan. "Twenty thousand pounds, which
you would lose by a single accidental delay!"

"The unforeseen does not exist," quietly replied Phileas Fogg.

"But, Mr. Fogg, eighty days are only the estimate of the least possible time in
which the journey can be made."

"A well-used minimum suffices for everything."

"But, in order not to exceed it, you must jump mathematically from the trains
upon the steamers, and from the steamers upon the trains again."


"T will jump--mathematically."

"You are joking."

"A true Englishman doesn't joke when he is talking about so serious a thing
as a wager," replied Phileas Fogg, solemnly. "I will bet twenty thousand pounds
against anyone who wishes that I will make the tour of the world in eighty days
or less; in nineteen hundred and twenty hours, or a hundred and fifteen thousand
two hundred minutes. Do you accept?"

"We accept,” replied Messrs. Stuart, Fallentin, Sullivan, Flanagan, and
Ralph, after consulting each other.

"Good," said Mr. Fogg. "The train leaves for Dover at a quarter before nine. I
will take it."

"This very evening?" asked Stuart.

"This very evening,” returned Phileas Fogg. He took out and consulted a
pocket almanac, and added, "As today is Wednesday, the 2nd of October, I shall
be due in London in this very room of the Reform Club, on Saturday, the 21st of
December, at a quarter before nine p.m.; or else the twenty thousand pounds,
now deposited in my name at Baring's, will belong to you, in fact and in right,
gentlemen. Here is a cheque for the amount."

A memorandum of the wager was at once drawn up and signed by the six
parties, during which Phileas Fogg preserved a stoical composure. He certainly
did not bet to win, and had only staked the twenty thousand pounds, half of his
fortune, because he foresaw that he might have to expend the other half to carry
out this difficult, not to say unattainable, project. As for his antagonists, they
seemed much agitated; not so much by the value of their stake, as because they
had some scruples about betting under conditions so difficult to their friend.

The clock struck seven, and the party offered to suspend the game so that Mr.
Fogg might make his preparations for departure.

"I am quite ready now," was his tranquil response. "Diamonds are trumps: be
so good as to play, gentlemen."


Chapter IV


IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG ASTOUNDS PASSEPARTOUT, HIS
SERVANT

Having won twenty guineas at whist, and taken leave of his friends, Phileas
Fogg, at twenty-five minutes past seven, left the Reform Club.

Passepartout, who had conscientiously studied the programme of his duties,
was more than surprised to see his master guilty of the inexactness of appearing
at this unaccustomed hour; for, according to rule, he was not due in Saville Row
until precisely midnight.

Mr. Fogg repaired to his bedroom, and called out, "Passepartout!"

Passepartout did not reply. It could not be he who was called; it was not the
right hour.

"Passepartout!" repeated Mr. Fogg, without raising his voice.

Passepartout made his appearance.

"T've called you twice," observed his master.

"But it is not midnight," responded the other, showing his watch.

"IT know it; I don't blame you. We start for Dover and Calais in ten minutes."

A puzzled grin overspread Passepartout's round face; clearly he had not
comprehended his master.

"Monsieur is going to leave home?"

"Yes," returned Phileas Fogg. "We are going round the world."

Passepartout opened wide his eyes, raised his eyebrows, held up his hands,
and seemed about to collapse, so overcome was he with stupefied astonishment.

"Round the world!" he murmured.

"In eighty days," responded Mr. Fogg. "So we haven't a moment to lose."

"But the trunks?" gasped Passepartout, unconsciously swaying his head from
right to left.

"We'll have no trunks; only a carpet-bag, with two shirts and three pairs of
stockings for me, and the same for you. We'll buy our clothes on the way. Bring
down my mackintosh and traveling-cloak, and some stout shoes, though we shall
do little walking. Make haste!"

Passepartout tried to reply, but could not. He went out, mounted to his own
room, fell into a chair, and muttered: "That's good, that is! And I, who wanted to
remain quiet!"

He mechanically set about making the preparations for departure. Around the
world in eighty days! Was his master a fool? No. Was this a joke, then? They


were going to Dover; good! To Calais; good again! After all, Passepartout, who
had been away from France five years, would not be sorry to set foot on his
native soil again. Perhaps they would go as far as Paris, and it would do his eyes
good to see Paris once more. But surely a gentleman so chary of his steps would
stop there; no doubt--but, then, it was none the less true that he was going away,
this so domestic person hitherto!

By eight o'clock Passepartout had packed the modest carpet-bag, containing
the wardrobes of his master and himself; then, still troubled in mind, he carefully
shut the door of his room, and descended to Mr. Fogg.

Mr. Fogg was quite ready. Under his arm might have been observed a red-
bound copy of Bradshaw's Continental Railway Steam Transit and General
Guide, with its timetables showing the arrival and departure of steamers and
railways. He took the carpet-bag, opened it, and slipped into it a goodly roll of
Bank of England notes, which would pass wherever he might go.

"You have forgotten nothing?” asked he.

"Nothing, monsieur."

"My mackintosh and cloak?"

"Here they are."

"Good! Take this carpet-bag," handing it to Passepartout. "Take good care of
it, for there are twenty thousand pounds in it."

Passepartout nearly dropped the bag, as if the twenty thousand pounds were
in gold, and weighed him down.

Master and man then descended, the street-door was double-locked, and at
the end of Saville Row they took a cab and drove rapidly to Charing Cross. The
cab stopped before the railway station at twenty minutes past eight. Passepartout
jumped off the box and followed his master, who, after paying the cabman, was
about to enter the station, when a poor beggar-woman, with a child in her arms,
her naked feet smeared with mud, her head covered with a wretched bonnet,
from which hung a tattered feather, and her shoulders shrouded in a ragged
shawl, approached, and mournfully asked for alms.

Mr. Fogg took out the twenty guineas he had just won at whist, and handed
them to the beggar, saying, "Here, my good woman. I'm glad that I met you;"
and passed on.

Passepartout had a moist sensation about the eyes; his master's action
touched his susceptible heart.

Two first-class tickets for Paris having been speedily purchased, Mr. Fogg
was crossing the station to the train, when he perceived his five friends of the
Reform.

"Well, gentlemen," said he, "I'm off, you see; and, if you will examine my


passport when I get back, you will be able to judge whether I have accomplished
the journey agreed upon."

"Oh, that would be quite unnecessary, Mr. Fogg," said Ralph politely. "We
will trust your word, as a gentleman of honour."

"You do not forget when you are due in London again?" asked Stuart.

"In eighty days; on Saturday, the 21st of December, 1872, at a quarter before
nine p.m. Good-bye, gentlemen."

Phileas Fogg and his servant seated themselves in a first-class carriage at
twenty minutes before nine; five minutes later the whistle screamed, and the
train slowly glided out of the station.

The night was dark, and a fine, steady rain was falling. Phileas Fogg, snugly
ensconced in his corner, did not open his lips. Passepartout, not yet recovered
from his stupefaction, clung mechanically to the carpet-bag, with its enormous
treasure.

Just as the train was whirling through Sydenham, Passepartout suddenly
uttered a cry of despair.

"What's the matter?" asked Mr. Fogg.

"Alas! In my hurry--I--I forgot--"

"What?"

"To turn off the gas in my room!"

"Very well, young man," returned Mr. Fogg, coolly; "it will burn--at your
expense.”


Chapter V


IN WHICH A NEW SPECIES OF FUNDS, UNKNOWN TO THE
MONEYED MEN, APPEARS ON 'CHANGE

Phileas Fogg rightly suspected that his departure from London would create
a lively sensation at the West End. The news of the bet spread through the
Reform Club, and afforded an exciting topic of conversation to its members.
From the club it soon got into the papers throughout England. The boasted "tour
of the world" was talked about, disputed, argued with as much warmth as if the
subject were another Alabama claim. Some took sides with Phileas Fogg, but the
large majority shook their heads and declared against him; it was absurd,
impossible, they declared, that the tour of the world could be made, except
theoretically and on paper, in this minimum of time, and with the existing means
of travelling. The Times, Standard, Morning Post, and Daily News, and twenty
other highly respectable newspapers scouted Mr. Fogg's project as madness; the
Daily Telegraph alone hesitatingly supported him. People in general thought him
a lunatic, and blamed his Reform Club friends for having accepted a wager
which betrayed the mental aberration of its proposer.

Articles no less passionate than logical appeared on the question, for
geography is one of the pet subjects of the English; and the columns devoted to
Phileas Fogg's venture were eagerly devoured by all classes of readers. At first
some rash individuals, principally of the gentler sex, espoused his cause, which
became still more popular when the Illustrated London News came out with his
portrait, copied from a photograph in the Reform Club. A few readers of the
Daily Telegraph even dared to say, "Why not, after all? Stranger things have
come to pass."

At last a long article appeared, on the 7th of October, in the bulletin of the
Royal Geographical Society, which treated the question from every point of
view, and demonstrated the utter folly of the enterprise.

Everything, it said, was against the travellers, every obstacle imposed alike
by man and by nature. A miraculous agreement of the times of departure and
arrival, which was impossible, was absolutely necessary to his success. He
might, perhaps, reckon on the arrival of trains at the designated hours, in Europe,
where the distances were relatively moderate; but when he calculated upon
crossing India in three days, and the United States in seven, could he rely beyond
misgiving upon accomplishing his task? There were accidents to machinery, the
liability of trains to run off the line, collisions, bad weather, the blocking up by


snow--were not all these against Phileas Fogg? Would he not find himself, when
travelling by steamer in winter, at the mercy of the winds and fogs? Is it
uncommon for the best ocean steamers to be two or three days behind time? But
a single delay would suffice to fatally break the chain of communication; should
Phileas Fogg once miss, even by an hour; a steamer, he would have to wait for
the next, and that would irrevocably render his attempt vain.

This article made a great deal of noise, and, being copied into all the papers,
seriously depressed the advocates of the rash tourist.

Everybody knows that England is the world of betting men, who are of a
higher class than mere gamblers; to bet is in the English temperament. Not only
the members of the Reform, but the general public, made heavy wagers for or
against Phileas Fogg, who was set down in the betting books as if he were a
race-horse. Bonds were issued, and made their appearance on ‘Change; "Phileas
Fogg bonds" were offered at par or at a premium, and a great business was done
in them. But five days after the article in the bulletin of the Geographical Society
appeared, the demand began to subside: "Phileas Fogg" declined. They were
offered by packages, at first of five, then of ten, until at last nobody would take
less than twenty, fifty, a hundred!

Lord Albemarle, an elderly paralytic gentleman, was now the only advocate
of Phileas Fogg left. This noble lord, who was fastened to his chair, would have
given his fortune to be able to make the tour of the world, if it took ten years;
and he bet five thousand pounds on Phileas Fogg. When the folly as well as the
uselessness of the adventure was pointed out to him, he contented himself with
replying, "If the thing is feasible, the first to do it ought to be an Englishman."

The Fogg party dwindled more and more, everybody was going against him,
and the bets stood a hundred and fifty and two hundred to one; and a week after
his departure an incident occurred which deprived him of backers at any price.

The commissioner of police was sitting in his office at nine o'clock one
evening, when the following telegraphic dispatch was put into his hands:

Suez to London.

Rowan, Commissioner of Police, Scotland Yard:

I've found the bank robber, Phileas Fogg. Send with out delay warrant of
arrest to Bombay.

Fix, Detective.

The effect of this dispatch was instantaneous. The polished gentleman
disappeared to give place to the bank robber. His photograph, which was hung
with those of the rest of the members at the Reform Club, was minutely
examined, and it betrayed, feature by feature, the description of the robber which
had been provided to the police. The mysterious habits of Phileas Fogg were


recalled; his solitary ways, his sudden departure; and it seemed clear that, in
undertaking a tour round the world on the pretext of a wager, he had had no
other end in view than to elude the detectives, and throw them off his track.


Chapter VI


IN WHICH FIX, THE DETECTIVE, BETRAYS A VERY NATURAL
IMPATIENCE

The circumstances under which this telegraphic dispatch about Phileas Fogg
was sent were as follows:

The steamer Mongolia, belonging to the Peninsular and Oriental Company,
built of iron, of two thousand eight hundred tons burden, and five hundred horse-
power, was due at eleven o'clock a.m. on Wednesday, the 9th of October, at
Suez. The Mongolia plied regularly between Brindisi and Bombay via the Suez
Canal, and was one of the fastest steamers belonging to the company, always
making more than ten knots an hour between Brindisi and Suez, and nine and a
half between Suez and Bombay.

Two men were promenading up and down the wharves, among the crowd of
natives and strangers who were sojourning at this once straggling village--now,
thanks to the enterprise of M. Lesseps, a fast-growing town. One was the British
consul at Suez, who, despite the prophecies of the English Government, and the
unfavourable predictions of Stephenson, was in the habit of seeing, from his
office window, English ships daily passing to and fro on the great canal, by
which the old roundabout route from England to India by the Cape of Good
Hope was abridged by at least a half. The other was a small, slight-built
personage, with a nervous, intelligent face, and bright eyes peering out from
under eyebrows which he was incessantly twitching. He was just now
manifesting unmistakable signs of impatience, nervously pacing up and down,
and unable to stand still for a moment. This was Fix, one of the detectives who
had been dispatched from England in search of the bank robber; it was his task
to narrowly watch every passenger who arrived at Suez, and to follow up all who
seemed to be suspicious characters, or bore a resemblance to the description of
the criminal, which he had received two days before from the police
headquarters at London. The detective was evidently inspired by the hope of
obtaining the splendid reward which would be the prize of success, and awaited
with a feverish impatience, easy to understand, the arrival of the steamer
Mongolia.

"So you say, consul," asked he for the twentieth time, "that this steamer is
never behind time?"

"No, Mr. Fix," replied the consul. "She was bespoken yesterday at Port Said,
and the rest of the way is of no account to such a craft. I repeat that the Mongolia


has been in advance of the time required by the company's regulations, and
gained the prize awarded for excess of speed."

"Does she come directly from Brindisi?"

"Directly from Brindisi; she takes on the Indian mails there, and she left
there Saturday at five p.m. Have patience, Mr. Fix; she will not be late. But
really, I don't see how, from the description you have, you will be able to
recognise your man, even if he is on board the Mongolia."

"A man rather feels the presence of these fellows, consul, than recognises
them. You must have a scent for them, and a scent is like a sixth sense which
combines hearing, seeing, and smelling. I've arrested more than one of these
gentlemen in my time, and, if my thief is on board, I'll answer for it; he'll not slip
through my fingers."

"I hope so, Mr. Fix, for it was a heavy robbery."

"A magnificent robbery, consul; fifty-five thousand pounds! We don't often
have such windfalls. Burglars are getting to be so contemptible nowadays! A
fellow gets hung for a handful of shillings!"

"Mr. Fix," said the consul, "I like your way of talking, and hope you'll
succeed; but I fear you will find it far from easy. Don't you see, the description
which you have there has a singular resemblance to an honest man?"

"Consul," remarked the detective, dogmatically, "great robbers always
resemble honest folks. Fellows who have rascally faces have only one course to
take, and that is to remain honest; otherwise they would be arrested off-hand.
The artistic thing is, to unmask honest countenances; it's no light task, I admit,
but a real art."

Mr. Fix evidently was not wanting in a tinge of self-conceit.

Little by little the scene on the quay became more animated; sailors of
various nations, merchants, ship-brokers, porters, fellahs, bustled to and fro as if
the steamer were immediately expected. The weather was clear, and slightly
chilly. The minarets of the town loomed above the houses in the pale rays of the
sun. A jetty pier, some two thousand yards along, extended into the roadstead. A
number of fishing-smacks and coasting boats, some retaining the fantastic
fashion of ancient galleys, were discernible on the Red Sea.

As he passed among the busy crowd, Fix, according to habit, scrutinised the
passers-by with a keen, rapid glance.

It was now half-past ten.

"The steamer doesn't come!" he exclaimed, as the port clock struck.

"She can't be far off now," returned his companion.

"How long will she stop at Suez?"

"Four hours; long enough to get in her coal. It is thirteen hundred and ten


miles from Suez to Aden, at the other end of the Red Sea, and she has to take in
a fresh coal supply."

"And does she go from Suez directly to Bombay?"

"Without putting in anywhere."

"Good!" said Fix. "If the robber is on board he will no doubt get off at Suez,
so as to reach the Dutch or French colonies in Asia by some other route. He
ought to know that he would not be safe an hour in India, which is English soil."

"Unless," objected the consul, "he is exceptionally shrewd. An English
criminal, you know, is always better concealed in London than anywhere else."

This observation furnished the detective food for thought, and meanwhile the
consul went away to his office. Fix, left alone, was more impatient than ever,
having a presentiment that the robber was on board the Mongolia. If he had
indeed left London intending to reach the New World, he would naturally take
the route via India, which was less watched and more difficult to watch than that
of the Atlantic. But Fix's reflections were soon interrupted by a succession of
sharp whistles, which announced the arrival of the Mongolia. The porters and
fellahs rushed down the quay, and a dozen boats pushed off from the shore to go
and meet the steamer. Soon her gigantic hull appeared passing along between the
banks, and eleven o'clock struck as she anchored in the road. She brought an
unusual number of passengers, some of whom remained on deck to scan the
picturesque panorama of the town, while the greater part disembarked in the
boats, and landed on the quay.

Fix took up a position, and carefully examined each face and figure which
made its appearance. Presently one of the passengers, after vigorously pushing
his way through the importunate crowd of porters, came up to him and politely
asked if he could point out the English consulate, at the same time showing a
passport which he wished to have visaed. Fix instinctively took the passport, and
with a rapid glance read the description of its bearer. An involuntary motion of
surprise nearly escaped him, for the description in the passport was identical
with that of the bank robber which he had received from Scotland Yard.

"Is this your passport?" asked he.

"No, it's my master's."

"And your master is--"

"He stayed on board."

"But he must go to the consul's in person, so as to establish his identity."

"Oh, is that necessary?"

"Quite indispensable."

"And where is the consulate?"

"There, on the corner of the square," said Fix, pointing to a house two


hundred steps off.

"T'll go and fetch my master, who won't be much pleased, however, to be
disturbed."

The passenger bowed to Fix, and returned to the steamer.


Chapter VII


WHICH ONCE MORE DEMONSTRATES THE USELESSNESS OF
PASSPORTS AS AIDS TO DETECTIVES

The detective passed down the quay, and rapidly made his way to the
consul's office, where he was at once admitted to the presence of that official.

"Consul," said he, without preamble, "I have strong reasons for believing that
my man is a passenger on the Mongolia." And he narrated what had just passed
concerning the passport.

"Well, Mr. Fix," replied the consul, "I shall not be sorry to see the rascal's
face; but perhaps he won't come here--that is, if he is the person you suppose
him to be. A robber doesn't quite like to leave traces of his flight behind him;
and, besides, he is not obliged to have his passport countersigned."

"Tf he is as shrewd as I think he is, consul, he will come."

"To have his passport visaed?"

"Yes. Passports are only good for annoying honest folks, and aiding in the
flight of rogues. I assure you it will be quite the thing for him to do; but I hope
you will not visa the passport."

"Why not? If the passport is genuine I have no right to refuse."

"Still, I must keep this man here until I can get a warrant to arrest him from
London."

"Ah, that's your look-out. But I cannot--"

The consul did not finish his sentence, for as he spoke a knock was heard at
the door, and two strangers entered, one of whom was the servant whom Fix had
met on the quay. The other, who was his master, held out his passport with the
request that the consul would do him the favour to visa it. The consul took the
document and carefully read it, whilst Fix observed, or rather devoured, the
stranger with his eyes from a corner of the room.

"You are Mr. Phileas Fogg?" said the consul, after reading the passport.

"Tam."

"And this man is your servant?"

"He is: a Frenchman, named Passepartout."

"You are from London?"

"Yes."

"And you are going--"

"To Bombay."

"Very good, sir. You know that a visa is useless, and that no passport is


required?"

"I know it, sir," replied Phileas Fogg; "but I wish to prove, by your visa, that
I came by Suez."

"Very well, sir."

The consul proceeded to sign and date the passport, after which he added his
official seal. Mr. Fogg paid the customary fee, coldly bowed, and went out,
followed by his servant.

"Well?" queried the detective.

"Well, he looks and acts like a perfectly honest man," replied the consul.

"Possibly; but that is not the question. Do you think, consul, that this
phlegmatic gentleman resembles, feature by feature, the robber whose
description I have received?"

"I concede that; but then, you know, all descriptions--"

"T'll make certain of it," interrupted Fix. "The servant seems to me less
mysterious than the master; besides, he's a Frenchman, and can't help talking.
Excuse me for a little while, consul."

Fix started off in search of Passepartout.

Meanwhile Mr. Fogg, after leaving the consulate, repaired to the quay, gave
some orders to Passepartout, went off to the Mongolia in a boat, and descended
to his cabin. He took up his note-book, which contained the following
memoranda:

"Left London, Wednesday, October 2nd, at 8.45 p.m. "Reached Paris,
Thursday, October 3rd, at 7.20 a.m. "Left Paris, Thursday, at 8.40 a.m. "Reached
Turin by Mont Cenis, Friday, October 4th, at 6.35 a.m. "Left Turin, Friday, at
7.20 a.m. "Arrived at Brindisi, Saturday, October 5th, at 4 p.m. "Sailed on the
Mongolia, Saturday, at 5 p.m. "Reached Suez, Wednesday, October 9th, at 11
a.m. "Total of hours spent, 158+; or, in days, six days and a half."

These dates were inscribed in an itinerary divided into columns, indicating
the month, the day of the month, and the day for the stipulated and actual
arrivals at each principal point Paris, Brindisi, Suez, Bombay, Calcutta,
Singapore, Hong Kong, Yokohama, San Francisco, New York, and London--
from the 2nd of October to the 21st of December; and giving a space for setting
down the gain made or the loss suffered on arrival at each locality. This
methodical record thus contained an account of everything needed, and Mr. Fogg
always knew whether he was behind-hand or in advance of his time. On this
Friday, October 9th, he noted his arrival at Suez, and observed that he had as yet
neither gained nor lost. He sat down quietly to breakfast in his cabin, never once
thinking of inspecting the town, being one of those Englishmen who are wont to
see foreign countries through the eyes of their domestics.


Chapter VIII


IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT TALKS RATHER MORE, PERHAPS,
THAN IS PRUDENT

Fix soon rejoined Passepartout, who was lounging and looking about on the
quay, as if he did not feel that he, at least, was obliged not to see anything.

"Well, my friend," said the detective, coming up with him, "is your passport
visaed?"

"Ah, it's you, is it, monsieur?"” responded Passepartout. "Thanks, yes, the
passport is all right."

"And you are looking about you?"

"Yes; but we travel so fast that I seem to be journeying in a dream. So this is
Suez?"

"Yes."

"In Egypt?"

"Certainly, in Egypt."

"And in Africa?"

"In Africa."

"In Africa!" repeated Passepartout. "Just think, monsieur, I had no idea that
we should go farther than Paris; and all that I saw of Paris was between twenty
minutes past seven and twenty minutes before nine in the morning, between the
Northern and the Lyons stations, through the windows of a car, and in a driving
rain! How I regret not having seen once more Pere la Chaise and the circus in the
Champs Elysees!"

"You are in a great hurry, then?"

"IT am not, but my master is. By the way, I must buy some shoes and shirts.
We came away without trunks, only with a carpet-bag."

"IT will show you an excellent shop for getting what you want."

"Really, monsieur, you are very kind."

And they walked off together, Passepartout chatting volubly as they went
along.

"Above all," said he; "don't let me lose the steamer."

"You have plenty of time; it's only twelve o'clock."

Passepartout pulled out his big watch. "Twelve!" he exclaimed; "why, it's
only eight minutes before ten."

"Your watch is slow."

"My watch? A family watch, monsieur, which has come down from my


great-grandfather! It doesn't vary five minutes in the year. It's a perfect
chronometer, look you."

"I see how it is," said Fix. "You have kept London time, which is two hours
behind that of Suez. You ought to regulate your watch at noon in each country."

"I regulate my watch? Never!"

"Well, then, it will not agree with the sun."

"So much the worse for the sun, monsieur. The sun will be wrong, then!"

And the worthy fellow returned the watch to its fob with a defiant gesture.
After a few minutes silence, Fix resumed: "You left London hastily, then?"

"T rather think so! Last Friday at eight o'clock in the evening, Monsieur Fogg
came home from his club, and three-quarters of an hour afterwards we were off."

"But where is your master going?"

"Always straight ahead. He is going round the world."

"Round the world?" cried Fix.

"Yes, and in eighty days! He says it is on a wager; but, between us, I don't
believe a word of it. That wouldn't be common sense. There's something else in
the wind."

"Ah! Mr. Fogg is a character, is he?"

"I should say he was."

"Is he rich?"

"No doubt, for he is carrying an enormous sum in brand new banknotes with
him. And he doesn't spare the money on the way, either: he has offered a large
reward to the engineer of the Mongolia if he gets us to Bombay well in advance
of time."

"And you have known your master a long time?"

"Why, no; I entered his service the very day we left London."

The effect of these replies upon the already suspicious and excited detective
may be imagined. The hasty departure from London soon after the robbery; the
large sum carried by Mr. Fogg; his eagerness to reach distant countries; the
pretext of an eccentric and foolhardy bet--all confirmed Fix in his theory. He
continued to pump poor Passepartout, and learned that he really knew little or
nothing of his master, who lived a solitary existence in London, was said to be
rich, though no one knew whence came his riches, and was mysterious and
impenetrable in his affairs and habits. Fix felt sure that Phileas Fogg would not
land at Suez, but was really going on to Bombay.

"Is Bombay far from here?" asked Passepartout.

"Pretty far. It is a ten days' voyage by sea."

"And in what country is Bombay?"

"India."


"In Asia?"

"Certainly."

"The deuce! I was going to tell you there's one thing that worries me--my
burner!"

"What burner?"

"My gas-bumer, which I forgot to turn off, and which is at this moment
buming at my expense. I have calculated, monsieur, that I lose two shillings
every four and twenty hours, exactly sixpence more than I earn; and you will
understand that the longer our journey--"

Did Fix pay any attention to Passepartout's trouble about the gas? It is not
probable. He was not listening, but was cogitating a project. Passepartout and he
had now reached the shop, where Fix left his companion to make his purchases,
after recommending him not to miss the steamer, and hurried back to the
consulate. Now that he was fully convinced, Fix had quite recovered his
equanimity.

"Consul," said he, "I have no longer any doubt. I have spotted my man. He
passes himself off as an odd stick who is going round the world in eighty days."

"Then he's a sharp fellow," returned the consul, "and counts on returning to
London after putting the police of the two countries off his track."

"We'll see about that,” replied Fix.

"But are you not mistaken?"

"IT am not mistaken."

"Why was this robber so anxious to prove, by the visa, that he had passed
through Suez?"

"Why? I have no idea; but listen to me."

He reported in a few words the most important parts of his conversation with
Passepartout.

"In short," said the consul, "appearances are wholly against this man. And
what are you going to do?"

"Send a dispatch to London for a warrant of arrest to be dispatched instantly
to Bombay, take passage on board the Mongolia, follow my rogue to India, and
there, on English ground, arrest him politely, with my warrant in my hand, and
my hand on his shoulder."

Having uttered these words with a cool, careless air, the detective took leave
of the consul, and repaired to the telegraph office, whence he sent the dispatch
which we have seen to the London police office. A quarter of an hour later found
Fix, with a small bag in his hand, proceeding on board the Mongolia; and, ere
many moments longer, the noble steamer rode out at full steam upon the waters
of the Red Sea.


Chapter IX


IN WHICH THE RED SEA AND THE INDIAN OCEAN PROVE
PROPITIOUS TO THE DESIGNS OF PHILEAS FOGG

The distance between Suez and Aden is precisely thirteen hundred and ten
miles, and the regulations of the company allow the steamers one hundred and
thirty-eight hours in which to traverse it. The Mongolia, thanks to the vigorous
exertions of the engineer, seemed likely, so rapid was her speed, to reach her
destination considerably within that time. The greater part of the passengers
from Brindisi were bound for India some for Bombay, others for Calcutta by
way of Bombay, the nearest route thither, now that a railway crosses the Indian
peninsula. Among the passengers was a number of officials and military officers
of various grades, the latter being either attached to the regular British forces or
commanding the Sepoy troops, and receiving high salaries ever since the central
government has assumed the powers of the East India Company: for the sub-
lieutenants get 280 pounds, brigadiers, 2,400 pounds, and generals of divisions,
4,000 pounds. What with the military men, a number of rich young Englishmen
on their travels, and the hospitable efforts of the purser, the time passed quickly
on the Mongolia. The best of fare was spread upon the cabin tables at breakfast,
lunch, dinner, and the eight o'clock supper, and the ladies scrupulously changed
their toilets twice a day; and the hours were whirled away, when the sea was
tranquil, with music, dancing, and games.

But the Red Sea is full of caprice, and often boisterous, like most long and
narrow gulfs. When the wind came from the African or Asian coast the
Mongolia, with her long hull, rolled fearfully. Then the ladies speedily
disappeared below; the pianos were silent; singing and dancing suddenly ceased.
Yet the good ship ploughed straight on, unretarded by wind or wave, towards the
straits of Bab-el-Mandeb. What was Phileas Fogg doing all this time? It might be
thought that, in his anxiety, he would be constantly watching the changes of the
wind, the disorderly raging of the billows--every chance, in short, which might
force the Mongolia to slacken her speed, and thus interrupt his journey. But, if he
thought of these possibilities, he did not betray the fact by any outward sign.

Always the same impassible member of the Reform Club, whom no incident
could surprise, as unvarying as the ship's chronometers, and seldom having the
curiosity even to go upon the deck, he passed through the memorable scenes of
the Red Sea with cold indifference; did not care to recognise the historic towns
and villages which, along its borders, raised their picturesque outlines against the


sky; and betrayed no fear of the dangers of the Arabic Gulf, which the old
historians always spoke of with horror, and upon which the ancient navigators
never ventured without propitiating the gods by ample sacrifices. How did this
eccentric personage pass his time on the Mongolia? He made his four hearty
meals every day, regardless of the most persistent rolling and pitching on the part
of the steamer; and he played whist indefatigably, for he had found partners as
enthusiastic in the game as himself. A tax-collector, on the way to his post at
Goa; the Rev. Decimus Smith, returning to his parish at Bombay; and a
brigadier-general of the English army, who was about to rejoin his brigade at
Benares, made up the party, and, with Mr. Fogg, played whist by the hour
together in absorbing silence.

As for Passepartout, he, too, had escaped sea-sickness, and took his meals
conscientiously in the forward cabin. He rather enjoyed the voyage, for he was
well fed and well lodged, took a great interest in the scenes through which they
were passing, and consoled himself with the delusion that his master's whim
would end at Bombay. He was pleased, on the day after leaving Suez, to find on
deck the obliging person with whom he had walked and chatted on the quays.

"If I am not mistaken," said he, approaching this person, with his most
amiable smile, "you are the gentleman who so kindly volunteered to guide me at
Suez?"

"Ah! I quite recognise you. You are the servant of the strange Englishman--"

"Just so, monsieur--"

"Fix."

"Monsieur Fix," resumed Passepartout, "I'm charmed to find you on board.
Where are you bound?"

"Like you, to Bombay."

"That's capital! Have you made this trip before?"

"Several times. I am one of the agents of the Peninsular Company."

"Then you know India?"

"Why yes," replied Fix, who spoke cautiously.

"A curious place, this India?"

"Oh, very curious. Mosques, minarets, temples, fakirs, pagodas, tigers,
snakes, elephants! I hope you will have ample time to see the sights."

"I hope so, Monsieur Fix. You see, a man of sound sense ought not to spend
his life jumping from a steamer upon a railway train, and from a railway train
upon a steamer again, pretending to make the tour of the world in eighty days!
No; all these gymnastics, you may be sure, will cease at Bombay."

"And Mr. Fogg is getting on well?" asked Fix, in the most natural tone in the
world.


"Quite well, and I too. I eat like a famished ogre; it's the sea air."

"But I never see your master on deck."

"Never; he hasn't the least curiosity."

"Do you know, Mr. Passepartout, that this pretended tour in eighty days may
conceal some secret errand--perhaps a diplomatic mission?"

"Faith, Monsieur Fix, I assure you I know nothing about it, nor would I give
half a crown to find out."

After this meeting, Passepartout and Fix got into the habit of chatting
together, the latter making it a point to gain the worthy man's confidence. He
frequently offered him a glass of whiskey or pale ale in the steamer bar-room,
which Passepartout never failed to accept with graceful alacrity, mentally
pronouncing Fix the best of good fellows.

Meanwhile the Mongolia was pushing forward rapidly; on the 13th, Mocha,
surrounded by its ruined walls whereon date-trees were growing, was sighted,
and on the mountains beyond were espied vast coffee-fields. Passepartout was
ravished to behold this celebrated place, and thought that, with its circular walls
and dismantled fort, it looked like an immense coffee-cup and saucer. The
following night they passed through the Strait of Bab-el-Mandeb, which means
in Arabic The Bridge of Tears, and the next day they put in at Steamer Point,
north-west of Aden harbour, to take in coal. This matter of fuelling steamers is a
serious one at such distances from the coal-mines; it costs the Peninsular
Company some eight hundred thousand pounds a year. In these distant seas, coal
is worth three or four pounds sterling a ton.

The Mongolia had still sixteen hundred and fifty miles to traverse before
reaching Bombay, and was obliged to remain four hours at Steamer Point to coal
up. But this delay, as it was foreseen, did not affect Phileas Fogg's programme;
besides, the Mongolia, instead of reaching Aden on the moming of the 15th,
when she was due, arrived there on the evening of the 14th, a gain of fifteen
hours.

Mr. Fogg and his servant went ashore at Aden to have the passport again
visaed; Fix, unobserved, followed them. The visa procured, Mr. Fogg returned
on board to resume his former habits; while Passepartout, according to custom,
sauntered about among the mixed population of Somalis, Banyans, Parsees,
Jews, Arabs, and Europeans who comprise the twenty-five thousand inhabitants
of Aden. He gazed with wonder upon the fortifications which make this place
the Gibraltar of the Indian Ocean, and the vast cisterns where the English
engineers were still at work, two thousand years after the engineers of Solomon.

"Very curious, very curious," said Passepartout to himself, on returning to the
steamer. "I see that it is by no means useless to travel, if a man wants to see


something new." At six p.m. the Mongolia slowly moved out of the roadstead,
and was soon once more on the Indian Ocean. She had a hundred and sixty-eight
hours in which to reach Bombay, and the sea was favourable, the wind being in
the north-west, and all sails aiding the engine. The steamer rolled but little, the
ladies, in fresh toilets, reappeared on deck, and the singing and dancing were
resumed. The trip was being accomplished most successfully, and Passepartout
was enchanted with the congenial companion which chance had secured him in
the person of the delightful Fix. On Sunday, October 20th, towards noon, they
came in sight of the Indian coast: two hours later the pilot came on board. A
range of hills lay against the sky in the horizon, and soon the rows of palms
which adorn Bombay came distinctly into view. The steamer entered the road
formed by the islands in the bay, and at half-past four she hauled up at the quays
of Bombay.

Phileas Fogg was in the act of finishing the thirty-third rubber of the voyage,
and his partner and himself having, by a bold stroke, captured all thirteen of the
tricks, concluded this fine campaign with a brilliant victory.

The Mongolia was due at Bombay on the 22nd; she arrived on the 20th. This
was a gain to Phileas Fogg of two days since his departure from London, and he
calmly entered the fact in the itinerary, in the column of gains.


Chapter X


IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT IS ONLY TOO GLAD TO GET OFF WITH
THE LOSS OF HIS SHOES

Everybody knows that the great reversed triangle of land, with its base in the
north and its apex in the south, which is called India, embraces fourteen hundred
thousand square miles, upon which is spread unequally a population of one
hundred and eighty millions of souls. The British Crown exercises a real and
despotic dominion over the larger portion of this vast country, and has a
governor-general stationed at Calcutta, governors at Madras, Bombay, and in
Bengal, and a lieutenant-governor at Agra.

But British India, properly so called, only embraces seven hundred thousand
square miles, and a population of from one hundred to one hundred and ten
millions of inhabitants. A considerable portion of India is still free from British
authority; and there are certain ferocious rajahs in the interior who are absolutely
independent. The celebrated East India Company was all-powerful from 1756,
when the English first gained a foothold on the spot where now stands the city of
Madras, down to the time of the great Sepoy insurrection. It gradually annexed
province after province, purchasing them of the native chiefs, whom it seldom
paid, and appointed the governor-general and his subordinates, civil and military.
But the East India Company has now passed away, leaving the British
possessions in India directly under the control of the Crown. The aspect of the
country, as well as the manners and distinctions of race, is daily changing.

Formerly one was obliged to travel in India by the old cumbrous methods of
going on foot or on horseback, in palanquins or unwieldy coaches; now fast
steamboats ply on the Indus and the Ganges, and a great railway, with branch
lines joining the main line at many points on its route, traverses the peninsula
from Bombay to Calcutta in three days. This railway does not run in a direct line
across India. The distance between Bombay and Calcutta, as the bird flies, is
only from one thousand to eleven hundred miles; but the deflections of the road
increase this distance by more than a third.

The general route of the Great Indian Peninsula Railway is as follows:
Leaving Bombay, it passes through Salcette, crossing to the continent opposite
Tannah, goes over the chain of the Western Ghauts, runs thence north-east as far
as Burhampoor, skirts the nearly independent territory of Bundelcund, ascends to
Allahabad, turns thence eastwardly, meeting the Ganges at Benares, then departs
from the river a little, and, descending south-eastward by Burdivan and the


French town of Chandernagor, has its terminus at Calcutta.

The passengers of the Mongolia went ashore at half-past four p.m.; at exactly
eight the train would start for Calcutta.

Mr. Fogg, after bidding good-bye to his whist partners, left the steamer, gave
his servant several errands to do, urged it upon him to be at the station promptly
at eight, and, with his regular step, which beat to the second, like an
astronomical clock, directed his steps to the passport office. As for the wonders
of Bombay its famous city hall, its splendid library, its forts and docks, its
bazaars, mosques, synagogues, its Armenian churches, and the noble pagoda on
Malabar Hill, with its two polygonal towers--he cared not a straw to see them.
He would not deign to examine even the masterpieces of Elephanta, or the
mysterious hypogea, concealed south-east from the docks, or those fine remains
of Buddhist architecture, the Kanherian grottoes of the island of Salcette.

Having transacted his business at the passport office, Phileas Fogg repaired
quietly to the railway station, where he ordered dinner. Among the dishes served
up to him, the landlord especially recommended a certain giblet of "native
rabbit," on which he prided himself.

Mr. Fogg accordingly tasted the dish, but, despite its spiced sauce, found it
far from palatable. He rang for the landlord, and, on his appearance, said, fixing
his clear eyes upon him, "Is this rabbit, sir?"

"Yes, my lord," the rogue boldly replied, "rabbit from the jungles."

"And this rabbit did not mew when he was killed?"

"Mew, my lord! What, a rabbit mew! I swear to you--"

"Be so good, landlord, as not to swear, but remember this: cats were formerly
considered, in India, as sacred animals. That was a good time."

"For the cats, my lord?"

"Perhaps for the travellers as well!"

After which Mr. Fogg quietly continued his dinner. Fix had gone on shore
shortly after Mr. Fogg, and his first destination was the headquarters of the
Bombay police. He made himself known as a London detective, told his business
at Bombay, and the position of affairs relative to the supposed robber, and
nervously asked if a warrant had arrived from London. It had not reached the
office; indeed, there had not yet been time for it to arrive. Fix was sorely
disappointed, and tried to obtain an order of arrest from the director of the
Bombay police. This the director refused, as the matter concerned the London
office, which alone could legally deliver the warrant. Fix did not insist, and was
fain to resign himself to await the arrival of the important document; but he was
determined not to lose sight of the mysterious rogue as long as he stayed in
Bombay. He did not doubt for a moment, any more than Passepartout, that


Phileas Fogg would remain there, at least until it was time for the warrant to
arrive.

Passepartout, however, had no sooner heard his master's orders on leaving
the Mongolia than he saw at once that they were to leave Bombay as they had
done Suez and Paris, and that the journey would be extended at least as far as
Calcutta, and perhaps beyond that place. He began to ask himself if this bet that
Mr. Fogg talked about was not really in good earnest, and whether his fate was
not in truth forcing him, despite his love of repose, around the world in eighty
days!

Having purchased the usual quota of shirts and shoes, he took a leisurely
promenade about the streets, where crowds of people of many nationalities--
Europeans, Persians with pointed caps, Banyas with round turbans, Sindes with
square bonnets, Parsees with black mitres, and long-robed Armenians--were
collected. It happened to be the day of a Parsee festival. These descendants of
the sect of Zoroaster--the most thrifty, civilised, intelligent, and austere of the
East Indians, among whom are counted the richest native merchants of Bombay-
-were celebrating a sort of religious carnival, with processions and shows, in the
midst of which Indian dancing-girls, clothed in rose-coloured gauze, looped up
with gold and silver, danced airily, but with perfect modesty, to the sound of
viols and the clanging of tambourines. It is needless to say that Passepartout
watched these curious ceremonies with staring eyes and gaping mouth, and that
his countenance was that of the greenest booby imaginable.

Unhappily for his master, as well as himself, his curiosity drew him
unconsciously farther off than he intended to go. At last, having seen the Parsee
carnival wind away in the distance, he was turing his steps towards the station,
when he happened to espy the splendid pagoda on Malabar Hill, and was seized
with an irresistible desire to see its interior. He was quite ignorant that it is
forbidden to Christians to enter certain Indian temples, and that even the faithful
must not go in without first leaving their shoes outside the door. It may be said
here that the wise policy of the British Government severely punishes a
disregard of the practices of the native religions.

Passepartout, however, thinking no harm, went in like a simple tourist, and
was soon lost in admiration of the splendid Brahmin ornamentation which
everywhere met his eyes, when of a sudden he found himself sprawling on the
sacred flagging. He looked up to behold three enraged priests, who forthwith fell
upon him; tore off his shoes, and began to beat him with loud, savage
exclamations. The agile Frenchman was soon upon his feet again, and lost no
time in knocking down two of his long-gowned adversaries with his fists and a
vigorous application of his toes; then, rushing out of the pagoda as fast as his


legs could carry him, he soon escaped the third priest by mingling with the
crowd in the streets.

At five minutes before eight, Passepartout, hatless, shoeless, and having in
the squabble lost his package of shirts and shoes, rushed breathlessly into the
station.

Fix, who had followed Mr. Fogg to the station, and saw that he was really
going to leave Bombay, was there, upon the platform. He had resolved to follow
the supposed robber to Calcutta, and farther, if necessary. Passepartout did not
observe the detective, who stood in an obscure corner; but Fix heard him relate
his adventures in a few words to Mr. Fogg.

"I hope that this will not happen again," said Phileas Fogg coldly, as he got
into the train. Poor Passepartout, quite crestfallen, followed his master without a
word. Fix was on the point of entering another carriage, when an idea struck him
which induced him to alter his plan.

"No, I'll stay," muttered he. "An offence has been committed on Indian soil.
I've got my man."

Just then the locomotive gave a sharp screech, and the train passed out into
the darkness of the night.


Chapter XI


IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG SECURES A CURIOUS MEANS OF
CONVEYANCE AT A FABULOUS PRICE

The train had started punctually. Among the passengers were a number of
officers, Government officials, and opium and indigo merchants, whose business
called them to the eastern coast. Passepartout rode in the same carriage with his
master, and a third passenger occupied a seat opposite to them. This was Sir
Francis Cromarty, one of Mr. Fogg's whist partners on the Mongolia, now on his
way to join his corps at Benares. Sir Francis was a tall, fair man of fifty, who had
greatly distinguished himself in the last Sepoy revolt. He made India his home,
only paying brief visits to England at rare intervals; and was almost as familiar
as a native with the customs, history, and character of India and its people. But
Phileas Fogg, who was not travelling, but only describing a circumference, took
no pains to inquire into these subjects; he was a solid body, traversing an orbit
around the terrestrial globe, according to the laws of rational mechanics. He was
at this moment calculating in his mind the number of hours spent since his
departure from London, and, had it been in his nature to make a useless
demonstration, would have rubbed his hands for satisfaction. Sir Francis
Cromarty had observed the oddity of his travelling companion--although the
only opportunity he had for studying him had been while he was dealing the
cards, and between two rubbers--and questioned himself whether a human heart
really beat beneath this cold exterior, and whether Phileas Fogg had any sense of
the beauties of nature. The brigadier-general was free to mentally confess that, of
all the eccentric persons he had ever met, none was comparable to this product
of the exact sciences.

Phileas Fogg had not concealed from Sir Francis his design of going round
the world, nor the circumstances under which he set out; and the general only
saw in the wager a useless eccentricity and a lack of sound common sense. In the
way this strange gentleman was going on, he would leave the world without
having done any good to himself or anybody else.

An hour after leaving Bombay the train had passed the viaducts and the
Island of Salcette, and had got into the open country. At Callyan they reached the
junction of the branch line which descends towards south-eastern India by
Kandallah and Pounah; and, passing Pauwell, they entered the defiles of the
mountains, with their basalt bases, and their summits crowned with thick and
verdant forests. Phileas Fogg and Sir Francis Cromarty exchanged a few words


from time to time, and now Sir Francis, reviving the conversation, observed,
"Some years ago, Mr. Fogg, you would have met with a delay at this point which
would probably have lost you your wager."

"How So, Sir Francis?"

"Because the railway stopped at the base of these mountains, which the
passengers were obliged to cross in palanquins or on ponies to Kandallah, on the
other side."

"Such a delay would not have deranged my plans in the least," said Mr.
Fogg. "I have constantly foreseen the likelihood of certain obstacles."

"But, Mr. Fogg," pursued Sir Francis, "you run the risk of having some
difficulty about this worthy fellow's adventure at the pagoda." Passepartout, his
feet comfortably wrapped in his travelling-blanket, was sound asleep and did not
dream that anybody was talking about him. "The Government is very severe
upon that kind of offence. It takes particular care that the religious customs of
the Indians should be respected, and if your servant were caught--"

"Very well, Sir Francis," replied Mr. Fogg; "if he had been caught he would
have been condemned and punished, and then would have quietly returned to
Europe. I don't see how this affair could have delayed his master."

The conversation fell again. During the night the train left the mountains
behind, and passed Nassik, and the next day proceeded over the flat, well-
cultivated country of the Khandeish, with its straggling villages, above which
rose the minarets of the pagodas. This fertile territory is watered by numerous
small rivers and limpid streams, mostly tributaries of the Godavery.

Passepartout, on waking and looking out, could not realise that he was
actually crossing India in a railway train. The locomotive, guided by an English
engineer and fed with English coal, threw out its smoke upon cotton, coffee,
nutmeg, clove, and pepper plantations, while the steam curled in spirals around
groups of palm-trees, in the midst of which were seen picturesque bungalows,
viharis (sort of abandoned monasteries), and marvellous temples enriched by the
exhaustless ornamentation of Indian architecture. Then they came upon vast
tracts extending to the horizon, with jungles inhabited by snakes and tigers,
which fled at the noise of the train; succeeded by forests penetrated by the
railway, and still haunted by elephants which, with pensive eyes, gazed at the
train as it passed. The travellers crossed, beyond Milligaum, the fatal country so
often stained with blood by the sectaries of the goddess Kali. Not far off rose
Ellora, with its graceful pagodas, and the famous Aurungabad, capital of the
ferocious Aureng-Zeb, now the chief town of one of the detached provinces of
the kingdom of the Nizam. It was thereabouts that Feringhea, the Thuggee chief,
king of the stranglers, held his sway. These ruffians, united by a secret bond,


strangled victims of every age in honour of the goddess Death, without ever
shedding blood; there was a period when this part of the country could scarcely
be travelled over without corpses being found in every direction. The English
Government has succeeded in greatly diminishing these murders, though the
Thuggees still exist, and pursue the exercise of their horrible rites.

At half-past twelve the train stopped at Burhampoor where Passepartout was
able to purchase some Indian slippers, ornamented with false pearls, in which,
with evident vanity, he proceeded to encase his feet. The travellers made a hasty
breakfast and started off for Assurghur, after skirting for a little the banks of the
small river Tapty, which empties into the Gulf of Cambray, near Surat.

Passepartout was now plunged into absorbing reverie. Up to his arrival at
Bombay, he had entertained hopes that their journey would end there; but, now
that they were plainly whirling across India at full speed, a sudden change had
come over the spirit of his dreams. His old vagabond nature returned to him; the
fantastic ideas of his youth once more took possession of him. He came to regard
his master's project as intended in good earnest, believed in the reality of the bet,
and therefore in the tour of the world and the necessity of making it without fail
within the designated period. Already he began to worry about possible delays,
and accidents which might happen on the way. He recognised himself as being
personally interested in the wager, and trembled at the thought that he might
have been the means of losing it by his unpardonable folly of the night before.
Being much less cool-headed than Mr. Fogg, he was much more restless,
counting and recounting the days passed over, uttering maledictions when the
train stopped, and accusing it of sluggishness, and mentally blaming Mr. Fogg
for not having bribed the engineer. The worthy fellow was ignorant that, while it
was possible by such means to hasten the rate of a steamer, it could not be done
on the railway.

The train entered the defiles of the Sutpour Mountains, which separate the
Khandeish from Bundelcund, towards evening. The next day Sir Francis
Cromarty asked Passepartout what time it was; to which, on consulting his
watch, he replied that it was three in the morning. This famous timepiece, always
regulated on the Greenwich meridian, which was now some seventy-seven
degrees westward, was at least four hours slow. Sir Francis corrected
Passepartout's time, whereupon the latter made the same remark that he had done
to Fix; and upon the general insisting that the watch should be regulated in each
new meridian, since he was constantly going eastward, that is in the face of the
sun, and therefore the days were shorter by four minutes for each degree gone
over, Passepartout obstinately refused to alter his watch, which he kept at
London time. It was an innocent delusion which could harm no one.


The train stopped, at eight o'clock, in the midst of a glade some fifteen miles
beyond Rothal, where there were several bungalows, and workmen's cabins. The
conductor, passing along the carriages, shouted, "Passengers will get out here!"

Phileas Fogg looked at Sir Francis Cromarty for an explanation; but the
general could not tell what meant a halt in the midst of this forest of dates and
acacias.

Passepartout, not less surprised, rushed out and speedily returned, crying:
"Monsieur, no more railway!"

"What do you mean?" asked Sir Francis.

"I mean to say that the train isn't going on."

The general at once stepped out, while Phileas Fogg calmly followed him,
and they proceeded together to the conductor.

"Where are we?" asked Sir Francis.

"At the hamlet of Kholby."

"Do we stop here?"

"Certainly. The railway isn't finished."

"What! not finished?"

"No. There's still a matter of fifty miles to be laid from here to Allahabad,
where the line begins again."

"But the papers announced the opening of the railway throughout."

"What would you have, officer? The papers were mistaken."

"Yet you sell tickets from Bombay to Calcutta," retorted Sir Francis, who
was growing warm.

"No doubt," replied the conductor; "but the passengers know that they must
provide means of transportation for themselves from Kholby to Allahabad."

Sir Francis was furious. Passepartout would willingly have knocked the
conductor down, and did not dare to look at his master.

"Sir Francis," said Mr. Fogg quietly, "we will, if you please, look about for
some means of conveyance to Allahabad."

"Mr. Fogg, this is a delay greatly to your disadvantage."

"No, Sir Francis; it was foreseen."

"What! You knew that the way--"

"Not at all; but I knew that some obstacle or other would sooner or later arise
on my route. Nothing, therefore, is lost. I have two days, which I have already
gained, to sacrifice. A steamer leaves Calcutta for Hong Kong at noon, on the
25th. This is the 22nd, and we shall reach Calcutta in time."

There was nothing to say to so confident a response.

It was but too true that the railway came to a termination at this point. The
papers were like some watches, which have a way of getting too fast, and had


been premature in their announcement of the completion of the line. The greater
part of the travellers were aware of this interruption, and, leaving the train, they
began to engage such vehicles as the village could provide four-wheeled
palkigharis, waggons drawn by zebus, carriages that looked like perambulating
pagodas, palanquins, ponies, and what not.

Mr. Fogg and Sir Francis Cromarty, after searching the village from end to
end, came back without having found anything.

"I shall go afoot," said Phileas Fogg.

Passepartout, who had now rejoined his master, made a wry grimace, as he
thought of his magnificent, but too frail Indian shoes. Happily he too had been
looking about him, and, after a moment's hesitation, said, "Monsieur, I think I
have found a means of conveyance."

"What?"

"An elephant! An elephant that belongs to an Indian who lives but a hundred
steps from here."

"Let's go and see the elephant," replied Mr. Fogg.

They soon reached a small hut, near which, enclosed within some high
palings, was the animal in question. An Indian came out of the hut, and, at their
request, conducted them within the enclosure. The elephant, which its owner had
reared, not for a beast of burden, but for warlike purposes, was _ half
domesticated. The Indian had begun already, by often irritating him, and feeding
him every three months on sugar and butter, to impart to him a ferocity not in his
nature, this method being often employed by those who train the Indian
elephants for battle. Happily, however, for Mr. Fogg, the animal's instruction in
this direction had not gone far, and the elephant still preserved his natural
gentleness. Kiouni--this was the name of the beast--could doubtless travel
rapidly for a long time, and, in default of any other means of conveyance, Mr.
Fogg resolved to hire him. But elephants are far from cheap in India, where they
are becoming scarce, the males, which alone are suitable for circus shows, are
much sought, especially as but few of them are domesticated. When therefore
Mr. Fogg proposed to the Indian to hire Kiouni, he refused point-blank. Mr.
Fogg persisted, offering the excessive sum of ten pounds an hour for the loan of
the beast to Allahabad. Refused. Twenty pounds? Refused also. Forty pounds?
Still refused. Passepartout jumped at each advance; but the Indian declined to be
tempted. Yet the offer was an alluring one, for, supposing it took the elephant
fifteen hours to reach Allahabad, his owner would receive no less than six
hundred pounds sterling.

Phileas Fogg, without getting in the least flurried, then proposed to purchase
the animal outright, and at first offered a thousand pounds for him. The Indian,


perhaps thinking he was going to make a great bargain, still refused.

Sir Francis Cromarty took Mr. Fogg aside, and begged him to reflect before
he went any further; to which that gentleman replied that he was not in the habit
of acting rashly, that a bet of twenty thousand pounds was at stake, that the
elephant was absolutely necessary to him, and that he would secure him if he
had to pay twenty times his value. Returning to the Indian, whose small, sharp
eyes, glistening with avarice, betrayed that with him it was only a question of
how great a price he could obtain. Mr. Fogg offered first twelve hundred, then
fifteen hundred, eighteen hundred, two thousand pounds. Passepartout, usually
so rubicund, was fairly white with suspense.

At two thousand pounds the Indian yielded.

"What a price, good heavens!" cried Passepartout, "for an elephant."

It only remained now to find a guide, which was comparatively easy. A
young Parsee, with an intelligent face, offered his services, which Mr. Fogg
accepted, promising so generous a reward as to materially stimulate his zeal. The
elephant was led out and equipped. The Parsee, who was an accomplished
elephant driver, covered his back with a sort of saddle-cloth, and attached to
each of his flanks some curiously uncomfortable howdahs. Phileas Fogg paid the
Indian with some banknotes which he extracted from the famous carpet-bag, a
proceeding that seemed to deprive poor Passepartout of his vitals. Then he
offered to carry Sir Francis to Allahabad, which the brigadier gratefully
accepted, as one traveller the more would not be likely to fatigue the gigantic
beast. Provisions were purchased at Kholby, and, while Sir Francis and Mr. Fogg
took the howdahs on either side, Passepartout got astride the saddle-cloth
between them. The Parsee perched himself on the elephant's neck, and at nine
o'clock they set out from the village, the animal marching off through the dense
forest of palms by the shortest cut.


Chapter XII


IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG AND HIS COMPANIONS VENTURE
ACROSS THE INDIAN FORESTS, AND WHAT ENSUED

In order to shorten the journey, the guide passed to the left of the line where
the railway was still in process of being built. This line, owing to the capricious
turnings of the Vindhia Mountains, did not pursue a straight course. The Parsee,
who was quite familiar with the roads and paths in the district, declared that they
would gain twenty miles by striking directly through the forest.

Phileas Fogg and Sir Francis Cromarty, plunged to the neck in the peculiar
howdahs provided for them, were horribly jostled by the swift trotting of the
elephant, spurred on as he was by the skilful Parsee; but they endured the
discomfort with true British phlegm, talking little, and scarcely able to catch a
glimpse of each other. As for Passepartout, who was mounted on the beast's
back, and received the direct force of each concussion as he trod along, he was
very careful, in accordance with his master's advice, to keep his tongue from
between his teeth, as it would otherwise have been bitten off short. The worthy
fellow bounced from the elephant's neck to his rump, and vaulted like a clown
on a spring-board; yet he laughed in the midst of his bouncing, and from time to
time took a piece of sugar out of his pocket, and inserted it in Kiouni's trunk,
who received it without in the least slackening his regular trot.

After two hours the guide stopped the elephant, and gave him an hour for
rest, during which Kiouni, after quenching his thirst at a neighbouring spring, set
to devouring the branches and shrubs round about him. Neither Sir Francis nor
Mr. Fogg regretted the delay, and both descended with a feeling of relief. "Why,
he's made of iron!" exclaimed the general, gazing admiringly on Kiouni.

"Of forged iron," replied Passepartout, as he set about preparing a hasty
breakfast.

At noon the Parsee gave the signal of departure. The country soon presented
a very savage aspect. Copses of dates and dwarf-palms succeeded the dense
forests; then vast, dry plains, dotted with scanty shrubs, and sown with great
blocks of syenite. All this portion of Bundelcund, which is little frequented by
travellers, is inhabited by a fanatical population, hardened in the most horrible
practices of the Hindoo faith. The English have not been able to secure complete
dominion over this territory, which is subjected to the influence of rajahs, whom
it is almost impossible to reach in their inaccessible mountain fastnesses. The
travellers several times saw bands of ferocious Indians, who, when they


perceived the elephant striding across-country, made angry and threatening
motions. The Parsee avoided them as much as possible. Few animals were
observed on the route; even the monkeys hurried from their path with
contortions and grimaces which convulsed Passepartout with laughter.

In the midst of his gaiety, however, one thought troubled the worthy servant.
What would Mr. Fogg do with the elephant when he got to Allahabad? Would he
carry him on with him? Impossible! The cost of transporting him would make
him ruinously expensive. Would he sell him, or set him free? The estimable
beast certainly deserved some consideration. Should Mr. Fogg choose to make
him, Passepartout, a present of Kiouni, he would be very much embarrassed; and
these thoughts did not cease worrying him for a long time.

The principal chain of the Vindhias was crossed by eight in the evening, and
another halt was made on the northern slope, in a ruined bungalow. They had
gone nearly twenty-five miles that day, and an equal distance still separated them
from the station of Allahabad.

The night was cold. The Parsee lit a fire in the bungalow with a few dry
branches, and the warmth was very grateful, provisions purchased at Kholby
sufficed for supper, and the travellers ate ravenously. The conversation,
beginning with a few disconnected phrases, soon gave place to loud and steady
snores. The guide watched Kiouni, who slept standing, bolstering himself
against the trunk of a large tree. Nothing occurred during the night to disturb the
slumberers, although occasional growls front panthers and chatterings of
monkeys broke the silence; the more formidable beasts made no cries or hostile
demonstration against the occupants of the bungalow. Sir Francis slept heavily,
like an honest soldier overcome with fatigue. Passepartout was wrapped in
uneasy dreams of the bouncing of the day before. As for Mr. Fogg, he slumbered
as peacefully as if he had been in his serene mansion in Saville Row.

The journey was resumed at six in the morning; the guide hoped to reach
Allahabad by evening. In that case, Mr. Fogg would only lose a part of the forty-
eight hours saved since the beginning of the tour. Kiouni, resuming his rapid
gait, soon descended the lower spurs of the Vindhias, and towards noon they
passed by the village of Kallenger, on the Cani, one of the branches of the
Ganges. The guide avoided inhabited places, thinking it safer to keep the open
country, which lies along the first depressions of the basin of the great river.
Allahabad was now only twelve miles to the north-east. They stopped under a
clump of bananas, the fruit of which, as healthy as bread and as succulent as
cream, was amply partaken of and appreciated.

At two o'clock the guide entered a thick forest which extended several miles;
he preferred to travel under cover of the woods. They had not as yet had any


unpleasant encounters, and the journey seemed on the point of being
successfully accomplished, when the elephant, becoming restless, suddenly
stopped.

It was then four o'clock.

"What's the matter?" asked Sir Francis, putting out his head.

"I don't know, officer," replied the Parsee, listening attentively to a confused
murmur which came through the thick branches.

The murmur soon became more distinct; it now seemed like a distant concert
of human voices accompanied by brass instruments. Passepartout was all eyes
and ears. Mr. Fogg patiently waited without a word. The Parsee jumped to the
ground, fastened the elephant to a tree, and plunged into the thicket. He soon
returned, saying:

"A procession of Brahmins is coming this way. We must prevent their seeing
us, if possible."

The guide unloosed the elephant and led him into a thicket, at the same time
asking the travellers not to stir. He held himself ready to bestride the animal at a
moment's notice, should flight become necessary; but he evidently thought that
the procession of the faithful would pass without perceiving them amid the thick
foliage, in which they were wholly concealed.

The discordant tones of the voices and instruments drew nearer, and now
droning songs mingled with the sound of the tambourines and cymbals. The
head of the procession soon appeared beneath the trees, a hundred paces away;
and the strange figures who performed the religious ceremony were easily
distinguished through the branches. First came the priests, with mitres on their
heads, and clothed in long lace robes. They were surrounded by men, women,
and children, who sang a kind of lugubrious psalm, interrupted at regular
intervals by the tambourines and cymbals; while behind them was drawn a car
with large wheels, the spokes of which represented serpents entwined with each
other. Upon the car, which was drawn by four richly caparisoned zebus, stood a
hideous statue with four arms, the body coloured a dull red, with haggard eyes,
dishevelled hair, protruding tongue, and lips tinted with betel. It stood upright
upon the figure of a prostrate and headless giant.

Sir Francis, recognising the statue, whispered, "The goddess Kali; the
goddess of love and death."

"Of death, perhaps," muttered back Passepartout, "but of love--that ugly old
hag? Never!"

The Parsee made a motion to keep silence.

A group of old fakirs were capering and making a wild ado round the statue;
these were striped with ochre, and covered with cuts whence their blood issued


drop by drop--stupid fanatics, who, in the great Indian ceremonies, still throw
themselves under the wheels of Juggernaut. Some Brahmins, clad in all the
sumptuousness of Oriental apparel, and leading a woman who faltered at every
step, followed. This woman was young, and as fair as a European. Her head and
neck, shoulders, ears, arms, hands, and toes were loaded down with jewels and
gems with bracelets, earrings, and rings; while a tunic bordered with gold, and
covered with a light muslin robe, betrayed the outline of her form.

The guards who followed the young woman presented a violent contrast to
her, armed as they were with naked sabres hung at their waists, and long
damascened pistols, and bearing a corpse on a palanquin. It was the body of an
old man, gorgeously arrayed in the habiliments of a rajah, wearing, as in life, a
turban embroidered with pearls, a robe of tissue of silk and gold, a scarf of
cashmere sewed with diamonds, and the magnificent weapons of a Hindoo
prince. Next came the musicians and a rearguard of capering fakirs, whose cries
sometimes drowned the noise of the instruments; these closed the procession.

Sir Francis watched the procession with a sad countenance, and, turning to
the guide, said, "A suttee."

The Parsee nodded, and put his finger to his lips. The procession slowly
wound under the trees, and soon its last ranks disappeared in the depths of the
wood. The songs gradually died away; occasionally cries were heard in the
distance, until at last all was silence again.

Phileas Fogg had heard what Sir Francis said, and, as soon as the procession
had disappeared, asked: "What is a suttee?"

"A suttee,"” returned the general, "is a human sacrifice, but a voluntary one.
The woman you have just seen will be burned tomorrow at the dawn of day."

"Oh, the scoundrels!" cried Passepartout, who could not repress his
indignation.

"And the corpse?" asked Mr. Fogg.

"Is that of the prince, her husband," said the guide; "an independent rajah of
Bundelcund."

"Is it possible," resumed Phileas Fogg, his voice betraying not the least
emotion, "that these barbarous customs still exist in India, and that the English
have been unable to put a stop to them?"

"These sacrifices do not occur in the larger portion of India," replied Sir
Francis; "but we have no power over these savage territories, and especially here
in Bundelcund. The whole district north of the Vindhias is the theatre of
incessant murders and pillage."

"The poor wretch!" exclaimed Passepartout, "to be burned alive!"

"Yes," returned Sir Francis, "burned alive. And, if she were not, you cannot


conceive what treatment she would be obliged to submit to from her relatives.
They would shave off her hair, feed her on a scanty allowance of rice, treat her
with contempt; she would be looked upon as an unclean creature, and would die
in some corner, like a scurvy dog. The prospect of so frightful an existence
drives these poor creatures to the sacrifice much more than love or religious
fanaticism. Sometimes, however, the sacrifice is really voluntary, and it requires
the active interference of the Government to prevent it. Several years ago, when
I was living at Bombay, a young widow asked permission of the governor to be
bumed along with her husband's body; but, as you may imagine, he refused. The
woman left the town, took refuge with an independent rajah, and there carried
out her self-devoted purpose."

While Sir Francis was speaking, the guide shook his head several times, and
now said: "The sacrifice which will take place tomorrow at dawn is not a
voluntary one."

"How do you know?"

"Everybody knows about this affair in Bundelcund."

"But the wretched creature did not seem to be making any resistance,"
observed Sir Francis.

"That was because they had intoxicated her with fumes of hemp and opium."

"But where are they taking her?"

"To the pagoda of Pillaji, two miles from here; she will pass the night there."

"And the sacrifice will take place--"

"Tomorrow, at the first light of dawn."

The guide now led the elephant out of the thicket, and leaped upon his neck.
Just at the moment that he was about to urge Kiouni forward with a peculiar
whistle, Mr. Fogg stopped him, and, turning to Sir Francis Cromarty, said,
"Suppose we save this woman."

"Save the woman, Mr. Fogg!"

"I have yet twelve hours to spare; I can devote them to that."

"Why, you are a man of heart!"

"Sometimes," replied Phileas Fogg, quietly; "when I have the time."


Chapter XIII


IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT RECEIVES A NEW PROOF THAT
FORTUNE FAVORS THE BRAVE

The project was a bold one, full of difficulty, perhaps impracticable. Mr.
Fogg was going to risk life, or at least liberty, and therefore the success of his
tour. But he did not hesitate, and he found in Sir Francis Cromarty an
enthusiastic ally.

As for Passepartout, he was ready for anything that might be proposed. His
master's idea charmed him; he perceived a heart, a soul, under that icy exterior.
He began to love Phileas Fogg.

There remained the guide: what course would he adopt? Would he not take
part with the Indians? In default of his assistance, it was necessary to be assured
of his neutrality.

Sir Francis frankly put the question to him.

"Officers," replied the guide, "I am a Parsee, and this woman is a Parsee.
Command me as you will."

"Excellent!" said Mr. Fogg.

"However," resumed the guide, "it is certain, not only that we shall risk our
lives, but horrible tortures, if we are taken."

"That is foreseen," replied Mr. Fogg. "I think we must wait till night before
acting.”

"T think so," said the guide.

The worthy Indian then gave some account of the victim, who, he said, was a
celebrated beauty of the Parsee race, and the daughter of a wealthy Bombay
merchant. She had received a thoroughly English education in that city, and,
from her manners and intelligence, would be thought an European. Her name
was Aouda. Left an orphan, she was married against her will to the old rajah of
Bundelcund; and, knowing the fate that awaited her, she escaped, was retaken,
and devoted by the rajah's relatives, who had an interest in her death, to the
sacrifice from which it seemed she could not escape.

The Parsee's narrative only confirmed Mr. Fogg and his companions in their
generous design. It was decided that the guide should direct the elephant towards
the pagoda of Pillaji, which he accordingly approached as quickly as possible.
They halted, half an hour afterwards, in a copse, some five hundred feet from the
pagoda, where they were well concealed; but they could hear the groans and
cries of the fakirs distinctly.


They then discussed the means of getting at the victim. The guide was
familiar with the pagoda of Pillaji, in which, as he declared, the young woman
was imprisoned. Could they enter any of its doors while the whole party of
Indians was plunged in a drunken sleep, or was it safer to attempt to make a hole
in the walls? This could only be determined at the moment and the place
themselves; but it was certain that the abduction must be made that night, and
not when, at break of day, the victim was led to her funeral pyre. Then no human
intervention could save her.

As soon as night fell, about six o'clock, they decided to make a
reconnaissance around the pagoda. The cries of the fakirs were just ceasing; the
Indians were in the act of plunging themselves into the drunkenness caused by
liquid opium mingled with hemp, and it might be possible to slip between them
to the temple itself.

The Parsee, leading the others, noiselessly crept through the wood, and in ten
minutes they found themselves on the banks of a small stream, whence, by the
light of the rosin torches, they perceived a pyre of wood, on the top of which lay
the embalmed body of the rajah, which was to be burned with his wife. The
pagoda, whose minarets loomed above the trees in the deepening dusk, stood a
hundred steps away.

"Come!" whispered the guide.

He slipped more cautiously than ever through the brush, followed by his
companions; the silence around was only broken by the low murmuring of the
wind among the branches.

Soon the Parsee stopped on the borders of the glade, which was lit up by the
torches. The ground was covered by groups of the Indians, motionless in their
drunken sleep; it seemed a battlefield strewn with the dead. Men, women, and
children lay together.

In the background, among the trees, the pagoda of Pillaji loomed distinctly.
Much to the guide's disappointment, the guards of the rajah, lighted by torches,
were watching at the doors and marching to and fro with naked sabres; probably
the priests, too, were watching within.

The Parsee, now convinced that it was impossible to force an entrance to the
temple, advanced no farther, but led his companions back again. Phileas Fogg
and Sir Francis Cromarty also saw that nothing could be attempted in that
direction. They stopped, and engaged in a whispered colloquy.

"It is only eight now," said the brigadier, "and these guards may also go to
sleep."

"It is not impossible," returned the Parsee.

They lay down at the foot of a tree, and waited.


The time seemed long; the guide ever and anon left them to take an
observation on the edge of the wood, but the guards watched steadily by the
glare of the torches, and a dim light crept through the windows of the pagoda.

They waited till midnight; but no change took place among the guards, and it
became apparent that their yielding to sleep could not be counted on. The other
plan must be carried out; an opening in the walls of the pagoda must be made. It
remained to ascertain whether the priests were watching by the side of their
victim as assiduously as were the soldiers at the door.

After a last consultation, the guide announced that he was ready for the
attempt, and advanced, followed by the others. They took a roundabout way, so
as to get at the pagoda on the rear. They reached the walls about half-past
twelve, without having met anyone; here there was no guard, nor were there
either windows or doors.

The night was dark. The moon, on the wane, scarcely left the horizon, and
was covered with heavy clouds; the height of the trees deepened the darkness.

It was not enough to reach the walls; an opening in them must be
accomplished, and to attain this purpose the party only had their pocket-knives.
Happily the temple walls were built of brick and wood, which could be
penetrated with little difficulty; after one brick had been taken out, the rest
would yield easily.

They set noiselessly to work, and the Parsee on one side and Passepartout on
the other began to loosen the bricks so as to make an aperture two feet wide.
They were getting on rapidly, when suddenly a cry was heard in the interior of
the temple, followed almost instantly by other cries replying from the outside.
Passepartout and the guide stopped. Had they been heard? Was the alarm being
given? Common prudence urged them to retire, and they did so, followed by
Phileas Fogg and Sir Francis. They again hid themselves in the wood, and
waited till the disturbance, whatever it might be, ceased, holding themselves
ready to resume their attempt without delay. But, awkwardly enough, the guards
now appeared at the rear of the temple, and there installed themselves, in
readiness to prevent a surprise.

It would be difficult to describe the disappointment of the party, thus
interrupted in their work. They could not now reach the victim; how, then, could
they save her? Sir Francis shook his fists, Passepartout was beside himself, and
the guide gnashed his teeth with rage. The tranquil Fogg waited, without
betraying any emotion.

"We have nothing to do but to go away," whispered Sir Francis.

"Nothing but to go away," echoed the guide.

"Stop," said Fogg. "I am only due at Allahabad tomorrow before noon."


"But what can you hope to do?" asked Sir Francis. "In a few hours it will be
daylight, and--"

"The chance which now seems lost may present itself at the last moment."

Sir Francis would have liked to read Phileas Fogg's eyes. What was this cool
Englishman thinking of? Was he planning to make a rush for the young woman
at the very moment of the sacrifice, and boldly snatch her from her executioners?

This would be utter folly, and it was hard to admit that Fogg was such a fool.
Sir Francis consented, however, to remain to the end of this terrible drama. The
guide led them to the rear of the glade, where they were able to observe the
sleeping groups.

Meanwhile Passepartout, who had perched himself on the lower branches of
a tree, was resolving an idea which had at first struck him like a flash, and which
was now firmly lodged in his brain.

He had commenced by saying to himself, "What folly!" and then he
repeated, "Why not, after all? It's a chance perhaps the only one; and with such
sots!" Thinking thus, he slipped, with the suppleness of a serpent, to the lowest
branches, the ends of which bent almost to the ground.

The hours passed, and the lighter shades now announced the approach of
day, though it was not yet light. This was the moment. The slumbering multitude
became animated, the tambourines sounded, songs and cries arose; the hour of
the sacrifice had come. The doors of the pagoda swung open, and a bright light
escaped from its interior, in the midst of which Mr. Fogg and Sir Francis espied
the victim. She seemed, having shaken off the stupor of intoxication, to be
striving to escape from her executioner. Sir Francis's heart throbbed; and,
convulsively seizing Mr. Fogg's hand, found in it an open knife. Just at this
moment the crowd began to move. The young woman had again fallen into a
stupor caused by the fumes of hemp, and passed among the fakirs, who escorted
her with their wild, religious cries.

Phileas Fogg and his companions, mingling in the rear ranks of the crowd,
followed; and in two minutes they reached the banks of the stream, and stopped
fifty paces from the pyre, upon which still lay the rajah's corpse. In the semi-
obscurity they saw the victim, quite senseless, stretched out beside her husband's
body. Then a torch was brought, and the wood, heavily soaked with oil, instantly
took fire.

At this moment Sir Francis and the guide seized Phileas Fogg, who, in an
instant of mad generosity, was about to rush upon the pyre. But he had quickly
pushed them aside, when the whole scene suddenly changed. A cry of terror
arose. The whole multitude prostrated themselves, terror-stricken, on the ground.

The old rajah was not dead, then, since he rose of a sudden, like a spectre,


took up his wife in his arms, and descended from the pyre in the midst of the
clouds of smoke, which only heightened his ghostly appearance.

Fakirs and soldiers and priests, seized with instant terror, lay there, with their
faces on the ground, not daring to lift their eyes and behold such a prodigy.

The inanimate victim was borne along by the vigorous arms which supported
her, and which she did not seem in the least to burden. Mr. Fogg and Sir Francis
stood erect, the Parsee bowed his head, and Passepartout was, no doubt, scarcely
less stupefied.

The resuscitated rajah approached Sir Francis and Mr. Fogg, and, in an
abrupt tone, said, "Let us be off!"

It was Passepartout himself, who had slipped upon the pyre in the midst of
the smoke and, profiting by the still overhanging darkness, had delivered the
young woman from death! It was Passepartout who, playing his part with a
happy audacity, had passed through the crowd amid the general terror.

A moment after all four of the party had disappeared in the woods, and the
elephant was bearing them away at a rapid pace. But the cries and noise, and a
ball which whizzed through Phileas Fogg's hat, apprised them that the trick had
been discovered.

The old rajah's body, indeed, now appeared upon the burning pyre; and the
priests, recovered from their terror, perceived that an abduction had taken place.
They hastened into the forest, followed by the soldiers, who fired a volley after
the fugitives; but the latter rapidly increased the distance between them, and ere
long found themselves beyond the reach of the bullets and arrows.


Chapter XIV


IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG DESCENDS THE WHOLE LENGTH OF
THE BEAUTIFUL VALLEY OF THE GANGES WITHOUT EVER
THINKING OF SEEING IT

The rash exploit had been accomplished; and for an hour Passepartout
laughed gaily at his success. Sir Francis pressed the worthy fellow's hand, and
his master said, "Well done!" which, from him, was high commendation; to
which Passepartout replied that all the credit of the affair belonged to Mr. Fogg.
As for him, he had only been struck with a "queer" idea; and he laughed to think
that for a few moments he, Passepartout, the ex-gymnast, ex-sergeant fireman,
had been the spouse of a charming woman, a venerable, embalmed rajah! As for
the young Indian woman, she had been unconscious throughout of what was
passing, and now, wrapped up in a travelling-blanket, was reposing in one of the
howdahs.

The elephant, thanks to the skilful guidance of the Parsee, was advancing
rapidly through the still darksome forest, and, an hour after leaving the pagoda,
had crossed a vast plain. They made a halt at seven o'clock, the young woman
being still in a state of complete prostration. The guide made her drink a little
brandy and water, but the drowsiness which stupefied her could not yet be
shaken off. Sir Francis, who was familiar with the effects of the intoxication
produced by the fumes of hemp, reassured his companions on her account. But
he was more disturbed at the prospect of her future fate. He told Phileas Fogg
that, should Aouda remain in India, she would inevitably fall again into the
hands of her executioners. These fanatics were scattered throughout the county,
and would, despite the English police, recover their victim at Madras, Bombay,
or Calcutta. She would only be safe by quitting India for ever.

Phileas Fogg replied that he would reflect upon the matter.

The station at Allahabad was reached about ten o'clock, and, the interrupted
line of railway being resumed, would enable them to reach Calcutta in less than
twenty-four hours. Phileas Fogg would thus be able to arrive in time to take the
steamer which left Calcutta the next day, October 25th, at noon, for Hong Kong.

The young woman was placed in one of the waiting-rooms of the station,
whilst Passepartout was charged with purchasing for her various articles of
toilet, a dress, shawl, and some furs; for which his master gave him unlimited
credit. Passepartout started off forthwith, and found himself in the streets of
Allahabad, that is, the City of God, one of the most venerated in India, being


built at the junction of the two sacred rivers, Ganges and Jumna, the waters of
which attract pilgrims from every part of the peninsula. The Ganges, according
to the legends of the Ramayana, rises in heaven, whence, owing to Brahma's
agency, it descends to the earth.

Passepartout made it a point, as he made his purchases, to take a good look at
the city. It was formerly defended by a noble fort, which has since become a
state prison; its commerce has dwindled away, and Passepartout in vain looked
about him for such a bazaar as he used to frequent in Regent Street. At last he
came upon an elderly, crusty Jew, who sold second-hand articles, and from
whom he purchased a dress of Scotch stuff, a large mantle, and a fine otter-skin
pelisse, for which he did not hesitate to pay seventy-five pounds. He then
returned triumphantly to the station.

The influence to which the priests of Pillaji had subjected Aouda began
gradually to yield, and she became more herself, so that her fine eyes resumed
all their soft Indian expression.

When the poet-king, Ucaf Uddaul, celebrates the charms of the queen of
Ahmehnagara, he speaks thus:

"Her shining tresses, divided in two parts, encircle the harmonious contour of
her white and delicate cheeks, brilliant in their glow and freshness. Her ebony
brows have the form and charm of the bow of Kama, the god of love, and
beneath her long silken lashes the purest reflections and a celestial light swim, as
in the sacred lakes of Himalaya, in the black pupils of her great clear eyes. Her
teeth, fine, equal, and white, glitter between her smiling lips like dewdrops in a
passion-flower's half-enveloped breast. Her delicately formed ears, her vermilion
hands, her little feet, curved and tender as the lotus-bud, glitter with the
brilliancy of the loveliest pearls of Ceylon, the most dazzling diamonds of
Golconda. Her narrow and supple waist, which a hand may clasp around, sets
forth the outline of her rounded figure and the beauty of her bosom, where youth
in its flower displays the wealth of its treasures; and beneath the silken folds of
her tunic she seems to have been modelled in pure silver by the godlike hand of
Vicvarcarma, the immortal sculptor."

It is enough to say, without applying this poetical rhapsody to Aouda, that
she was a charming woman, in all the European acceptation of the phrase. She
spoke English with great purity, and the guide had not exaggerated in saying that
the young Parsee had been transformed by her bringing up.

The train was about to start from Allahabad, and Mr. Fogg proceeded to pay
the guide the price agreed upon for his service, and not a farthing more; which
astonished Passepartout, who remembered all that his master owed to the guide's
devotion. He had, indeed, risked his life in the adventure at Pillaji, and, if he


should be caught afterwards by the Indians, he would with difficulty escape their
vengeance. Kiouni, also, must be disposed of. What should be done with the
elephant, which had been so dearly purchased? Phileas Fogg had already
determined this question.

"Parsee," said he to the guide, "you have been serviceable and devoted. I
have paid for your service, but not for your devotion. Would you like to have this
elephant? He is yours."

The guide's eyes glistened.

"Your honour is giving me a fortune!" cried he.

"Take him, guide," returned Mr. Fogg, "and I shall still be your debtor."

"Good!" exclaimed Passepartout. "Take him, friend. Kiouni is a brave and
faithful beast." And, going up to the elephant, he gave him several lumps of
sugar, saying, "Here, Kiouni, here, here."

The elephant grunted out his satisfaction, and, clasping Passepartout around
the waist with his trunk, lifted him as high as his head. Passepartout, not in the
least alarmed, caressed the animal, which replaced him gently on the ground.

Soon after, Phileas Fogg, Sir Francis Cromarty, and Passepartout, installed in
a carriage with Aouda, who had the best seat, were whirling at full speed
towards Benares. It was a run of eighty miles, and was accomplished in two
hours. During the journey, the young woman fully recovered her senses. What
was her astonishment to find herself in this carriage, on the railway, dressed in
European habiliments, and with travellers who were quite strangers to her! Her
companions first set about fully reviving her with a little liquor, and then Sir
Francis narrated to her what had passed, dwelling upon the courage with which
Phileas Fogg had not hesitated to risk his life to save her, and recounting the
happy sequel of the venture, the result of Passepartout's rash idea. Mr. Fogg said
nothing; while Passepartout, abashed, kept repeating that "it wasn't worth
telling.”

Aouda pathetically thanked her deliverers, rather with tears than words; her
fine eyes interpreted her gratitude better than her lips. Then, as her thoughts
strayed back to the scene of the sacrifice, and recalled the dangers which still
menaced her, she shuddered with terror.

Phileas Fogg understood what was passing in Aouda's mind, and offered, in
order to reassure her, to escort her to Hong Kong, where she might remain safely
until the affair was hushed up--an offer which she eagerly and gratefully
accepted. She had, it seems, a Parsee relation, who was one of the principal
merchants of Hong Kong, which is wholly an English city, though on an island
on the Chinese coast.

At half-past twelve the train stopped at Benares. The Brahmin legends assert


that this city is built on the site of the ancient Casi, which, like Mahomet's tomb,
was once suspended between heaven and earth; though the Benares of to-day,
which the Orientalists call the Athens of India, stands quite unpoetically on the
solid earth, Passepartout caught glimpses of its brick houses and clay huts,
giving an aspect of desolation to the place, as the train entered it.

Benares was Sir Francis Cromarty's destination, the troops he was rejoining
being encamped some miles northward of the city. He bade adieu to Phileas
Fogg, wishing him all success, and expressing the hope that he would come that
way again in a less original but more profitable fashion. Mr. Fogg lightly pressed
him by the hand. The parting of Aouda, who did not forget what she owed to Sir
Francis, betrayed more warmth; and, as for Passepartout, he received a hearty
shake of the hand from the gallant general.

The railway, on leaving Benares, passed for a while along the valley of the
Ganges. Through the windows of their carriage the travellers had glimpses of the
diversified landscape of Behar, with its mountains clothed in verdure, its fields
of barley, wheat, and corn, its jungles peopled with green alligators, its neat
villages, and its still thickly-leaved forests. Elephants were bathing in the waters
of the sacred river, and groups of Indians, despite the advanced season and chilly
air, were performing solemnly their pious ablutions. These were fervent
Brahmins, the bitterest foes of Buddhism, their deities being Vishnu, the solar
god, Shiva, the divine impersonation of natural forces, and Brahma, the supreme
ruler of priests and legislators. What would these divinities think of India,
anglicised as it is to-day, with steamers whistling and scudding along the
Ganges, frightening the gulls which float upon its surface, the turtles swarming
along its banks, and the faithful dwelling upon its borders?

The panorama passed before their eyes like a flash, save when the steam
concealed it fitfully from the view; the travellers could scarcely discern the fort
of Chupenie, twenty miles south-westward from Benares, the ancient stronghold
of the rajahs of Behar; or Ghazipur and its famous rose-water factories; or the
tomb of Lord Cornwallis, rising on the left bank of the Ganges; the fortified
town of Buxar, or Patna, a large manufacturing and trading-place, where is held
the principal opium market of India; or Monghir, a more than European town,
for it is as English as Manchester or Birmingham, with its iron foundries,
edgetool factories, and high chimneys puffing clouds of black smoke
heavenward.

Night came on; the train passed on at full speed, in the midst of the roaring
of the tigers, bears, and wolves which fled before the locomotive; and the
marvels of Bengal, Golconda ruined Gour, Murshedabad, the ancient capital,
Burdwan, Hugly, and the French town of Chandernagor, where Passepartout


would have been proud to see his country's flag flying, were hidden from their
view in the darkness.

Calcutta was reached at seven in the morning, and the packet left for Hong
Kong at noon; so that Phileas Fogg had five hours before him.

According to his journal, he was due at Calcutta on the 25th of October, and
that was the exact date of his actual arrival. He was therefore neither behind-
hand nor ahead of time. The two days gained between London and Bombay had
been lost, as has been seen, in the journey across India. But it is not to be
supposed that Phileas Fogg regretted them.


Chapter XV


IN WHICH THE BAG OF BANKNOTES DISGORGES SOME
THOUSANDS OF POUNDS MORE

The train entered the station, and Passepartout jumping out first, was
followed by Mr. Fogg, who assisted his fair companion to descend. Phileas Fogg
intended to proceed at once to the Hong Kong steamer, in order to get Aouda
comfortably settled for the voyage. He was unwilling to leave her while they
were still on dangerous ground.

Just as he was leaving the station a policeman came up to him, and said, "Mr.
Phileas Fogg?"

"Tam he."

"Is this man your servant?" added the policeman, pointing to Passepartout.

"Yes."

"Be so good, both of you, as to follow me."

Mr. Fogg betrayed no surprise whatever. The policeman was a representative
of the law, and law is sacred to an Englishman. Passepartout tried to reason
about the matter, but the policeman tapped him with his stick, and Mr. Fogg
made him a signal to obey.

"May this young lady go with us?" asked he.

"She may," replied the policeman.

Mr. Fogg, Aouda, and Passepartout were conducted to a palkigahri, a sort of
four-wheeled carriage, drawn by two horses, in which they took their places and
were driven away. No one spoke during the twenty minutes which elapsed before
they reached their destination. They first passed through the "black town," with
its narrow streets, its miserable, dirty huts, and squalid population; then through
the "European town," which presented a relief in its bright brick mansions,
shaded by coconut-trees and bristling with masts, where, although it was early
moming, elegantly dressed horsemen and handsome equipages were passing
back and forth.

The carriage stopped before a modest-looking house, which, however, did
not have the appearance of a private mansion. The policeman having requested
his prisoners for so, truly, they might be called-to descend, conducted them into
a room with barred windows, and said: "You will appear before Judge Obadiah
at half-past eight."

He then retired, and closed the door.

"Why, we are prisoners!" exclaimed Passepartout, falling into a chair.


Aouda, with an emotion she tried to conceal, said to Mr. Fogg: "Sir, you
must leave me to my fate! It is on my account that you receive this treatment, it
is for having saved me!"

Phileas Fogg contented himself with saying that it was impossible. It was
quite unlikely that he should be arrested for preventing a suttee. The
complainants would not dare present themselves with such a charge. There was
some mistake. Moreover, he would not, in any event, abandon Aouda, but would
escort her to Hong Kong.

"But the steamer leaves at noon!" observed Passepartout, nervously.

"We shall be on board by noon," replied his master, placidly.

It was said so positively that Passepartout could not help muttering to
himself, "Parbleu that's certain! Before noon we shall be on board." But he was
by no means reassured.

At half-past eight the door opened, the policeman appeared, and, requesting
them to follow him, led the way to an adjoining hall. It was evidently a court-
room, and a crowd of Europeans and natives already occupied the rear of the
apartment.

Mr. Fogg and his two companions took their places on a bench opposite the
desks of the magistrate and his clerk. Immediately after, Judge Obadiah, a fat,
round man, followed by the clerk, entered. He proceeded to take down a wig
which was hanging on a nail, and put it hurriedly on his head.

"The first case," said he. Then, putting his hand to his head, he exclaimed,
"Heh! This is not my wig!"

"No, your worship," returned the clerk, "it is mine."

"My dear Mr. Oysterpuff, how can a judge give a wise sentence in a clerk's
wig?"

The wigs were exchanged.

Passepartout was getting nervous, for the hands on the face of the big clock
over the judge seemed to go around with terrible rapidity.

"The first case," repeated Judge Obadiah.

"Phileas Fogg?" demanded Oysterpuff.

"I am here," replied Mr. Fogg.

"Passepartout?"

"Present," responded Passepartout.

"Good," said the judge. "You have been looked for, prisoners, for two days
on the trains from Bombay."

"But of what are we accused?" asked Passepartout, impatiently.

"You are about to be informed."

"Tam an English subject, sir," said Mr. Fogg, "and I have the right--"


"Have you been ill-treated?"

"Not at all."

"Very well; let the complainants come in."

A door was swung open by order of the judge, and three Indian priests
entered.

"That's it," muttered Passepartout; "these are the rogues who were going to
burn our young lady."

The priests took their places in front of the judge, and the clerk proceeded to
read in a loud voice a complaint of sacrilege against Phileas Fogg and his
servant, who were accused of having violated a place held consecrated by the
Brahmin religion.

"You hear the charge?" asked the judge.

"Yes, sir," replied Mr. Fogg, consulting his watch, "and I admit it."

"You admit it?"

"I admit it, and I wish to hear these priests admit, in their turn, what they
were going to do at the pagoda of Pillaji."

The priests looked at each other; they did not seem to understand what was
said.

"Yes," cried Passepartout, warmly; "at the pagoda of Pillaji, where they were
on the point of burning their victim."

The judge stared with astonishment, and the priests were stupefied.

"What victim?" said Judge Obadiah. "Burn whom? In Bombay itself?"

"Bombay?" cried Passepartout.

"Certainly. We are not talking of the pagoda of Pillaji, but of the pagoda of
Malabar Hill, at Bombay."

"And as a proof," added the clerk, "here are the desecrator's very shoes,
which he left behind him."

Whereupon he placed a pair of shoes on his desk.

"My shoes!" cried Passepartout, in his surprise permitting this imprudent
exclamation to escape him.

The confusion of master and man, who had quite forgotten the affair at
Bombay, for which they were now detained at Calcutta, may be imagined.

Fix the detective, had foreseen the advantage which Passepartout's escapade
gave him, and, delaying his departure for twelve hours, had consulted the priests
of Malabar Hill. Knowing that the English authorities dealt very severely with
this kind of misdemeanour, he promised them a goodly sum in damages, and
sent them forward to Calcutta by the next train. Owing to the delay caused by the
rescue of the young widow, Fix and the priests reached the Indian capital before
Mr. Fogg and his servant, the magistrates having been already warned by a


dispatch to arrest them should they arrive. Fix's disappointment when he learned
that Phileas Fogg had not made his appearance in Calcutta may be imagined. He
made up his mind that the robber had stopped somewhere on the route and taken
refuge in the southern provinces. For twenty-four hours Fix watched the station
with feverish anxiety; at last he was rewarded by seeing Mr. Fogg and
Passepartout arrive, accompanied by a young woman, whose presence he was
wholly at a loss to explain. He hastened for a policeman; and this was how the
party came to be arrested and brought before Judge Obadiah.

Had Passepartout been a little less preoccupied, he would have espied the
detective ensconced in a corner of the court-room, watching the proceedings
with an interest easily understood; for the warrant had failed to reach him at
Calcutta, as it had done at Bombay and Suez.

Judge Obadiah had unfortunately caught Passepartout's rash exclamation,
which the poor fellow would have given the world to recall.

"The facts are admitted?" asked the judge.

"Admitted," replied Mr. Fogg, coldly.

"Inasmuch," resumed the judge, "as the English law protects equally and
sternly the religions of the Indian people, and as the man Passepartout has
admitted that he violated the sacred pagoda of Malabar Hill, at Bombay, on the
20th of October, I condemn the said Passepartout to imprisonment for fifteen
days and a fine of three hundred pounds."

"Three hundred pounds!" cried Passepartout, startled at the largeness of the
sum.

"Silence!" shouted the constable.

"And inasmuch," continued the judge, "as it is not proved that the act was not
done by the connivance of the master with the servant, and as the master in any
case must be held responsible for the acts of his paid servant, I condemn Phileas
Fogg to a week's imprisonment and a fine of one hundred and fifty pounds."

Fix rubbed his hands softly with satisfaction; if Phileas Fogg could be
detained in Calcutta a week, it would be more than time for the warrant to arrive.
Passepartout was stupefied. This sentence ruined his master. A wager of twenty
thousand pounds lost, because he, like a precious fool, had gone into that
abominable pagoda!

Phileas Fogg, as self-composed as if the judgment did not in the least
concern him, did not even lift his eyebrows while it was being pronounced. Just
as the clerk was calling the next case, he rose, and said, "I offer bail."

"You have that right," returned the judge.

Fix's blood ran cold, but he resumed his composure when he heard the judge
announce that the bail required for each prisoner would be one thousand pounds.


"I will pay it at once," said Mr. Fogg, taking a roll of bank-bills from the
carpet-bag, which Passepartout had by him, and placing them on the clerk's desk.

"This sum will be restored to you upon your release from prison," said the
judge. "Meanwhile, you are liberated on bail."

"Come!" said Phileas Fogg to his servant.

"But let them at least give me back my shoes!" cried Passepartout angrily.

"Ah, these are pretty dear shoes!" he muttered, as they were handed to him.
"More than a thousand pounds apiece; besides, they pinch my feet."

Mr. Fogg, offering his arm to Aouda, then departed, followed by the
crestfallen Passepartout. Fix still nourished hopes that the robber would not,
after all, leave the two thousand pounds behind him, but would decide to serve
out his week in jail, and issued forth on Mr. Fogg's traces. That gentleman took a
carriage, and the party were soon landed on one of the quays.

The Rangoon was moored half a mile off in the harbour, its signal of
departure hoisted at the mast-head. Eleven o'clock was striking; Mr. Fogg was an
hour in advance of time. Fix saw them leave the carriage and push off in a boat
for the steamer, and stamped his feet with disappointment.

"The rascal is off, after all!" he exclaimed. "Two thousand pounds sacrificed!
He's as prodigal as a thief! I'll follow him to the end of the world if necessary;
but, at the rate he is going on, the stolen money will soon be exhausted."

The detective was not far wrong in making this conjecture. Since leaving
London, what with travelling expenses, bribes, the purchase of the elephant,
bails, and fines, Mr. Fogg had already spent more than five thousand pounds on
the way, and the percentage of the sum recovered from the bank robber promised
to the detectives, was rapidly diminishing.


Chapter XVI


IN WHICH FIX DOES NOT SEEM TO UNDERSTAND IN THE LEAST
WHAT IS SAID TO HIM

The Rangoon--one of the Peninsular and Oriental Company's boats plying in
the Chinese and Japanese seas--was a screw steamer, built of iron, weighing
about seventeen hundred and seventy tons, and with engines of four hundred
horse-power. She was as fast, but not as well fitted up, as the Mongolia, and
Aouda was not as comfortably provided for on board of her as Phileas Fogg
could have wished. However, the trip from Calcutta to Hong Kong only
comprised some three thousand five hundred miles, occupying from ten to
twelve days, and the young woman was not difficult to please.

During the first days of the journey Aouda became better acquainted with her
protector, and constantly gave evidence of her deep gratitude for what he had
done. The phlegmatic gentleman listened to her, apparently at least, with
coldness, neither his voice nor his manner betraying the slightest emotion; but he
seemed to be always on the watch that nothing should be wanting to Aouda's
comfort. He visited her regularly each day at certain hours, not so much to talk
himself, as to sit and hear her talk. He treated her with the strictest politeness,
but with the precision of an automaton, the movements of which had been
arranged for this purpose. Aouda did not quite know what to make of him,
though Passepartout had given her some hints of his master's eccentricity, and
made her smile by telling her of the wager which was sending him round the
world. After all, she owed Phileas Fogg her life, and she always regarded him
through the exalting medium of her gratitude.

Aouda confirmed the Parsee guide's narrative of her touching history. She
did, indeed, belong to the highest of the native races of India. Many of the Parsee
merchants have made great fortunes there by dealing in cotton; and one of them,
Sir Jametsee Jeejeebhoy, was made a baronet by the English government. Aouda
was a relative of this great man, and it was his cousin, Jeejeeh, whom she hoped
to join at Hong Kong. Whether she would find a protector in him she could not
tell; but Mr. Fogg essayed to calm her anxieties, and to assure her that everything
would be mathematically--he used the very word--arranged. Aouda fastened her
great eyes, "clear as the sacred lakes of the Himalaya," upon him; but the
intractable Fogg, as reserved as ever, did not seem at all inclined to throw
himself into this lake.

The first few days of the voyage passed prosperously, amid favourable


weather and propitious winds, and they soon came in sight of the great
Andaman, the principal of the islands in the Bay of Bengal, with its picturesque
Saddle Peak, two thousand four hundred feet high, looming above the waters.
The steamer passed along near the shores, but the savage Papuans, who are in
the lowest scale of humanity, but are not, as has been asserted, cannibals, did not
make their appearance.

The panorama of the islands, as they steamed by them, was superb. Vast
forests of palms, arecs, bamboo, teakwood, of the gigantic mimosa, and tree-like
ferns covered the foreground, while behind, the graceful outlines of the
mountains were traced against the sky; and along the coasts swarmed by
thousands the precious swallows whose nests furnish a luxurious dish to the
tables of the Celestial Empire. The varied landscape afforded by the Andaman
Islands was soon passed, however, and the Rangoon rapidly approached the
Straits of Malacca, which gave access to the China seas.

What was detective Fix, so unluckily drawn on from country to country,
doing all this while? He had managed to embark on the Rangoon at Calcutta
without being seen by Passepartout, after leaving orders that, if the warrant
should arrive, it should be forwarded to him at Hong Kong; and he hoped to
conceal his presence to the end of the voyage. It would have been difficult to
explain why he was on board without awakening Passepartout's suspicions, who
thought him still at Bombay. But necessity impelled him, nevertheless, to renew
his acquaintance with the worthy servant, as will be seen.

All the detective's hopes and wishes were now centred on Hong Kong; for
the steamer's stay at Singapore would be too brief to enable him to take any steps
there. The arrest must be made at Hong Kong, or the robber would probably
escape him for ever. Hong Kong was the last English ground on which he would
set foot; beyond, China, Japan, America offered to Fogg an almost certain
refuge. If the warrant should at last make its appearance at Hong Kong, Fix
could arrest him and give him into the hands of the local police, and there would
be no further trouble. But beyond Hong Kong, a simple warrant would be of no
avail; an extradition warrant would be necessary, and that would result in delays
and obstacles, of which the rascal would take advantage to elude justice.

Fix thought over these probabilities during the long hours which he spent in
his cabin, and kept repeating to himself, "Now, either the warrant will be at
Hong Kong, in which case I shall arrest my man, or it will not be there; and this
time it is absolutely necessary that I should delay his departure. I have failed at
Bombay, and I have failed at Calcutta; if I fail at Hong Kong, my reputation is
lost: Cost what it may, I must succeed! But how shall I prevent his departure, if
that should turn out to be my last resource?"


Fix made up his mind that, if worst came to worst, he would make a
confidant of Passepartout, and tell him what kind of a fellow his master really
was. That Passepartout was not Fogg's accomplice, he was very certain. The
servant, enlightened by his disclosure, and afraid of being himself implicated in
the crime, would doubtless become an ally of the detective. But this method was
a dangerous one, only to be employed when everything else had failed. A word
from Passepartout to his master would ruin all. The detective was therefore in a
sore strait. But suddenly a new idea struck him. The presence of Aouda on the
Rangoon, in company with Phileas Fogg, gave him new material for reflection.

Who was this woman? What combination of events had made her Fogg's
travelling companion? They had evidently met somewhere between Bombay and
Calcutta; but where? Had they met accidentally, or had Fogg gone into the
interior purposely in quest of this charming damsel? Fix was fairly puzzled. He
asked himself whether there had not been a wicked elopement; and this idea so
impressed itself upon his mind that he determined to make use of the supposed
intrigue. Whether the young woman were married or not, he would be able to
create such difficulties for Mr. Fogg at Hong Kong that he could not escape by
paying any amount of money.

But could he even wait till they reached Hong Kong? Fogg had an
abominable way of jumping from one boat to another, and, before anything
could be effected, might get full under way again for Yokohama.

Fix decided that he must warn the English authorities, and signal the
Rangoon before her arrival. This was easy to do, since the steamer stopped at
Singapore, whence there is a telegraphic wire to Hong Kong. He finally
resolved, moreover, before acting more positively, to question Passepartout. It
would not be difficult to make him talk; and, as there was no time to lose, Fix
prepared to make himself known.

It was now the 30th of October, and on the following day the Rangoon was
due at Singapore.

Fix emerged from his cabin and went on deck. Passepartout was
promenading up and down in the forward part of the steamer. The detective
rushed forward with every appearance of extreme surprise, and exclaimed, "You
here, on the Rangoon?"

"What, Monsieur Fix, are you on board?" returned the really astonished
Passepartout, recognising his crony of the Mongolia. "Why, I left you at
Bombay, and here you are, on the way to Hong Kong! Are you going round the
world too?"

"No, no," replied Fix; "I shall stop at Hong Kong--at least for some days."

"Hum!" said Passepartout, who seemed for an instant perplexed. "But how is


it I have not seen you on board since we left Calcutta?"

"Oh, a trifle of sea-sickness--I've been staying in my berth. The Gulf of
Bengal does not agree with me as well as the Indian Ocean. And how is Mr.
Fogg?"

"As well and as punctual as ever, not a day behind time! But, Monsieur Fix,
you don't know that we have a young lady with us."

"A young lady?" replied the detective, not seeming to comprehend what was
said.

Passepartout thereupon recounted Aouda's history, the affair at the Bombay
pagoda, the purchase of the elephant for two thousand pounds, the rescue, the
arrest, and sentence of the Calcutta court, and the restoration of Mr. Fogg and
himself to liberty on bail. Fix, who was familiar with the last events, seemed to
be equally ignorant of all that Passepartout related; and the later was charmed to
find so interested a listener.

"But does your master propose to carry this young woman to Europe?"

"Not at all. We are simply going to place her under the protection of one of
her relatives, a rich merchant at Hong Kong."

"Nothing to be done there," said Fix to himself, concealing his
disappointment. "A glass of gin, Mr. Passepartout?"

"Willingly, Monsieur Fix. We must at least have a friendly glass on board the
Rangoon."


Chapter XVII


SHOWING WHAT HAPPENED ON THE VOYAGE FROM SINGAPORE
TO HONG KONG

The detective and Passepartout met often on deck after this interview, though
Fix was reserved, and did not attempt to induce his companion to divulge any
more facts concerning Mr. Fogg. He caught a glimpse of that mysterious
gentleman once or twice; but Mr. Fogg usually confined himself to the cabin,
where he kept Aouda company, or, according to his inveterate habit, took a hand
at whist.

Passepartout began very seriously to conjecture what strange chance kept Fix
still on the route that his master was pursuing. It was really worth considering
why this certainly very amiable and complacent person, whom he had first met
at Suez, had then encountered on board the Mongolia, who disembarked at
Bombay, which he announced as his destination, and now turned up so
unexpectedly on the Rangoon, was following Mr. Fogg's tracks step by step.
What was Fix's object? Passepartout was ready to wager his Indian shoes--which
he religiously preserved--that Fix would also leave Hong Kong at the same time
with them, and probably on the same steamer.

Passepartout might have cudgelled his brain for a century without hitting
upon the real object which the detective had in view. He never could have
imagined that Phileas Fogg was being tracked as a robber around the globe. But,
as it is in human nature to attempt the solution of every mystery, Passepartout
suddenly discovered an explanation of Fix's movements, which was in truth far
from unreasonable. Fix, he thought, could only be an agent of Mr. Fogg's friends
at the Reform Club, sent to follow him up, and to ascertain that he really went
round the world as had been agreed upon.

"It's clear!" repeated the worthy servant to himself, proud of his shrewdness.
"He's a spy sent to keep us in view! That isn't quite the thing, either, to be spying
Mr. Fogg, who is so honourable a man! Ah, gentlemen of the Reform, this shall
cost you dear!"

Passepartout, enchanted with his discovery, resolved to say nothing to his
master, lest he should be justly offended at this mistrust on the part of his
adversaries. But he determined to chaff Fix, when he had the chance, with
mysterious allusions, which, however, need not betray his real suspicions.

During the afternoon of Wednesday, 30th October, the Rangoon entered the
Strait of Malacca, which separates the peninsula of that name from Sumatra. The


mountainous and craggy islets intercepted the beauties of this noble island from
the view of the travellers. The Rangoon weighed anchor at Singapore the next
day at four a.m., to receive coal, having gained half a day on the prescribed time
of her arrival. Phileas Fogg noted this gain in his journal, and then, accompanied
by Aouda, who betrayed a desire for a walk on shore, disembarked.

Fix, who suspected Mr. Fogg's every movement, followed them cautiously,
without being himself perceived; while Passepartout, laughing in his sleeve at
Fix's manoeuvres, went about his usual errands.

The island of Singapore is not imposing in aspect, for there are no
mountains; yet its appearance is not without attractions. It is a park checkered by
pleasant highways and avenues. A handsome carriage, drawn by a sleek pair of
New Holland horses, carried Phileas Fogg and Aouda into the midst of rows of
palms with brilliant foliage, and of clove-trees, whereof the cloves form the heart
of a half-open flower. Pepper plants replaced the prickly hedges of European
fields; sago-bushes, large ferns with gorgeous branches, varied the aspect of this
tropical clime; while nutmeg-trees in full foliage filled the air with a penetrating
perfume. Agile and grinning bands of monkeys skipped about in the trees, nor
were tigers wanting in the jungles.

After a drive of two hours through the country, Aouda and Mr. Fogg returned
to the town, which is a vast collection of heavy-looking, irregular houses,
surrounded by charming gardens rich in tropical fruits and plants; and at ten
o'clock they re-embarked, closely followed by the detective, who had kept them
constantly in sight.

Passepartout, who had been purchasing several dozen mangoes--a fruit as
large as good-sized apples, of a dark-brown colour outside and a bright red
within, and whose white pulp, melting in the mouth, affords gourmands a
delicious sensation--was waiting for them on deck. He was only too glad to offer
some mangoes to Aouda, who thanked him very gracefully for them.

At eleven o'clock the Rangoon rode out of Singapore harbour, and in a few
hours the high mountains of Malacca, with their forests, inhabited by the most
beautifully-furred tigers in the world, were lost to view. Singapore is distant
some thirteen hundred miles from the island of Hong Kong, which is a little
English colony near the Chinese coast. Phileas Fogg hoped to accomplish the
journey in six days, so as to be in time for the steamer which would leave on the
6th of November for Yokohama, the principal Japanese port.

The Rangoon had a large quota of passengers, many of whom disembarked
at Singapore, among them a number of Indians, Ceylonese, Chinamen, Malays,
and Portuguese, mostly second-class travellers.

The weather, which had hitherto been fine, changed with the last quarter of


the moon. The sea rolled heavily, and the wind at intervals rose almost to a
storm, but happily blew from the south-west, and thus aided the steamer's
progress. The captain as often as possible put up his sails, and under the double
action of steam and sail the vessel made rapid progress along the coasts of Anam
and Cochin China. Owing to the defective construction of the Rangoon,
however, unusual precautions became necessary in unfavourable weather; but
the loss of time which resulted from this cause, while it nearly drove
Passepartout out of his senses, did not seem to affect his master in the least.
Passepartout blamed the captain, the engineer, and the crew, and consigned all
who were connected with the ship to the land where the pepper grows. Perhaps
the thought of the gas, which was remorselessly burning at his expense in Saville
Row, had something to do with his hot impatience.

"You are in a great hurry, then," said Fix to him one day, "to reach Hong
Kong?"

"A very great hurry!"

"Mr. Fogg, I suppose, is anxious to catch the steamer for Yokohama?"

"Terribly anxious."

"You believe in this journey around the world, then?"

"Absolutely. Don't you, Mr. Fix?"

"I? I don't believe a word of it."

"You're a Sly dog!" said Passepartout, winking at him.

This expression rather disturbed Fix, without his knowing why. Had the
Frenchman guessed his real purpose? He knew not what to think. But how could
Passepartout have discovered that he was a detective? Yet, in speaking as he did,
the man evidently meant more than he expressed.

Passepartout went still further the next day; he could not hold his tongue.

"Mr. Fix," said he, in a bantering tone, "shall we be so unfortunate as to lose
you when we get to Hong Kong?"

"Why," responded Fix, a little embarrassed, "I don't know; perhaps--"

"Ah, if you would only go on with us! An agent of the Peninsular Company,
you know, can't stop on the way! You were only going to Bombay, and here you
are in China. America is not far off, and from America to Europe is only a step."

Fix looked intently at his companion, whose countenance was as serene as
possible, and laughed with him. But Passepartout persisted in chaffing him by
asking him if he made much by his present occupation.

"Yes, and no," returned Fix; "there is good and bad luck in such things. But
you must understand that I don't travel at my own expense."

"Oh, I am quite sure of that!" cried Passepartout, laughing heartily.

Fix, fairly puzzled, descended to his cabin and gave himself up to his


reflections. He was evidently suspected; somehow or other the Frenchman had
found out that he was a detective. But had he told his master? What part was he
playing in all this: was he an accomplice or not? Was the game, then, up? Fix
spent several hours turning these things over in his mind, sometimes thinking
that all was lost, then persuading himself that Fogg was ignorant of his presence,
and then undecided what course it was best to take.

Nevertheless, he preserved his coolness of mind, and at last resolved to deal
plainly with Passepartout. If he did not find it practicable to arrest Fogg at Hong
Kong, and if Fogg made preparations to leave that last foothold of English
territory, he, Fix, would tell Passepartout all. Either the servant was the
accomplice of his master, and in this case the master knew of his operations, and
he should fail; or else the servant knew nothing about the robbery, and then his
interest would be to abandon the robber.

Such was the situation between Fix and Passepartout. Meanwhile Phileas
Fogg moved about above them in the most majestic and unconscious
indifference. He was passing methodically in his orbit around the world,
regardless of the lesser stars which gravitated around him. Yet there was near by
what the astronomers would call a disturbing star, which might have produced an
agitation in this gentleman's heart. But no! the charms of Aouda failed to act, to
Passepartout's great surprise; and the disturbances, if they existed, would have
been more difficult to calculate than those of Uranus which led to the discovery
of Neptune.

It was every day an increasing wonder to Passepartout, who read in Aouda's
eyes the depths of her gratitude to his master. Phileas Fogg, though brave and
gallant, must be, he thought, quite heartless. As to the sentiment which this
journey might have awakened in him, there was clearly no trace of such a thing;
while poor Passepartout existed in perpetual reveries.

One day he was leaning on the railing of the engine-room, and was observing
the engine, when a sudden pitch of the steamer threw the screw out of the water.
The steam came hissing out of the valves; and this made Passepartout indignant.

"The valves are not sufficiently charged!" he exclaimed. "We are not going.
Oh, these English! If this was an American craft, we should blow up, perhaps,
but we should at all events go faster!"


Chapter XVIII


IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG, PASSEPARTOUT, AND FIX GO EACH
ABOUT HIS BUSINESS

The weather was bad during the latter days of the voyage. The wind,
obstinately remaining in the northwest, blew a gale, and retarded the steamer.
The Rangoon rolled heavily and the passengers became impatient of the long,
monstrous waves which the wind raised before their path. A sort of tempest
arose on the 3rd of November, the squall knocking the vessel about with fury,
and the waves running high. The Rangoon reefed all her sails, and even the
rigging proved too much, whistling and shaking amid the squall. The steamer
was forced to proceed slowly, and the captain estimated that she would reach
Hong Kong twenty hours behind time, and more if the storm lasted.

Phileas Fogg gazed at the tempestuous sea, which seemed to be struggling
especially to delay him, with his habitual tranquillity. He never changed
countenance for an instant, though a delay of twenty hours, by making him too
late for the Yokohama boat, would almost inevitably cause the loss of the wager.
But this man of nerve manifested neither impatience nor annoyance; it seemed as
if the storm were a part of his programme, and had been foreseen. Aouda was
amazed to find him as calm as he had been from the first time she saw him.

Fix did not look at the state of things in the same light. The storm greatly
pleased him. His satisfaction would have been complete had the Rangoon been
forced to retreat before the violence of wind and waves. Each delay filled him
with hope, for it became more and more probable that Fogg would be obliged to
remain some days at Hong Kong; and now the heavens themselves became his
allies, with the gusts and squalls. It mattered not that they made him sea-sick--he
made no account of this inconvenience; and, whilst his body was writhing under
their effects, his spirit bounded with hopeful exultation.

Passepartout was enraged beyond expression by the unpropitious weather.
Everything had gone so well till now! Earth and sea had seemed to be at his
master's service; steamers and railways obeyed him; wind and steam united to
speed his journey. Had the hour of adversity come? Passepartout was as much
excited as if the twenty thousand pounds were to come from his own pocket. The
storm exasperated him, the gale made him furious, and he longed to lash the
obstinate sea into obedience. Poor fellow! Fix carefully concealed from him his
own satisfaction, for, had he betrayed it, Passepartout could scarcely have
restrained himself from personal violence.


Passepartout remained on deck as long as the tempest lasted, being unable to
remain quiet below, and taking it into his head to aid the progress of the ship by
lending a hand with the crew. He overwhelmed the captain, officers, and sailors,
who could not help laughing at his impatience, with all sorts of questions. He
wanted to know exactly how long the storm was going to last; whereupon he was
referred to the barometer, which seemed to have no intention of rising.
Passepartout shook it, but with no perceptible effect; for neither shaking nor
maledictions could prevail upon it to change its mind.

On the 4th, however, the sea became more calm, and the storm lessened its
violence; the wind veered southward, and was once more favourable.
Passepartout cleared up with the weather. Some of the sails were unfurled, and
the Rangoon resumed its most rapid speed. The time lost could not, however, be
regained. Land was not signalled until five o'clock on the morning of the 6th; the
steamer was due on the Sth. Phileas Fogg was twenty-four hours behind-hand,
and the Yokohama steamer would, of course, be missed.

The pilot went on board at six, and took his place on the bridge, to guide the
Rangoon through the channels to the port of Hong Kong. Passepartout longed to
ask him if the steamer had left for Yokohama; but he dared not, for he wished to
preserve the spark of hope, which still remained till the last moment. He had
confided his anxiety to Fix who--the sly rascal!--tried to console him by saying
that Mr. Fogg would be in time if he took the next boat; but this only put
Passepartout in a passion.

Mr. Fogg, bolder than his servant, did not hesitate to approach the pilot, and
tranquilly ask him if he knew when a steamer would leave Hong Kong for
Yokohama.

"At high tide to-morrow morning," answered the pilot.

"Ah!" said Mr. Fogg, without betraying any astonishment.

Passepartout, who heard what passed, would willingly have embraced the
pilot, while Fix would have been glad to twist his neck.

"What is the steamer's name?" asked Mr. Fogg.

"The Carnatic."

"Ought she not to have gone yesterday?"

"Yes, sir; but they had to repair one of her boilers, and so her departure was
postponed till to-morrow."

"Thank you," returned Mr. Fogg, descending mathematically to the saloon.

Passepartout clasped the pilot's hand and shook it heartily in his delight,
exclaiming, "Pilot, you are the best of good fellows!"

The pilot probably does not know to this day why his responses won him this
enthusiastic greeting. He remounted the bridge, and guided the steamer through


the flotilla of junks, tankas, and fishing boats which crowd the harbour of Hong
Kong.

At one o'clock the Rangoon was at the quay, and the passengers were going
ashore.

Chance had strangely favoured Phileas Fogg, for had not the Carnatic been
forced to lie over for repairing her boilers, she would have left on the 6th of
November, and the passengers for Japan would have been obliged to await for a
week the sailing of the next steamer. Mr. Fogg was, it is true, twenty-four hours
behind his time; but this could not seriously imperil the remainder of his tour.

The steamer which crossed the Pacific from Yokohama to San Francisco
made a direct connection with that from Hong Kong, and it could not sail until
the latter reached Yokohama; and if Mr. Fogg was twenty-four hours late on
reaching Yokohama, this time would no doubt be easily regained in the voyage
of twenty-two days across the Pacific. He found himself, then, about twenty-four
hours behind-hand, thirty-five days after leaving London.

The Carnatic was announced to leave Hong Kong at five the next morning.
Mr. Fogg had sixteen hours in which to attend to his business there, which was
to deposit Aouda safely with her wealthy relative.

On landing, he conducted her to a palanquin, in which they repaired to the
Club Hotel. A room was engaged for the young woman, and Mr. Fogg, after
seeing that she wanted for nothing, set out in search of her cousin Jeejeeh. He
instructed Passepartout to remain at the hotel until his return, that Aouda might
not be left entirely alone.

Mr. Fogg repaired to the Exchange, where, he did not doubt, every one
would know so wealthy and considerable a personage as the Parsee merchant.
Meeting a broker, he made the inquiry, to learn that Jeejeeh had left China two
years before, and, retiring from business with an immense fortune, had taken up
his residence in Europe--in Holland the broker thought, with the merchants of
which country he had principally traded. Phileas Fogg returned to the hotel,
begged a moment's conversation with Aouda, and without more ado, apprised
her that Jeejeeh was no longer at Hong Kong, but probably in Holland.

Aouda at first said nothing. She passed her hand across her forehead, and
reflected a few moments. Then, in her sweet, soft voice, she said: "What ought I
to do, Mr. Fogg?"

"It is very simple," responded the gentleman. "Go on to Europe."

"But I cannot intrude--"

"You do not intrude, nor do you in the least embarrass my project.
Passepartout!"

"Monsieur."


"Go to the Carnatic, and engage three cabins."

Passepartout, delighted that the young woman, who was very gracious to
him, was going to continue the journey with them, went off at a brisk gait to
obey his master's order.


Chapter XIX


IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT TAKES A TOO GREAT INTEREST IN HIS
MASTER, AND WHAT COMES OF IT

Hong Kong is an island which came into the possession of the English by the
Treaty of Nankin, after the war of 1842; and the colonising genius of the English
has created upon it an important city and an excellent port. The island is situated
at the mouth of the Canton River, and is separated by about sixty miles from the
Portuguese town of Macao, on the opposite coast. Hong Kong has beaten Macao
in the struggle for the Chinese trade, and now the greater part of the
transportation of Chinese goods finds its depot at the former place. Docks,
hospitals, wharves, a Gothic cathedral, a government house, macadamised
streets, give to Hong Kong the appearance of a town in Kent or Surrey
transferred by some strange magic to the antipodes.

Passepartout wandered, with his hands in his pockets, towards the Victoria
port, gazing as he went at the curious palanquins and other modes of
conveyance, and the groups of Chinese, Japanese, and Europeans who passed to
and fro in the streets. Hong Kong seemed to him not unlike Bombay, Calcutta,
and Singapore, since, like them, it betrayed everywhere the evidence of English
supremacy. At the Victoria port he found a confused mass of ships of all nations:
English, French, American, and Dutch, men-of-war and trading vessels,
Japanese and Chinese junks, sempas, tankas, and flower-boats, which formed so
many floating parterres. Passepartout noticed in the crowd a number of the
natives who seemed very old and were dressed in yellow. On going into a
barber's to get shaved he learned that these ancient men were all at least eighty
years old, at which age they are permitted to wear yellow, which is the Imperial
colour. Passepartout, without exactly knowing why, thought this very funny.

On reaching the quay where they were to embark on the Carnatic, he was not
astonished to find Fix walking up and down. The detective seemed very much
disturbed and disappointed.

"This is bad," muttered Passepartout, "for the gentlemen of the Reform
Club!" He accosted Fix with a merry smile, as if he had not perceived that
gentleman's chagrin. The detective had, indeed, good reasons to inveigh against
the bad luck which pursued him. The warrant had not come! It was certainly on
the way, but as certainly it could not now reach Hong Kong for several days;
and, this being the last English territory on Mr. Fogg's route, the robber would
escape, unless he could manage to detain him.


"Well, Monsieur Fix," said Passepartout, "have you decided to go with us so
far as America?"

"Yes," returned Fix, through his set teeth.

"Good!" exclaimed Passepartout, laughing heartily. "I knew you could not
persuade yourself to separate from us. Come and engage your berth."

They entered the steamer office and secured cabins for four persons. The
clerk, as he gave them the tickets, informed them that, the repairs on the Carnatic
having been completed, the steamer would leave that very evening, and not next
morning, as had been announced.

"That will suit my master all the better," said Passepartout. "I will go and let
him know."

Fix now decided to make a bold move; he resolved to tell Passepartout all. It
seemed to be the only possible means of keeping Phileas Fogg several days
longer at Hong Kong. He accordingly invited his companion into a tavern which
caught his eye on the quay. On entering, they found themselves in a large room
handsomely decorated, at the end of which was a large camp-bed furnished with
cushions. Several persons lay upon this bed in a deep sleep. At the small tables
which were arranged about the room some thirty customers were drinking
English beer, porter, gin, and brandy; smoking, the while, long red clay pipes
stuffed with little balls of opium mingled with essence of rose. From time to time
one of the smokers, overcome with the narcotic, would slip under the table,
whereupon the waiters, taking him by the head and feet, carried and laid him
upon the bed. The bed already supported twenty of these stupefied sots.

Fix and Passepartout saw that they were in a smoking-house haunted by
those wretched, cadaverous, idiotic creatures to whom the English merchants sell
every year the miserable drug called opium, to the amount of one million four
hundred thousand pounds--thousands devoted to one of the most despicable
vices which afflict humanity! The Chinese government has in vain attempted to
deal with the evil by stringent laws. It passed gradually from the rich, to whom it
was at first exclusively reserved, to the lower classes, and then its ravages could
not be arrested. Opium is smoked everywhere, at all times, by men and women,
in the Celestial Empire; and, once accustomed to it, the victims cannot dispense
with it, except by suffering horrible bodily contortions and agonies. A great
smoker can smoke as many as eight pipes a day; but he dies in five years. It was
in one of these dens that Fix and Passepartout, in search of a friendly glass,
found themselves. Passepartout had no money, but willingly accepted Fix's
invitation in the hope of returning the obligation at some future time.

They ordered two bottles of port, to which the Frenchman did ample justice,
whilst Fix observed him with close attention. They chatted about the journey,


and Passepartout was especially merry at the idea that Fix was going to continue
it with them. When the bottles were empty, however, he rose to go and tell his
master of the change in the time of the sailing of the Carnatic.

Fix caught him by the arm, and said, "Wait a moment."

"What for, Mr. Fix?"

"I want to have a serious talk with you."

"A serious talk!" cried Passepartout, drinking up the little wine that was left
in the bottom of his glass. "Well, we'll talk about it to-morrow; I haven't time
now."

"Stay! What I have to say concerns your master."

Passepartout, at this, looked attentively at his companion. Fix's face seemed
to have a singular expression. He resumed his seat.

"What is it that you have to say?"

Fix placed his hand upon Passepartout's arm, and, lowering his voice, said,
"You have guessed who I am?"

"Parbleu!" said Passepartout, smiling.

"Then I'm going to tell you everything--"

"Now that I know everything, my friend! Ah! that's very good. But go on, go
on. First, though, let me tell you that those gentlemen have put themselves to a
useless expense.”

"Useless!" said Fix. "You speak confidently. It's clear that you don't know
how large the sum is."

"Of course I do," returned Passepartout. "Twenty thousand pounds."

"Fifty-five thousand!" answered Fix, pressing his companion's hand.

"What!" cried the Frenchman. "Has Monsieur Fogg dared--fifty-five
thousand pounds! Well, there's all the more reason for not losing an instant," he
continued, getting up hastily.

Fix pushed Passepartout back in his chair, and resumed: "Fifty-five thousand
pounds; and if I succeed, I get two thousand pounds. If you'll help me, I'll let you
have five hundred of them."

"Help you?" cried Passepartout, whose eyes were standing wide open.

"Yes; help me keep Mr. Fogg here for two or three days."

"Why, what are you saying? Those gentlemen are not satisfied with
following my master and suspecting his honour, but they must try to put
obstacles in his way! I blush for them!"

"What do you mean?"

"I mean that it is a piece of shameful trickery. They might as well waylay Mr.
Fogg and put his money in their pockets!"

"That's just what we count on doing."


"It's a conspiracy, then," cried Passepartout, who became more and more
excited as the liquor mounted in his head, for he drank without perceiving it. "A
real conspiracy! And gentlemen, too. Bah!"

Fix began to be puzzled.

"Members of the Reform Club!" continued Passepartout. "You must know,
Monsieur Fix, that my master is an honest man, and that, when he makes a
wager, he tries to win it fairly!"

"But who do you think I am?" asked Fix, looking at him intently.

"Parbleu! An agent of the members of the Reform Club, sent out here to
interrupt my master's journey. But, though I found you out some time ago, I've
taken good care to say nothing about it to Mr. Fogg."

"He knows nothing, then?"

"Nothing," replied Passepartout, again emptying his glass.

The detective passed his hand across his forehead, hesitating before he spoke
again. What should he do? Passepartout's mistake seemed sincere, but it made
his design more difficult. It was evident that the servant was not the master's
accomplice, as Fix had been inclined to suspect.

"Well," said the detective to himself, "as he is not an accomplice, he will help
me."

He had no time to lose: Fogg must be detained at Hong Kong, so he resolved
to make a clean breast of it.

"Listen to me," said Fix abruptly. "I am not, as you think, an agent of the
members of the Reform Club--"

"Bah!" retorted Passepartout, with an air of raillery.

"I am a police detective, sent out here by the London office."

"You, a detective?"

"I will prove it. Here is my commission."

Passepartout was speechless with astonishment when Fix displayed this
document, the genuineness of which could not be doubted.

"Mr. Fogg's wager," resumed Fix, "is only a pretext, of which you and the
gentlemen of the Reform are dupes. He had a motive for securing your innocent
complicity."

"But why?"

"Listen. On the 28th of last September a robbery of fifty-five thousand
pounds was committed at the Bank of England by a person whose description
was fortunately secured. Here is his description; it answers exactly to that of Mr.
Phileas Fogg."

"What nonsense!" cried Passepartout, striking the table with his fist. "My
master is the most honourable of men!"


"How can you tell? You know scarcely anything about him. You went into
his service the day he came away; and he came away on a foolish pretext,
without trunks, and carrying a large amount in banknotes. And yet you are bold
enough to assert that he is an honest man!"

"Yes, yes," repeated the poor fellow, mechanically.

"Would you like to be arrested as his accomplice?"

Passepartout, overcome by what he had heard, held his head between his
hands, and did not dare to look at the detective. Phileas Fogg, the saviour of
Aouda, that brave and generous man, a robber! And yet how many presumptions
there were against him! Passepartout essayed to reject the suspicions which
forced themselves upon his mind; he did not wish to believe that his master was
guilty.

"Well, what do you want of me?" said he, at last, with an effort.

"See here," replied Fix; "I have tracked Mr. Fogg to this place, but as yet I
have failed to receive the warrant of arrest for which I sent to London. You must
help me to keep him here in Hong Kong--"

"T! But I--"

"T will share with you the two thousand pounds reward offered by the Bank
of England."

"Never!" replied Passepartout, who tried to rise, but fell back, exhausted in
mind and body.

"Mr. Fix," he stammered, "even should what you say be true--if my master is
really the robber you are seeking for--which I deny--I have been, am, in his
service; I have seen his generosity and goodness; and I will never betray him--
not for all the gold in the world. I come from a village where they don't eat that
kind of bread!"

"You refuse?"

"T refuse."

"Consider that I've said nothing," said Fix; "and let us drink."

"Yes; let us drink!"

Passepartout felt himself yielding more and more to the effects of the liquor.
Fix, seeing that he must, at all hazards, be separated from his master, wished to
entirely overcome him. Some pipes full of opium lay upon the table. Fix slipped
one into Passepartout's hand. He took it, put it between his lips, lit it, drew
several puffs, and his head, becoming heavy under the influence of the narcotic,
fell upon the table.

"At last!" said Fix, seeing Passepartout unconscious. "Mr. Fogg will not be
informed of the Carnatic's departure; and, if he is, he will have to go without this
cursed Frenchman!"


And, after paying his bill, Fix left the tavern.


Chapter XX


IN WHICH FIX COMES FACE TO FACE WITH PHILEAS FOGG

While these events were passing at the opium-house, Mr. Fogg, unconscious
of the danger he was in of losing the steamer, was quietly escorting Aouda about
the streets of the English quarter, making the necessary purchases for the long
voyage before them. It was all very well for an Englishman like Mr. Fogg to
make the tour of the world with a carpet-bag; a lady could not be expected to
travel comfortably under such conditions. He acquitted his task with
characteristic serenity, and invariably replied to the remonstrances of his fair
companion, who was confused by his patience and generosity:

"Tt is in the interest of my journey--a part of my programme."

The purchases made, they returned to the hotel, where they dined at a
sumptuously served table-d'hote; after which Aouda, shaking hands with her
protector after the English fashion, retired to her room for rest. Mr. Fogg
absorbed himself throughout the evening in the perusal of The Times and
Illustrated London News.

Had he been capable of being astonished at anything, it would have been not
to see his servant return at bedtime. But, knowing that the steamer was not to
leave for Yokohama until the next morning, he did not disturb himself about the
matter. When Passepartout did not appear the next morning to answer his
master's bell, Mr. Fogg, not betraying the least vexation, contented himself with
taking his carpet-bag, calling Aouda, and sending for a palanquin.

It was then eight o'clock; at half-past nine, it being then high tide, the
Carnatic would leave the harbour. Mr. Fogg and Aouda got into the palanquin,
their luggage being brought after on a wheelbarrow, and half an hour later
stepped upon the quay whence they were to embark. Mr. Fogg then learned that
the Carnatic had sailed the evening before. He had expected to find not only the
steamer, but his domestic, and was forced to give up both; but no sign of
disappointment appeared on his face, and he merely remarked to Aouda, "It is an
accident, madam; nothing more."

At this moment a man who had been observing him attentively approached.
It was Fix, who, bowing, addressed Mr. Fogg: "Were you not, like me, sir, a
passenger by the Rangoon, which arrived yesterday?"

"I was, sir," replied Mr. Fogg coldly. "But I have not the honour--"

"Pardon me; I thought I should find your servant here."

"Do you know where he is, sir?" asked Aouda anxiously.


"What!" responded Fix, feigning surprise. "Is he not with you?"

"No," said Aouda. "He has not made his appearance since yesterday. Could
he have gone on board the Carnatic without us?"

"Without you, madam?" answered the detective. "Excuse me, did you intend
to sail in the Carnatic?"

"Yes, sir."

"So did I, madam, and I am excessively disappointed. The Carnatic, its
repairs being completed, left Hong Kong twelve hours before the stated time,
without any notice being given; and we must now wait a week for another
steamer."

As he said "a week" Fix felt his heart leap for joy. Fogg detained at Hong
Kong for a week! There would be time for the warrant to arrive, and fortune at
last favoured the representative of the law. His horror may be imagined when he
heard Mr. Fogg say, in his placid voice, "But there are other vessels besides the
Carnatic, it seems to me, in the harbour of Hong Kong."

And, offering his arm to Aouda, he directed his steps toward the docks in
search of some craft about to start. Fix, stupefied, followed; it seemed as if he
were attached to Mr. Fogg by an invisible thread. Chance, however, appeared
really to have abandoned the man it had hitherto served so well. For three hours
Phileas Fogg wandered about the docks, with the determination, if necessary, to
charter a vessel to carry him to Yokohama; but he could only find vessels which
were loading or unloading, and which could not therefore set sail. Fix began to
hope again.

But Mr. Fogg, far from being discouraged, was continuing his search,
resolved not to stop if he had to resort to Macao, when he was accosted by a
sailor on one of the wharves.

"Is your honour looking for a boat?"

"Have you a boat ready to sail?"

"Yes, your honour; a pilot-boat--No. 43--the best in the harbour."

"Does she go fast?"

"Between eight and nine knots the hour. Will you look at her?"

"Yes."

"Your honour will be satisfied with her. Is it for a sea excursion?"

"No; for a voyage.”

"A voyage?"

"Yes, will you agree to take me to Yokohama?"

The sailor leaned on the railing, opened his eyes wide, and said, "Is your
honour joking?"

"No. I have missed the Carnatic, and I must get to Yokohama by the 14th at


the latest, to take the boat for San Francisco."

"I am sorry," said the sailor; "but it is impossible."

"I offer you a hundred pounds per day, and an additional reward of two
hundred pounds if I reach Yokohama in time."

"Are you in earnest?"

"Very much so."

The pilot walked away a little distance, and gazed out to sea, evidently
struggling between the anxiety to gain a large sum and the fear of venturing so
far. Fix was in mortal suspense.

Mr. Fogg turned to Aouda and asked her, "You would not be afraid, would
you, madam?"

"Not with you, Mr. Fogg," was her answer.

The pilot now returned, shuffling his hat in his hands.

"Well, pilot?" said Mr. Fogg.

"Well, your honour,” replied he, "I could not risk myself, my men, or my
little boat of scarcely twenty tons on so long a voyage at this time of year.
Besides, we could not reach Yokohama in time, for it is sixteen hundred and
sixty miles from Hong Kong."

"Only sixteen hundred," said Mr. Fogg.

"It's the same thing."

Fix breathed more freely.

"But," added the pilot, "it might be arranged another way."

Fix ceased to breathe at all.

"How?" asked Mr. Fogg.

"By going to Nagasaki, at the extreme south of Japan, or even to Shanghai,
which is only eight hundred miles from here. In going to Shanghai we should not
be forced to sail wide of the Chinese coast, which would be a great advantage, as
the currents run northward, and would aid us."

"Pilot," said Mr. Fogg, "I must take the American steamer at Yokohama, and
not at Shanghai or Nagasaki."

"Why not?" returned the pilot. "The San Francisco steamer does not start
from Yokohama. It puts in at Yokohama and Nagasaki, but it starts from
Shanghai."

"You are sure of that?"

"Perfectly."

"And when does the boat leave Shanghai?"

"On the 11th, at seven in the evening. We have, therefore, four days before
us, that is ninety-six hours; and in that time, if we had good luck and a south-
west wind, and the sea was calm, we could make those eight hundred miles to


Shanghai."

"And you could go--"

"In an hour; as soon as provisions could be got aboard and the sails put up."

"It is a bargain. Are you the master of the boat?"

"Yes; John Bunsby, master of the Tankadere."

"Would you like some earnest-money?"

"If it would not put your honour out--"

"Here are two hundred pounds on account sir," added Phileas Fogg, turning
to Fix, "if you would like to take advantage--"

"Thanks, sir; I was about to ask the favour."

"Very well. In half an hour we shall go on board."

"But poor Passepartout?" urged Aouda, who was much disturbed by the
servant's disappearance.

"T shall do all I can to find him," replied Phileas Fogg.

While Fix, in a feverish, nervous state, repaired to the pilot-boat, the others
directed their course to the police-station at Hong Kong. Phileas Fogg there gave
Passepartout's description, and left a sum of money to be spent in the search for
him. The same formalities having been gone through at the French consulate,
and the palanquin having stopped at the hotel for the luggage, which had been
sent back there, they returned to the wharf.

It was now three o'clock; and pilot-boat No. 43, with its crew on board, and
its provisions stored away, was ready for departure.

The Tankadere was a neat little craft of twenty tons, as gracefully built as if
she were a racing yacht. Her shining copper sheathing, her galvanised iron-work,
her deck, white as ivory, betrayed the pride taken by John Bunsby in making her
presentable. Her two masts leaned a trifle backward; she carried brigantine,
foresail, storm-jib, and standing-jib, and was well rigged for running before the
wind; and she seemed capable of brisk speed, which, indeed, she had already
proved by gaining several prizes in pilot-boat races. The crew of the Tankadere
was composed of John Bunsby, the master, and four hardy mariners, who were
familiar with the Chinese seas. John Bunsby, himself, a man of forty-five or
thereabouts, vigorous, sunburnt, with a sprightly expression of the eye, and
energetic and self-reliant countenance, would have inspired confidence in the
most timid.

Phileas Fogg and Aouda went on board, where they found Fix already
installed. Below deck was a square cabin, of which the walls bulged out in the
form of cots, above a circular divan; in the centre was a table provided with a
swinging lamp. The accommodation was confined, but neat.

"I am sorry to have nothing better to offer you," said Mr. Fogg to Fix, who


bowed without responding.

The detective had a feeling akin to humiliation in profiting by the kindness
of Mr. Fogg.

"It's certain," thought he, "though rascal as he is, he is a polite one!"

The sails and the English flag were hoisted at ten minutes past three. Mr.
Fogg and Aouda, who were seated on deck, cast a last glance at the quay, in the
hope of espying Passepartout. Fix was not without his fears lest chance should
direct the steps of the unfortunate servant, whom he had so badly treated, in this
direction; in which case an explanation the reverse of satisfactory to the
detective must have ensued. But the Frenchman did not appear, and, without
doubt, was still lying under the stupefying influence of the opium.

John Bunsby, master, at length gave the order to start, and the Tankadere,
taking the wind under her brigantine, foresail, and standing-jib, bounded briskly
forward over the waves.


Chapter XXI


IN WHICH THE MASTER OF THE "TANKADERE" RUNS GREAT RISK
OF LOSING A REWARD OF TWO HUNDRED POUNDS

This voyage of eight hundred miles was a perilous venture on a craft of
twenty tons, and at that season of the year. The Chinese seas are usually
boisterous, subject to terrible gales of wind, and especially during the equinoxes;
and it was now early November.

It would clearly have been to the master's advantage to carry his passengers
to Yokohama, since he was paid a certain sum per day; but he would have been
rash to attempt such a voyage, and it was imprudent even to attempt to reach
Shanghai. But John Bunsby believed in the Tankadere, which rode on the waves
like a seagull; and perhaps he was not wrong.

Late in the day they passed through the capricious channels of Hong Kong,
and the Tankadere, impelled by favourable winds, conducted herself admirably.

"IT do not need, pilot," said Phileas Fogg, when they got into the open sea, "to
advise you to use all possible speed."

"Trust me, your honour. We are carrying all the sail the wind will let us. The
poles would add nothing, and are only used when we are going into port."

"Its your trade, not mine, pilot, and I confide in you."

Phileas Fogg, with body erect and legs wide apart, standing like a sailor,
gazed without staggering at the swelling waters. The young woman, who was
seated aft, was profoundly affected as she looked out upon the ocean, darkening
now with the twilight, on which she had ventured in so frail a vessel. Above her
head rustled the white sails, which seemed like great white wings. The boat,
carried forward by the wind, seemed to be flying in the air.

Night came. The moon was entering her first quarter, and her insufficient
light would soon die out in the mist on the horizon. Clouds were rising from the
east, and already overcast a part of the heavens.

The pilot had hung out his lights, which was very necessary in these seas
crowded with vessels bound landward; for collisions are not uncommon
occurrences, and, at the speed she was going, the least shock would shatter the
gallant little craft.

Fix, seated in the bow, gave himself up to meditation. He kept apart from his
fellow-travellers, knowing Mr. Fogg's taciturn tastes; besides, he did not quite
like to talk to the man whose favours he had accepted. He was thinking, too, of
the future. It seemed certain that Fogg would not stop at Yokohama, but would at


once take the boat for San Francisco; and the vast extent of America would
ensure him impunity and safety. Fogg's plan appeared to him the simplest in the
world. Instead of sailing directly from England to the United States, like a
common villain, he had traversed three quarters of the globe, so as to gain the
American continent more surely; and there, after throwing the police off his
track, he would quietly enjoy himself with the fortune stolen from the bank. But,
once in the United States, what should he, Fix, do? Should he abandon this man?
No, a hundred times no! Until he had secured his extradition, he would not lose
sight of him for an hour. It was his duty, and he would fulfil it to the end. At all
events, there was one thing to be thankful for; Passepartout was not with his
master; and it was above all important, after the confidences Fix had imparted to
him, that the servant should never have speech with his master.

Phileas Fogg was also thinking of Passepartout, who had so strangely
disappeared. Looking at the matter from every point of view, it did not seem to
him impossible that, by some mistake, the man might have embarked on the
Carnatic at the last moment; and this was also Aouda's opinion, who regretted
very much the loss of the worthy fellow to whom she owed so much. They might
then find him at Yokohama; for, if the Carnatic was carrying him thither, it
would be easy to ascertain if he had been on board.

A brisk breeze arose about ten o'clock; but, though it might have been
prudent to take in a reef, the pilot, after carefully examining the heavens, let the
craft remain rigged as before. The Tankadere bore sail admirably, as she drew a
great deal of water, and everything was prepared for high speed in case of a gale.

Mr. Fogg and Aouda descended into the cabin at midnight, having been
already preceded by Fix, who had lain down on one of the cots. The pilot and
crew remained on deck all night.

At sunrise the next day, which was 8th November, the boat had made more
than one hundred miles. The log indicated a mean speed of between eight and
nine miles. The Tankadere still carried all sail, and was accomplishing her
greatest capacity of speed. If the wind held as it was, the chances would be in her
favour. During the day she kept along the coast, where the currents were
favourable; the coast, irregular in profile, and visible sometimes across the
clearings, was at most five miles distant. The sea was less boisterous, since the
wind came off land--a fortunate circumstance for the boat, which would suffer,
owing to its small tonnage, by a heavy surge on the sea.

The breeze subsided a little towards noon, and set in from the south-west.
The pilot put up his poles, but took them down again within two hours, as the
wind freshened up anew.

Mr. Fogg and Aouda, happily unaffected by the roughness of the sea, ate


with a good appetite, Fix being invited to share their repast, which he accepted
with secret chagrin. To travel at this man's expense and live upon his provisions
was not palatable to him. Still, he was obliged to eat, and so he ate.

When the meal was over, he took Mr. Fogg apart, and said, "sir"--this "sir"
scorched his lips, and he had to control himself to avoid collaring this
"gentleman"--"sir, you have been very kind to give me a passage on this boat.
But, though my means will not admit of my expending them as freely as you, I
must ask to pay my share--"

"Let us not speak of that, sir," replied Mr. Fogg.

"But, if I insist--"

"No, sir," repeated Mr. Fogg, in a tone which did not admit of a reply. "This
enters into my general expenses."

Fix, as he bowed, had a stifled feeling, and, going forward, where he
ensconced himself, did not open his mouth for the rest of the day.

Meanwhile they were progressing famously, and John Bunsby was in high
hope. He several times assured Mr. Fogg that they would reach Shanghai in
time; to which that gentleman responded that he counted upon it. The crew set to
work in good earnest, inspired by the reward to be gained. There was not a sheet
which was not tightened not a sail which was not vigorously hoisted; not a lurch
could be charged to the man at the helm. They worked as desperately as if they
were contesting in a Royal yacht regatta.

By evening, the log showed that two hundred and twenty miles had been
accomplished from Hong Kong, and Mr. Fogg might hope that he would be able
to reach Yokohama without recording any delay in his journal; in which case, the
many misadventures which had overtaken him since he left London would not
seriously affect his journey.

The Tankadere entered the Straits of Fo-Kien, which separate the island of
Formosa from the Chinese coast, in the small hours of the night, and crossed the
Tropic of Cancer. The sea was very rough in the straits, full of eddies formed by
the counter-currents, and the chopping waves broke her course, whilst it became
very difficult to stand on deck.

At daybreak the wind began to blow hard again, and the heavens seemed to
predict a gale. The barometer announced a speedy change, the mercury rising
and falling capriciously; the sea also, in the south-east, raised long surges which
indicated a tempest. The sun had set the evening before in a red mist, in the
midst of the phosphorescent scintillations of the ocean.

John Bunsby long examined the threatening aspect of the heavens, muttering
indistinctly between his teeth. At last he said in a low voice to Mr. Fogg, "Shall I
speak out to your honour?"


"Of course."

"Well, we are going to have a squall."

"Is the wind north or south?" asked Mr. Fogg quietly.

"South. Look! a typhoon is coming up."

"Glad it's a typhoon from the south, for it will carry us forward."

"Oh, if you take it that way," said John Bunsby, "I've nothing more to say."
John Bunsby's suspicions were confirmed. At a less advanced season of the year
the typhoon, according to a famous meteorologist, would have passed away like
a luminous cascade of electric flame; but in the winter equinox it was to be
feared that it would burst upon them with great violence.

The pilot took his precautions in advance. He reefed all sail, the pole-masts
were dispensed with; all hands went forward to the bows. A single triangular
sail, of strong canvas, was hoisted as a storm-jib, so as to hold the wind from
behind. Then they waited.

John Bunsby had requested his passengers to go below; but this
imprisonment in so narrow a space, with little air, and the boat bouncing in the
gale, was far from pleasant. Neither Mr. Fogg, Fix, nor Aouda consented to leave
the deck.

The storm of rain and wind descended upon them towards eight o'clock.
With but its bit of sail, the Tankadere was lifted like a feather by a wind, an idea
of whose violence can scarcely be given. To compare her speed to four times that
of a locomotive going on full steam would be below the truth.

The boat scudded thus northward during the whole day, borne on by
monstrous waves, preserving always, fortunately, a speed equal to theirs. Twenty
times she seemed almost to be submerged by these mountains of water which
rose behind her; but the adroit management of the pilot saved her. The
passengers were often bathed in spray, but they submitted to it philosophically.
Fix cursed it, no doubt; but Aouda, with her eyes fastened upon her protector,
whose coolness amazed her, showed herself worthy of him, and bravely
weathered the storm. As for Phileas Fogg, it seemed just as if the typhoon were a
part of his programme.

Up to this time the Tankadere had always held her course to the north; but
towards evening the wind, veering three quarters, bore down from the northwest.
The boat, now lying in the trough of the waves, shook and rolled terribly; the sea
struck her with fearful violence. At night the tempest increased in violence. John
Bunsby saw the approach of darkness and the rising of the storm with dark
misgivings. He thought awhile, and then asked his crew if it was not time to
slacken speed. After a consultation he approached Mr. Fogg, and said, "I think,
your honour, that we should do well to make for one of the ports on the coast."


"T think so too."

"Ah!" said the pilot. "But which one?"

"I know of but one," returned Mr. Fogg tranquilly.

"And that is--"

"Shanghai."

The pilot, at first, did not seem to comprehend; he could scarcely realise so
much determination and tenacity. Then he cried, "Well--yes! Your honour is
right. To Shanghai!"

So the Tankadere kept steadily on her northward track.

The night was really terrible; it would be a miracle if the craft did not
founder. Twice it could have been all over with her if the crew had not been
constantly on the watch. Aouda was exhausted, but did not utter a complaint.
More than once Mr. Fogg rushed to protect her from the violence of the waves.

Day reappeared. The tempest still raged with undiminished fury; but the
wind now returned to the south-east. It was a favourable change, and the
Tankadere again bounded forward on this mountainous sea, though the waves
crossed each other, and imparted shocks and counter-shocks which would have
crushed a craft less solidly built. From time to time the coast was visible through
the broken mist, but no vessel was in sight. The Tankadere was alone upon the
Sea.

There were some signs of a calm at noon, and these became more distinct as
the sun descended toward the horizon. The tempest had been as brief as terrific.
The passengers, thoroughly exhausted, could now eat a little, and take some
repose.

The night was comparatively quiet. Some of the sails were again hoisted, and
the speed of the boat was very good. The next morning at dawn they espied the
coast, and John Bunsby was able to assert that they were not one hundred miles
from Shanghai. A hundred miles, and only one day to traverse them! That very
evening Mr. Fogg was due at Shanghai, if he did not wish to miss the steamer to
Yokohama. Had there been no storm, during which several hours were lost, they
would be at this moment within thirty miles of their destination.

The wind grew decidedly calmer, and happily the sea fell with it. All sails
were now hoisted, and at noon the Tankadere was within forty-five miles of
Shanghai. There remained yet six hours in which to accomplish that distance. All
on board feared that it could not be done, and every one--Phileas Fogg, no doubt,
excepted--felt his heart beat with impatience. The boat must keep up an average
of nine miles an hour, and the wind was becoming calmer every moment! It was
a capricious breeze, coming from the coast, and after it passed the sea became
smooth. Still, the Tankadere was so light, and her fine sails caught the fickle


zephyrs so well, that, with the aid of the currents John Bunsby found himself at
six o'clock not more than ten miles from the mouth of Shanghai River. Shanghai
itself is situated at least twelve miles up the stream. At seven they were still three
miles from Shanghai. The pilot swore an angry oath; the reward of two hundred
pounds was evidently on the point of escaping him. He looked at Mr. Fogg. Mr.
Fogg was perfectly tranquil; and yet his whole fortune was at this moment at
stake.

At this moment, also, a long black funnel, crowned with wreaths of smoke,
appeared on the edge of the waters. It was the American steamer, leaving for
Yokohama at the appointed time.

"Confound her!" cried John Bunsby, pushing back the rudder with a
desperate jerk.

"Signal her!" said Phileas Fogg quietly.

A small brass cannon stood on the forward deck of the Tankadere, for
making signals in the fogs. It was loaded to the muzzle; but just as the pilot was
about to apply a red-hot coal to the touchhole, Mr. Fogg said, "Hoist your flag!"

The flag was run up at half-mast, and, this being the signal of distress, it was
hoped that the American steamer, perceiving it, would change her course a little,
so as to succour the pilot-boat.

"Fire!" said Mr. Fogg. And the booming of the little cannon resounded in the
air.


Chapter XXII


IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT FINDS OUT THAT, EVEN AT THE
ANTIPODES, IT IS CONVENIENT TO HAVE SOME MONEY IN ONE'S
POCKET

The Carnatic, setting sail from Hong Kong at half-past six on the 7th of
November, directed her course at full steam towards Japan. She carried a large
cargo and a well-filled cabin of passengers. Two state-rooms in the rear were,
however, unoccupied--those which had been engaged by Phileas Fogg.

The next day a passenger with a half-stupefied eye, staggering gait, and
disordered hair, was seen to emerge from the second cabin, and to totter to a seat
on deck.

It was Passepartout; and what had happened to him was as follows: Shortly
after Fix left the opium den, two waiters had lifted the unconscious Passepartout,
and had carried him to the bed reserved for the smokers. Three hours later,
pursued even in his dreams by a fixed idea, the poor fellow awoke, and struggled
against the stupefying influence of the narcotic. The thought of a duty unfulfilled
shook off his torpor, and he hurried from the abode of drunkenness. Staggering
and holding himself up by keeping against the walls, falling down and creeping
up again, and irresistibly impelled by a kind of instinct, he kept crying out, "The
Carnatic! the Carnatic!"

The steamer lay puffing alongside the quay, on the point of starting.
Passepartout had but few steps to go; and, rushing upon the plank, he crossed it,
and fell unconscious on the deck, just as the Carnatic was moving off. Several
sailors, who were evidently accustomed to this sort of scene, carried the poor
Frenchman down into the second cabin, and Passepartout did not wake until they
were one hundred and fifty miles away from China. Thus he found himself the
next morning on the deck of the Carnatic, and eagerly inhaling the exhilarating
sea-breeze. The pure air sobered him. He began to collect his sense, which he
found a difficult task; but at last he recalled the events of the evening before,
Fix's revelation, and the opium-house.

"Tt is evident," said he to himself, "that I have been abominably drunk! What
will Mr. Fogg say? At least I have not missed the steamer, which is the most
important thing."

Then, as Fix occurred to him: "As for that rascal, I hope we are well rid of
him, and that he has not dared, as he proposed, to follow us on board the
Carnatic. A detective on the track of Mr. Fogg, accused of robbing the Bank of


England! Pshaw! Mr. Fogg is no more a robber than I am a murderer."

Should he divulge Fix's real errand to his master? Would it do to tell the part
the detective was playing. Would it not be better to wait until Mr. Fogg reached
London again, and then impart to him that an agent of the metropolitan police
had been following him round the world, and have a good laugh over it? No
doubt; at least, it was worth considering. The first thing to do was to find Mr.
Fogg, and apologise for his singular behaviour.

Passepartout got up and proceeded, as well as he could with the rolling of the
steamer, to the after-deck. He saw no one who resembled either his master or
Aouda. "Good!" muttered he; "Aouda has not got up yet, and Mr. Fogg has
probably found some partners at whist."

He descended to the saloon. Mr. Fogg was not there. Passepartout had only,
however, to ask the purser the number of his master's state-room. The purser
replied that he did not know any passenger by the name of Fogg.

"I beg your pardon," said Passepartout persistently. "He is a tall gentleman,
quiet, and not very talkative, and has with him a young lady--"

"There is no young lady on board," interrupted the purser. "Here is a list of
the passengers; you may see for yourself."

Passepartout scanned the list, but his master's name was not upon it. All at
once an idea struck him.

"Ah! am I on the Carnatic?"

"Yes."

"On the way to Yokohama?"

"Certainly."

Passepartout had for an instant feared that he was on the wrong boat; but,
though he was really on the Carnatic, his master was not there.

He fell thunderstruck on a seat. He saw it all now. He remembered that the
time of sailing had been changed, that he should have informed his master of
that fact, and that he had not done so. It was his fault, then, that Mr. Fogg and
Aouda had missed the steamer. Yes, but it was still more the fault of the traitor
who, in order to separate him from his master, and detain the latter at Hong
Kong, had inveigled him into getting drunk! He now saw the detective's trick;
and at this moment Mr. Fogg was certainly ruined, his bet was lost, and he
himself perhaps arrested and imprisoned! At this thought Passepartout tore his
hair. Ah, if Fix ever came within his reach, what a settling of accounts there
would be!

After his first depression, Passepartout became calmer, and began to study
his situation. It was certainly not an enviable one. He found himself on the way
to Japan, and what should he do when he got there? His pocket was empty; he


had not a solitary shilling, not so much as a penny. His passage had fortunately
been paid for in advance; and he had five or six days in which to decide upon his
future course. He fell to at meals with an appetite, and ate for Mr. Fogg, Aouda,
and himself. He helped himself as generously as if Japan were a desert, where
nothing to eat was to be looked for.

At dawn on the 13th the Carnatic entered the port of Yokohama. This is an
important port of call in the Pacific, where all the mail-steamers, and those
carrying travellers between North America, China, Japan, and the Oriental
islands put in. It is situated in the bay of Yeddo, and at but a short distance from
that second capital of the Japanese Empire, and the residence of the Tycoon, the
civil Emperor, before the Mikado, the spiritual Emperor, absorbed his office in
his own. The Carnatic anchored at the quay near the custom-house, in the midst
of a crowd of ships bearing the flags of all nations.

Passepartout went timidly ashore on this so curious territory of the Sons of
the Sun. He had nothing better to do than, taking chance for his guide, to wander
aimlessly through the streets of Yokohama. He found himself at first in a
thoroughly European quarter, the houses having low fronts, and being adorned
with verandas, beneath which he caught glimpses of neat peristyles. This quarter
occupied, with its streets, squares, docks, and warehouses, all the space between
the "promontory of the Treaty" and the river. Here, as at Hong Kong and
Calcutta, were mixed crowds of all races, Americans and English, Chinamen and
Dutchmen, mostly merchants ready to buy or sell anything. The Frenchman felt
himself as much alone among them as if he had dropped down in the midst of
Hottentots.

He had, at least, one resource to call on the French and English consuls at
Yokohama for assistance. But he shrank from telling the story of his adventures,
intimately connected as it was with that of his master; and, before doing so, he
determined to exhaust all other means of aid. As chance did not favour him in
the European quarter, he penetrated that inhabited by the native Japanese,
determined, if necessary, to push on to Yeddo.

The Japanese quarter of Yokohama is called Benten, after the goddess of the
sea, who is worshipped on the islands round about. There Passepartout beheld
beautiful fir and cedar groves, sacred gates of a singular architecture, bridges
half hid in the midst of bamboos and reeds, temples shaded by immense cedar-
trees, holy retreats where were sheltered Buddhist priests and sectaries of
Confucius, and interminable streets, where a perfect harvest of rose-tinted and
red-cheeked children, who looked as if they had been cut out of Japanese
screens, and who were playing in the midst of short-legged poodles and
yellowish cats, might have been gathered.


The streets were crowded with people. Priests were passing in processions,
beating their dreary tambourines; police and custom-house officers with pointed
hats encrusted with lac and carrying two sabres hung to their waists; soldiers,
clad in blue cotton with white stripes, and bearing guns; the Mikado's guards,
enveloped in silken doubles, hauberks and coats of mail; and numbers of
military folk of all ranks--for the military profession is as much respected in
Japan as it is despised in China--went hither and thither in groups and pairs.
Passepartout saw, too, begging friars, long-robed pilgrims, and simple civilians,
with their warped and jet-black hair, big heads, long busts, slender legs, short
stature, and complexions varying from copper-colour to a dead white, but never
yellow, like the Chinese, from whom the Japanese widely differ. He did not fail
to observe the curious equipages--carriages and palanquins, barrows supplied
with sails, and litters made of bamboo; nor the women--whom he thought not
especially handsome--who took little steps with their little feet, whereon they
wore canvas shoes, straw sandals, and clogs of worked wood, and who displayed
tight-looking eyes, flat chests, teeth fashionably blackened, and gowns crossed
with silken scarfs, tied in an enormous knot behind an omament which the
modern Parisian ladies seem to have borrowed from the dames of Japan.

Passepartout wandered for several hours in the midst of this motley crowd,
looking in at the windows of the rich and curious shops, the jewellery
establishments glittering with quaint Japanese ornaments, the restaurants decked
with streamers and banners, the tea-houses, where the odorous beverage was
being drunk with saki, a liquor concocted from the fermentation of rice, and the
comfortable smoking-houses, where they were puffing, not opium, which is
almost unknown in Japan, but a very fine, stringy tobacco. He went on till he
found himself in the fields, in the midst of vast rice plantations. There he saw
dazzling camellias expanding themselves, with flowers which were giving forth
their last colours and perfumes, not on bushes, but on trees, and within bamboo
enclosures, cherry, plum, and apple trees, which the Japanese cultivate rather for
their blossoms than their fruit, and which queerly-fashioned, grinning
scarecrows protected from the sparrows, pigeons, ravens, and other voracious
birds. On the branches of the cedars were perched large eagles; amid the foliage
of the weeping willows were herons, solemnly standing on one leg; and on every
hand were crows, ducks, hawks, wild birds, and a multitude of cranes, which the
Japanese consider sacred, and which to their minds symbolise long life and
prosperity.

As he was strolling along, Passepartout espied some violets among the
shrubs.

"Good!" said he; "I'll have some supper."


But, on smelling them, he found that they were odourless.

"No chance there," thought he.

The worthy fellow had certainly taken good care to eat as hearty a breakfast
as possible before leaving the Carnatic; but, as he had been walking about all
day, the demands of hunger were becoming importunate. He observed that the
butchers stalls contained neither mutton, goat, nor pork; and, knowing also that it
is a sacrilege to kill cattle, which are preserved solely for farming, he made up
his mind that meat was far from plentiful in Yokohama--nor was he mistaken;
and, in default of butcher's meat, he could have wished for a quarter of wild boar
or deer, a partridge, or some quails, some game or fish, which, with rice, the
Japanese eat almost exclusively. But he found it necessary to keep up a stout
heart, and to postpone the meal he craved till the following morning. Night
came, and Passepartout re-entered the native quarter, where he wandered through
the streets, lit by vari-coloured lanterns, looking on at the dancers, who were
executing skilful steps and boundings, and the astrologers who stood in the open
air with their telescopes. Then he came to the harbour, which was lit up by the
resin torches of the fishermen, who were fishing from their boats.

The streets at last became quiet, and the patrol, the officers of which, in their
splendid costumes, and surrounded by their suites, Passepartout thought seemed
like ambassadors, succeeded the bustling crowd. Each time a company passed,
Passepartout chuckled, and said to himself: "Good! another Japanese embassy
departing for Europe!"


Chapter XXIII


IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT'S NOSE BECOMES OUTRAGEOUSLY
LONG

The next morning poor, jaded, famished Passepartout said to himself that he
must get something to eat at all hazards, and the sooner he did so the better. He
might, indeed, sell his watch; but he would have starved first. Now or never he
must use the strong, if not melodious voice which nature had bestowed upon
him. He knew several French and English songs, and resolved to try them upon
the Japanese, who must be lovers of music, since they were for ever pounding on
their cymbals, tam-tams, and tambourines, and could not but appreciate
European talent.

It was, perhaps, rather early in the morning to get up a concert, and the
audience prematurely aroused from their slumbers, might not possibly pay their
entertainer with coin bearing the Mikado's features. Passepartout therefore
decided to wait several hours; and, as he was sauntering along, it occurred to him
that he would seem rather too well dressed for a wandering artist. The idea
struck him to change his garments for clothes more in harmony with his project;
by which he might also get a little money to satisfy the immediate cravings of
hunger. The resolution taken, it remained to carry it out.

It was only after a long search that Passepartout discovered a native dealer in
old clothes, to whom he applied for an exchange. The man liked the European
costume, and ere long Passepartout issued from his shop accoutred in an old
Japanese coat, and a sort of one-sided turban, faded with long use. A few small
pieces of silver, moreover, jingled in his pocket.

"Good!" thought he. "I will imagine I am at the Carnival!"

His first care, after being thus "Japanesed," was to enter a tea-house of
modest appearance, and, upon half a bird and a little rice, to breakfast like a man
for whom dinner was as yet a problem to be solved.

"Now," thought he, when he had eaten heartily, "I mustn't lose my head. I
can't sell this costume again for one still more Japanese. I must consider how to
leave this country of the Sun, of which I shall not retain the most delightful of
memories, as quickly as possible."

It occurred to him to visit the steamers which were about to leave for
America. He would offer himself as a cook or servant, in payment of his passage
and meals. Once at San Francisco, he would find some means of going on. The
difficulty was, how to traverse the four thousand seven hundred miles of the


Pacific which lay between Japan and the New World.

Passepartout was not the man to let an idea go begging, and directed his
steps towards the docks. But, as he approached them, his project, which at first
had seemed so simple, began to grow more and more formidable to his mind.
What need would they have of a cook or servant on an American steamer, and
what confidence would they put in him, dressed as he was? What references
could he give?

As he was reflecting in this wise, his eyes fell upon an immense placard
which a sort of clown was carrying through the streets. This placard, which was
in English, read as follows:

ACROBATIC JAPANESE TROUPE, HONOURABLE WILLIAM
BATULCAR, PROPRIETOR, LAST REPRESENTATIONS, PRIOR TO THEIR
DEPARTURE TO THE UNITED STATES, OF THE LONG NOSES! LONG
NOSES! UNDER THE DIRECT PATRONAGE OF THE GOD TINGOU!
GREAT ATTRACTION!

"The United States!" said Passepartout; "that's just what I want!"

He followed the clown, and soon found himself once more in the Japanese
quarter. A quarter of an hour later he stopped before a large cabin, adorned with
several clusters of streamers, the exterior walls of which were designed to
represent, in violent colours and without perspective, a company of jugglers.

This was the Honourable William Batulcar's establishment. That gentleman
was a sort of Barnum, the director of a troupe of mountebanks, jugglers, clowns,
acrobats, equilibrists, and gymnasts, who, according to the placard, was giving
his last performances before leaving the Empire of the Sun for the States of the
Union.

Passepartout entered and asked for Mr. Batulcar, who straightway appeared
in person.

"What do you want?" said he to Passepartout, whom he at first took for a
native.

"Would you like a servant, sir?" asked Passepartout.

"A servant!" cried Mr. Batulcar, caressing the thick grey beard which hung
from his chin. "I already have two who are obedient and faithful, have never left
me, and serve me for their nourishment and here they are," added he, holding out
his two robust arms, furrowed with veins as large as the strings of a bass-viol.

"So I can be of no use to you?"

"None."

"The devil! I should so like to cross the Pacific with you!"

"Ah!" said the Honourable Mr. Batulcar. "You are no more a Japanese than I
am a monkey! Who are you dressed up in that way?"


"A man dresses as he can."

"That's true. You are a Frenchman, aren't you?"

"Yes; a Parisian of Paris."

"Then you ought to know how to make grimaces?"

"Why," replied Passepartout, a little vexed that his nationality should cause
this question, "we Frenchmen know how to make grimaces, it is true but not any
better than the Americans do."

"True. Well, if I can't take you as a servant, I can as a clown. You see, my
friend, in France they exhibit foreign clowns, and in foreign parts French
clowns."

"Ah!"

"You are pretty strong, eh?"

"Especially after a good meal."

"And you can sing?"

"Yes," returned Passepartout, who had formerly been wont to sing in the
streets.

"But can you sing standing on your head, with a top spinning on your left
foot, and a sabre balanced on your right?"

"Humph! I think so," replied Passepartout, recalling the exercises of his
younger days.

"Well, that's enough," said the Honourable William Batulcar.

The engagement was concluded there and then.

Passepartout had at last found something to do. He was engaged to act in the
celebrated Japanese troupe. It was not a very dignified position, but within a
week he would be on his way to San Francisco.

The performance, so noisily announced by the Honourable Mr. Batulcar, was
to commence at three o'clock, and soon the deafening instruments of a Japanese
orchestra resounded at the door. Passepartout, though he had not been able to
study or rehearse a part, was designated to lend the aid of his sturdy shoulders in
the great exhibition of the "human pyramid," executed by the Long Noses of the
god Tingou. This "great attraction" was to close the performance.

Before three o'clock the large shed was invaded by the spectators,
comprising Europeans and natives, Chinese and Japanese, men, women and
children, who precipitated themselves upon the narrow benches and into the
boxes opposite the stage. The musicians took up a position inside, and were
vigorously performing on their gongs, tam-tams, flutes, bones, tambourines, and
immense drums.

The performance was much like all acrobatic displays; but it must be
confessed that the Japanese are the first equilibrists in the world.


One, with a fan and some bits of paper, performed the graceful trick of the
butterflies and the flowers; another traced in the air, with the odorous smoke of
his pipe, a series of blue words, which composed a compliment to the audience;
while a third juggled with some lighted candles, which he extinguished
successively as they passed his lips, and relit again without interrupting for an
instant his juggling. Another reproduced the most singular combinations with a
spinning-top; in his hands the revolving tops seemed to be animated with a life
of their own in their interminable whirling; they ran over pipe-stems, the edges
of sabres, wires and even hairs stretched across the stage; they turned around on
the edges of large glasses, crossed bamboo ladders, dispersed into all the corners,
and produced strange musical effects by the combination of their various pitches
of tone. The jugglers tossed them in the air, threw them like shuttlecocks with
wooden battledores, and yet they kept on spinning; they put them into their
pockets, and took them out still whirling as before.

It is useless to describe the astonishing performances of the acrobats and
gymnasts. The turning on ladders, poles, balls, barrels, &c., was executed with
wonderful precision.

But the principal attraction was the exhibition of the Long Noses, a show to
which Europe is as yet a stranger.

The Long Noses form a peculiar company, under the direct patronage of the
god Tingou. Attired after the fashion of the Middle Ages, they bore upon their
shoulders a splendid pair of wings; but what especially distinguished them was
the long noses which were fastened to their faces, and the uses which they made
of them. These noses were made of bamboo, and were five, six, and even ten
feet long, some straight, others curved, some ribboned, and some having
imitation warts upon them. It was upon these appendages, fixed tightly on their
real noses, that they performed their gymnastic exercises. A dozen of these
sectaries of Tingou lay flat upon their backs, while others, dressed to represent
lightning-rods, came and frolicked on their noses, jumping from one to another,
and performing the most skilful leapings and somersaults.

As a last scene, a "human pyramid" had been announced, in which fifty Long
Noses were to represent the Car of Juggernaut. But, instead of forming a
pyramid by mounting each other's shoulders, the artists were to group
themselves on top of the noses. It happened that the performer who had hitherto
formed the base of the Car had quitted the troupe, and as, to fill this part, only
strength and adroitness were necessary, Passepartout had been chosen to take his
place.

The poor fellow really felt sad when--melancholy reminiscence of his
youth!--he donned his costume, adorned with vari-coloured wings, and fastened


to his natural feature a false nose six feet long. But he cheered up when he
thought that this nose was winning him something to eat.

He went upon the stage, and took his place beside the rest who were to
compose the base of the Car of Juggernaut. They all stretched themselves on the
floor, their noses pointing to the ceiling. A second group of artists disposed
themselves on these long appendages, then a third above these, then a fourth,
until a human monument reaching to the very cornices of the theatre soon arose
on top of the noses. This elicited loud applause, in the midst of which the
orchestra was just striking up a deafening air, when the pyramid tottered, the
balance was lost, one of the lower noses vanished from the pyramid, and the
human monument was shattered like a castle built of cards!

It was Passepartout's fault. Abandoning his position, clearing the footlights
without the aid of his wings, and, clambering up to the right-hand gallery, he fell
at the feet of one of the spectators, crying, "Ah, my master! my master!"

"You here?"

"Myself."

"Very well; then let us go to the steamer, young man!"

Mr. Fogg, Aouda, and Passepartout passed through the lobby of the theatre to
the outside, where they encountered the Honourable Mr. Batulcar, furious with
rage. He demanded damages for the "breakage" of the pyramid; and Phileas
Fogg appeased him by giving him a handful of banknotes.

At half-past six, the very hour of departure, Mr. Fogg and Aouda, followed
by Passepartout, who in his hurry had retained his wings, and nose six feet long,
stepped upon the American steamer.


Chapter XXIV


DURING WHICH MR. FOGG AND PARTY CROSS THE PACIFIC
OCEAN

What happened when the pilot-boat came in sight of Shanghai will be easily
guessed. The signals made by the Tankadere had been seen by the captain of the
Yokohama steamer, who, espying the flag at half-mast, had directed his course
towards the little craft. Phileas Fogg, after paying the stipulated price of his
passage to John Busby, and rewarding that worthy with the additional sum of
five hundred and fifty pounds, ascended the steamer with Aouda and Fix; and
they started at once for Nagasaki and Yokohama.

They reached their destination on the morning of the 14th of November.
Phileas Fogg lost no time in going on board the Carnatic, where he learned, to
Aouda's great delight--and perhaps to his own, though he betrayed no emotion--
that Passepartout, a Frenchman, had really arrived on her the day before.

The San Francisco steamer was announced to leave that very evening, and it
became necessary to find Passepartout, if possible, without delay. Mr. Fogg
applied in vain to the French and English consuls, and, after wandering through
the streets a long time, began to despair of finding his missing servant. Chance,
or perhaps a kind of presentiment, at last led him into the Honourable Mr.
Batulcar's theatre. He certainly would not have recognised Passepartout in the
eccentric mountebank's costume; but the latter, lying on his back, perceived his
master in the gallery. He could not help starting, which so changed the position
of his nose as to bring the "pyramid" pell-mell upon the stage.

All this Passepartout learned from Aouda, who recounted to him what had
taken place on the voyage from Hong Kong to Shanghai on the Tankadere, in
company with one Mr. Fix.

Passepartout did not change countenance on hearing this name. He thought
that the time had not yet arrived to divulge to his master what had taken place
between the detective and himself; and, in the account he gave of his absence, he
simply excused himself for having been overtaken by drunkenness, in smoking
opium at a tavern in Hong Kong.

Mr. Fogg heard this narrative coldly, without a word; and then furnished his
man with funds necessary to obtain clothing more in harmony with his position.
Within an hour the Frenchman had cut off his nose and parted with his wings,
and retained nothing about him which recalled the sectary of the god Tingou.

The steamer which was about to depart from Yokohama to San Francisco


belonged to the Pacific Mail Steamship Company, and was named the General
Grant. She was a large paddle-wheel steamer of two thousand five hundred tons;
well equipped and very fast. The massive walking-beam rose and fell above the
deck; at one end a piston-rod worked up and down; and at the other was a
connecting-rod which, in changing the rectilinear motion to a circular one, was
directly connected with the shaft of the paddles. The General Grant was rigged
with three masts, giving a large capacity for sails, and thus materially aiding the
steam power. By making twelve miles an hour, she would cross the ocean in
twenty-one days. Phileas Fogg was therefore justified in hoping that he would
reach San Francisco by the 2nd of December, New York by the 11th, and
London on the 20th--thus gaining several hours on the fatal date of the 21st of
December.

There was a full complement of passengers on board, among them English,
many Americans, a large number of coolies on their way to California, and
several East Indian officers, who were spending their vacation in making the tour
of the world. Nothing of moment happened on the voyage; the steamer, sustained
on its large paddles, rolled but little, and the Pacific almost justified its name.
Mr. Fogg was as calm and taciturn as ever. His young companion felt herself
more and more attached to him by other ties than gratitude; his silent but
generous nature impressed her more than she thought; and it was almost
unconsciously that she yielded to emotions which did not seem to have the least
effect upon her protector. Aouda took the keenest interest in his plans, and
became impatient at any incident which seemed likely to retard his journey.

She often chatted with Passepartout, who did not fail to perceive the state of
the lady's heart; and, being the most faithful of domestics, he never exhausted his
eulogies of Phileas Fogg's honesty, generosity, and devotion. He took pains to
calm Aouda's doubts of a successful termination of the journey, telling her that
the most difficult part of it had passed, that now they were beyond the fantastic
countries of Japan and China, and were fairly on their way to civilised places
again. A railway train from San Francisco to New York, and a transatlantic
steamer from New York to Liverpool, would doubtless bring them to the end of
this impossible journey round the world within the period agreed upon.

On the ninth day after leaving Yokohama, Phileas Fogg had traversed exactly
one half of the terrestrial globe. The General Grant passed, on the 23rd of
November, the one hundred and eightieth meridian, and was at the very
antipodes of London. Mr. Fogg had, it is true, exhausted fifty-two of the eighty
days in which he was to complete the tour, and there were only twenty-eight left.
But, though he was only half-way by the difference of meridians, he had really
gone over two-thirds of the whole journey; for he had been obliged to make long


circuits from London to Aden, from Aden to Bombay, from Calcutta to
Singapore, and from Singapore to Yokohama. Could he have followed without
deviation the fiftieth parallel, which is that of London, the whole distance would
only have been about twelve thousand miles; whereas he would be forced, by the
irregular methods of locomotion, to traverse twenty-six thousand, of which he
had, on the 23rd of November, accomplished seventeen thousand five hundred.
And now the course was a straight one, and Fix was no longer there to put
obstacles in their way!

It happened also, on the 23rd of November, that Passepartout made a joyful
discovery. It will be remembered that the obstinate fellow had insisted on
keeping his famous family watch at London time, and on regarding that of the
countries he had passed through as quite false and unreliable. Now, on this day,
though he had not changed the hands, he found that his watch exactly agreed
with the ship's chronometers. His triumph was hilarious. He would have liked to
know what Fix would say if he were aboard!

"The rogue told me a lot of stories," repeated Passepartout, "about the
meridians, the sun, and the moon! Moon, indeed! moonshine more likely! If one
listened to that sort of people, a pretty sort of time one would keep! I was sure
that the sun would some day regulate itself by my watch!"

Passepartout was ignorant that, if the face of his watch had been divided into
twenty-four hours, like the Italian clocks, he would have no reason for
exultation; for the hands of his watch would then, instead of as now indicating
nine o'clock in the morning, indicate nine o'clock in the evening, that is, the
twenty-first hour after midnight precisely the difference between London time
and that of the one hundred and eightieth meridian. But if Fix had been able to
explain this purely physical effect, Passepartout would not have admitted, even if
he had comprehended it. Moreover, if the detective had been on board at that
moment, Passepartout would have joined issue with him on a quite different
subject, and in an entirely different manner.

Where was Fix at that moment?

He was actually on board the General Grant.

On reaching Yokohama, the detective, leaving Mr. Fogg, whom he expected
to meet again during the day, had repaired at once to the English consulate,
where he at last found the warrant of arrest. It had followed him from Bombay,
and had come by the Carnatic, on which steamer he himself was supposed to be.
Fix's disappointment may be imagined when he reflected that the warrant was
now useless. Mr. Fogg had left English ground, and it was now necessary to
procure his extradition!

"Well," thought Fix, after a moment of anger, "My warrant is not good here,


but it will be in England. The rogue evidently intends to return to his own
country, thinking he has thrown the police off his track. Good! I will follow him
across the Atlantic. As for the money, heaven grant there may be some left! But
the fellow has already spent in travelling, rewards, trials, bail, elephants, and all
sorts of charges, more than five thousand pounds. Yet, after all, the Bank is
rich!"

His course decided on, he went on board the General Grant, and was there
when Mr. Fogg and Aouda arrived. To his utter amazement, he recognised
Passepartout, despite his theatrical disguise. He quickly concealed himself in his
cabin, to avoid an awkward explanation, and hoped--thanks to the number of
passengers--to remain unperceived by Mr. Fogg's servant.

On that very day, however, he met Passepartout face to face on the forward
deck. The latter, without a word, made a rush for him, grasped him by the throat,
and, much to the amusement of a group of Americans, who immediately began
to bet on him, administered to the detective a perfect volley of blows, which
proved the great superiority of French over English pugilistic skill.

When Passepartout had finished, he found himself relieved and comforted.
Fix got up in a somewhat rumpled condition, and, looking at his adversary,
coldly said, "Have you done?"

"For this time--yes."

"Then let me have a word with you."

"But I--"

"In your master's interests."

Passepartout seemed to be vanquished by Fix's coolness, for he quietly
followed him, and they sat down aside from the rest of the passengers.

"You have given me a thrashing," said Fix. "Good, I expected it. Now, listen
to me. Up to this time I have been Mr. Fogg's adversary. I am now in his game."

"Aha!" cried Passepartout; "you are convinced he is an honest man?"

"No," replied Fix coldly, "I think him a rascal. Sh! don't budge, and let me
speak. As long as Mr. Fogg was on English ground, it was for my interest to
detain him there until my warrant of arrest arrived. I did everything I could to
keep him back. I sent the Bombay priests after him, I got you intoxicated at
Hong Kong, I separated you from him, and I made him miss the Yokohama
steamer."

Passepartout listened, with closed fists.

"Now," resumed Fix, "Mr. Fogg seems to be going back to England. Well, I
will follow him there. But hereafter I will do as much to keep obstacles out of
his way as I have done up to this time to put them in his path. I've changed my
game, you see, and simply because it was for my interest to change it. Your


interest is the same as mine; for it is only in England that you will ascertain
whether you are in the service of a criminal or an honest man."

Passepartout listened very attentively to Fix, and was convinced that he
spoke with entire good faith.

"Are we friends?" asked the detective.

"Friends?--no," replied Passepartout; "but allies, perhaps. At the least sign of
treason, however, I'll twist your neck for you."

"Agreed," said the detective quietly.

Eleven days later, on the 3rd of December, the General Grant entered the bay
of the Golden Gate, and reached San Francisco.

Mr. Fogg had neither gained nor lost a single day.


Chapter XX V


IN WHICH A SLIGHT GLIMPSE IS HAD OF SAN FRANCISCO

It was seven in the moming when Mr. Fogg, Aouda, and Passepartout set
foot upon the American continent, if this name can be given to the floating quay
upon which they disembarked. These quays, rising and falling with the tide, thus
facilitate the loading and unloading of vessels. Alongside them were clippers of
all sizes, steamers of all nationalities, and the steamboats, with several decks
rising one above the other, which ply on the Sacramento and its tributaries.
There were also heaped up the products of a commerce which extends to
Mexico, Chili, Peru, Brazil, Europe, Asia, and all the Pacific islands.

Passepartout, in his joy on reaching at last the American continent, thought
he would manifest it by executing a perilous vault in fine style; but, tumbling
upon some worm-eaten planks, he fell through them. Put out of countenance by
the manner in which he thus "set foot" upon the New World, he uttered a loud
cry, which so frightened the innumerable cormorants and pelicans that are
always perched upon these movable quays, that they flew noisily away.

Mr. Fogg, on reaching shore, proceeded to find out at what hour the first
train left for New York, and learned that this was at six o'clock p.m.; he had,
therefore, an entire day to spend in the Californian capital. Taking a carriage at a
charge of three dollars, he and Aouda entered it, while Passepartout mounted the
box beside the driver, and they set out for the International Hotel.

From his exalted position Passepartout observed with much curiosity the
wide streets, the low, evenly ranged houses, the Anglo-Saxon Gothic churches,
the great docks, the palatial wooden and brick warehouses, the numerous
conveyances, omnibuses, horsecars, and upon the side-walks, not only
Americans and Europeans, but Chinese and Indians. Passepartout was surprised
at all he saw. San Francisco was no longer the legendary city of 1849--a city of
banditti, assassins, and incendiaries, who had flocked hither in crowds in pursuit
of plunder; a paradise of outlaws, where they gambled with gold-dust, a revolver
in one hand and a bowie-knife in the other: it was now a great commercial
emporium.

The lofty tower of its City Hall overlooked the whole panorama of the streets
and avenues, which cut each other at right-angles, and in the midst of which
appeared pleasant, verdant squares, while beyond appeared the Chinese quarter,
seemingly imported from the Celestial Empire in a toy-box. Sombreros and red
shirts and plumed Indians were rarely to be seen; but there were silk hats and


black coats everywhere worn by a multitude of nervously active, gentlemanly-
looking men. Some of the streets--especially Montgomery Street, which is to
San Francisco what Regent Street is to London, the Boulevard des Italiens to
Paris, and Broadway to New York--were lined with splendid and spacious stores,
which exposed in their windows the products of the entire world.

When Passepartout reached the International Hotel, it did not seem to him as
if he had left England at all.

The ground floor of the hotel was occupied by a large bar, a sort of restaurant
freely open to all passers-by, who might partake of dried beef, oyster soup,
biscuits, and cheese, without taking out their purses. Payment was made only for
the ale, porter, or sherry which was drunk. This seemed "very American" to
Passepartout. The hotel refreshment-rooms were comfortable, and Mr. Fogg and
Aouda, installing themselves at a table, were abundantly served on diminutive
plates by negroes of darkest hue.

After breakfast, Mr. Fogg, accompanied by Aouda, started for the English
consulate to have his passport visaed. As he was going out, he met Passepartout,
who asked him if it would not be well, before taking the train, to purchase some
dozens of Enfield rifles and Colt's revolvers. He had been listening to stories of
attacks upon the trains by the Sioux and Pawnees. Mr. Fogg thought it a useless
precaution, but told him to do as he thought best, and went on to the consulate.

He had not proceeded two hundred steps, however, when, "by the greatest
chance in the world," he met Fix. The detective seemed wholly taken by
surprise. What! Had Mr. Fogg and himself crossed the Pacific together, and not
met on the steamer! At least Fix felt honoured to behold once more the
gentleman to whom he owed so much, and, as his business recalled him to
Europe, he should be delighted to continue the journey in such pleasant
company.

Mr. Fogg replied that the honour would be his; and the detective--who was
determined not to lose sight of him--begged permission to accompany them in
their walk about San Francisco--a request which Mr. Fogg readily granted.

They soon found themselves in Montgomery Street, where a great crowd was
collected; the side-walks, street, horsecar rails, the shop-doors, the windows of
the houses, and even the roofs, were full of people. Men were going about
carrying large posters, and flags and streamers were floating in the wind; while
loud cries were heard on every hand.

"Hurrah for Camerfield!"

"Hurrah for Mandiboy!"

It was a political meeting; at least so Fix conjectured, who said to Mr. Fogg,
"Perhaps we had better not mingle with the crowd. There may be danger in it."


"Yes," returned Mr. Fogg; "and blows, even if they are political are still
blows."

Fix smiled at this remark; and, in order to be able to see without being jostled
about, the party took up a position on the top of a flight of steps situated at the
upper end of Montgomery Street. Opposite them, on the other side of the street,
between a coal wharf and a petroleum warehouse, a large platform had been
erected in the open air, towards which the current of the crowd seemed to be
directed.

For what purpose was this meeting? What was the occasion of this excited
assemblage? Phileas Fogg could not imagine. Was it to nominate some high
official--a governor or member of Congress? It was not improbable, so agitated
was the multitude before them.

Just at this moment there was an unusual stir in the human mass. All the
hands were raised in the air. Some, tightly closed, seemed to disappear suddenly
in the midst of the cries--an energetic way, no doubt, of casting a vote. The
crowd swayed back, the banners and flags wavered, disappeared an instant, then
reappeared in tatters. The undulations of the human surge reached the steps,
while all the heads floundered on the surface like a sea agitated by a squall.
Many of the black hats disappeared, and the greater part of the crowd seemed to
have diminished in height.

"It is evidently a meeting," said Fix, "and its object must be an exciting one. I
should not wonder if it were about the Alabama, despite the fact that that
question is settled."

"Perhaps," replied Mr. Fogg, simply.

"At least, there are two champions in presence of each other, the Honourable
Mr. Camerfield and the Honourable Mr. Mandiboy."

Aouda, leaning upon Mr. Fogg's arm, observed the tumultuous scene with
surprise, while Fix asked a man near him what the cause of it all was. Before the
man could reply, a fresh agitation arose; hurrahs and excited shouts were heard;
the staffs of the banners began to be used as offensive weapons; and fists flew
about in every direction. Thumps were exchanged from the tops of the carriages
and omnibuses which had been blocked up in the crowd. Boots and shoes went
whirling through the air, and Mr. Fogg thought he even heard the crack of
revolvers mingling in the din, the rout approached the stairway, and flowed over
the lower step. One of the parties had evidently been repulsed; but the mere
lookers-on could not tell whether Mandiboy or Camerfield had gained the upper
hand.

"It would be prudent for us to retire," said Fix, who was anxious that Mr.
Fogg should not receive any injury, at least until they got back to London. "If


there is any question about England in all this, and we were recognised, I fear it
would go hard with us."

"An English subject--" began Mr. Fogg.

He did not finish his sentence; for a terrific hubbub now arose on the terrace
behind the flight of steps where they stood, and there were frantic shouts of,
"Hurrah for Mandiboy! Hip, hip, hurrah!"

It was a band of voters coming to the rescue of their allies, and taking the
Camerfield forces in flank. Mr. Fogg, Aouda, and Fix found themselves between
two fires; it was too late to escape. The torrent of men, armed with loaded canes
and sticks, was irresistible. Phileas Fogg and Fix were roughly hustled in their
attempts to protect their fair companion; the former, as cool as ever, tried to
defend himself with the weapons which nature has placed at the end of every
Englishman's arm, but in vain. A big brawny fellow with a red beard, flushed
face, and broad shoulders, who seemed to be the chief of the band, raised his
clenched fist to strike Mr. Fogg, whom he would have given a crushing blow,
had not Fix rushed in and received it in his stead. An enormous bruise
immediately made its appearance under the detective's silk hat, which was
completely smashed in.

"Yankee!" exclaimed Mr. Fogg, darting a contemptuous look at the ruffian.

"Englishman!" returned the other. "We will meet again!"

"When you please."

"What is your name?"

"Phileas Fogg. And yours?"

"Colonel Stamp Proctor."

The human tide now swept by, after overturning Fix, who speedily got upon
his feet again, though with tattered clothes. Happily, he was not seriously hurt.
His travelling overcoat was divided into two unequal parts, and his trousers
resembled those of certain Indians, which fit less compactly than they are easy to
put on. Aouda had escaped unharmed, and Fix alone bore marks of the fray in
his black and blue bruise.

"Thanks," said Mr. Fogg to the detective, as soon as they were out of the
crowd.

"No thanks are necessary," replied. Fix; "but let us go."

"Where?"

"To a tailor's."

Such a visit was, indeed, opportune. The clothing of both Mr. Fogg and Fix
was in rags, as if they had themselves been actively engaged in the contest
between Camerfield and Mandiboy. An hour after, they were once more suitably
attired, and with Aouda returned to the International Hotel.


Passepartout was waiting for his master, armed with half a dozen six-
barrelled revolvers. When he perceived Fix, he knit his brows; but Aouda
having, in a few words, told him of their adventure, his countenance resumed its
placid expression. Fix evidently was no longer an enemy, but an ally; he was
faithfully keeping his word.

Dinner over, the coach which was to convey the passengers and their luggage
to the station drew up to the door. As he was getting in, Mr. Fogg said to Fix,
"You have not seen this Colonel Proctor again?"

"No."

"I will come back to America to find him," said Phileas Fogg calmly. "It
would not be right for an Englishman to permit himself to be treated in that way,
without retaliating."

The detective smiled, but did not reply. It was clear that Mr. Fogg was one of
those Englishmen who, while they do not tolerate duelling at home, fight abroad
when their honour is attacked.

At a quarter before six the travellers reached the station, and found the train
ready to depart. As he was about to enter it, Mr. Fogg called a porter, and said to
him: "My friend, was there not some trouble to-day in San Francisco?"

"It was a political meeting, sir," replied the porter.

"But I thought there was a great deal of disturbance in the streets."

"Tt was only a meeting assembled for an election."

"The election of a general-in-chief, no doubt?" asked Mr. Fogg.

"No, sir; of a justice of the peace."

Phileas Fogg got into the train, which started off at full speed.


Chapter XXVI


IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG AND PARTY TRAVEL BY THE PACIFIC
RAILROAD

"From ocean to ocean"--so say the Americans; and these four words
compose the general designation of the "great trunk line" which crosses the
entire width of the United States. The Pacific Railroad is, however, really
divided into two distinct lines: the Central Pacific, between San Francisco and
Ogden, and the Union Pacific, between Ogden and Omaha. Five main lines
connect Omaha with New York.

New York and San Francisco are thus united by an uninterrupted metal
ribbon, which measures no less than three thousand seven hundred and eighty-
six miles. Between Omaha and the Pacific the railway crosses a territory which
is still infested by Indians and wild beasts, and a large tract which the Mormons,
after they were driven from Illinois in 1845, began to colonise.

The journey from New York to San Francisco consumed, formerly, under the
most favourable conditions, at least six months. It is now accomplished in seven
days.

It was in 1862 that, in spite of the Southern Members of Congress, who
wished a more southerly route, it was decided to lay the road between the forty-
first and forty-second parallels. President Lincoln himself fixed the end of the
line at Omaha, in Nebraska. The work was at once commenced, and pursued
with true American energy; nor did the rapidity with which it went on injuriously
affect its good execution. The road grew, on the prairies, a mile and a half a day.
A locomotive, running on the rails laid down the evening before, brought the
rails to be laid on the morrow, and advanced upon them as fast as they were put
in position.

The Pacific Railroad is joined by several branches in Iowa, Kansas,
Colorado, and Oregon. On leaving Omaha, it passes along the left bank of the
Platte River as far as the junction of its northern branch, follows its southern
branch, crosses the Laramie territory and the Wahsatch Mountains, turns the
Great Salt Lake, and reaches Salt Lake City, the Mormon capital, plunges into
the Tuilla Valley, across the American Desert, Cedar and Humboldt Mountains,
the Sierra Nevada, and descends, via Sacramento, to the Pacific--its grade, even
on the Rocky Mountains, never exceeding one hundred and twelve feet to the
mile.

Such was the road to be traversed in seven days, which would enable Phileas


Fogg--at least, so he hoped--to take the Atlantic steamer at New York on the 11th
for Liverpool.

The car which he occupied was a sort of long omnibus on eight wheels, and
with no compartments in the interior. It was supplied with two rows of seats,
perpendicular to the direction of the train on either side of an aisle which
conducted to the front and rear platforms. These platforms were found
throughout the train, and the passengers were able to pass from one end of the
train to the other. It was supplied with saloon cars, balcony cars, restaurants, and
smoking-cars; theatre cars alone were wanting, and they will have these some
day.

Book and news dealers, sellers of edibles, drinkables, and cigars, who
seemed to have plenty of customers, were continually circulating in the aisles.

The train left Oakland station at six o'clock. It was already night, cold and
cheerless, the heavens being overcast with clouds which seemed to threaten
snow. The train did not proceed rapidly; counting the stoppages, it did not run
more than twenty miles an hour, which was a sufficient speed, however, to
enable it to reach Omaha within its designated time.

There was but little conversation in the car, and soon many of the passengers
were overcome with sleep. Passepartout found himself beside the detective; but
he did not talk to him. After recent events, their relations with each other had
grown somewhat cold; there could no longer be mutual sympathy or intimacy
between them. Fix's manner had not changed; but Passepartout was very
reserved, and ready to strangle his former friend on the slightest provocation.

Snow began to fall an hour after they started, a fine snow, however, which
happily could not obstruct the train; nothing could be seen from the windows but
a vast, white sheet, against which the smoke of the locomotive had a greyish
aspect.

At eight o'clock a steward entered the car and announced that the time for
going to bed had arrived; and in a few minutes the car was transformed into a
dormitory. The backs of the seats were thrown back, bedsteads carefully packed
were rolled out by an ingenious system, berths were suddenly improvised, and
each traveller had soon at his disposition a comfortable bed, protected from
curious eyes by thick curtains. The sheets were clean and the pillows soft. It only
remained to go to bed and sleep which everybody did--while the train sped on
across the State of California.

The country between San Francisco and Sacramento is not very hilly. The
Central Pacific, taking Sacramento for its starting-point, extends eastward to
meet the road from Omaha. The line from San Francisco to Sacramento runs ina
northeasterly direction, along the American River, which empties into San Pablo


Bay. The one hundred and twenty miles between these cities were accomplished
in six hours, and towards midnight, while fast asleep, the travellers passed
through Sacramento; so that they saw nothing of that important place, the seat of
the State government, with its fine quays, its broad streets, its noble hotels,
squares, and churches.

The train, on leaving Sacramento, and passing the junction, Roclin, Auburn,
and Colfax, entered the range of the Sierra Nevada. 'Cisco was reached at seven
in the morning; and an hour later the dormitory was transformed into an ordinary
car, and the travellers could observe the picturesque beauties of the mountain
region through which they were steaming. The railway track wound in and out
among the passes, now approaching the mountain-sides, now suspended over
precipices, avoiding abrupt angles by bold curves, plunging into narrow defiles,
which seemed to have no outlet. The locomotive, its great funnel emitting a
weird light, with its sharp bell, and its cow-catcher extended like a spur, mingled
its shrieks and bellowings with the noise of torrents and cascades, and twined its
smoke among the branches of the gigantic pines.

There were few or no bridges or tunnels on the route. The railway turned
around the sides of the mountains, and did not attempt to violate nature by taking
the shortest cut from one point to another.

The train entered the State of Nevada through the Carson Valley about nine
o'clock, going always northeasterly; and at midday reached Reno, where there
was a delay of twenty minutes for breakfast.

From this point the road, running along Humboldt River, passed northward
for several miles by its banks; then it turned eastward, and kept by the river until
it reached the Humboldt Range, nearly at the extreme eastern limit of Nevada.

Having breakfasted, Mr. Fogg and his companions resumed their places in
the car, and observed the varied landscape which unfolded itself as they passed
along the vast prairies, the mountains lining the horizon, and the creeks, with
their frothy, foaming streams. Sometimes a great herd of buffaloes, massing
together in the distance, seemed like a moveable dam. These innumerable
multitudes of ruminating beasts often form an insurmountable obstacle to the
passage of the trains; thousands of them have been seen passing over the track
for hours together, in compact ranks. The locomotive is then forced to stop and
wait till the road is once more clear.

This happened, indeed, to the train in which Mr. Fogg was travelling. About
twelve o'clock a troop of ten or twelve thousand head of buffalo encumbered the
track. The locomotive, slackening its speed, tried to clear the way with its cow-
catcher; but the mass of animals was too great. The buffaloes marched along
with a tranquil gait, uttering now and then deafening bellowings. There was no


use of interrupting them, for, having taken a particular direction, nothing can
moderate and change their course; it is a torrent of living flesh which no dam
could contain.

The travellers gazed on this curious spectacle from the platforms; but Phileas
Fogg, who had the most reason of all to be in a hurry, remained in his seat, and
waited philosophically until it should please the buffaloes to get out of the way.

Passepartout was furious at the delay they occasioned, and longed to
discharge his arsenal of revolvers upon them.

"What a country!" cried he. "Mere cattle stop the trains, and go by in a
procession, just as if they were not impeding travel! Parbleu! I should like to
know if Mr. Fogg foresaw this mishap in his programme! And here's an engineer
who doesn't dare to run the locomotive into this herd of beasts!"

The engineer did not try to overcome the obstacle, and he was wise. He
would have crushed the first buffaloes, no doubt, with the cow-catcher; but the
locomotive, however powerful, would soon have been checked, the train would
inevitably have been thrown off the track, and would then have been helpless.

The best course was to wait patiently, and regain the lost time by greater
speed when the obstacle was removed. The procession of buffaloes lasted three
full hours, and it was night before the track was clear. The last ranks of the herd
were now passing over the rails, while the first had already disappeared below
the southern horizon.

It was eight o'clock when the train passed through the defiles of the
Humboldt Range, and half-past nine when it penetrated Utah, the region of the
Great Salt Lake, the singular colony of the Mormons.


Chapter XXVII


IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT UNDERGOES, AT A SPEED OF TWENTY
MILES AN HOUR, A COURSE OF MORMON HISTORY

During the night of the Sth of December, the train ran south-easterly for
about fifty miles; then rose an equal distance in a northeasterly direction,
towards the Great Salt Lake.

Passepartout, about nine o'clock, went out upon the platform to take the air.
The weather was cold, the heavens grey, but it was not snowing. The sun's disc,
enlarged by the mist, seemed an enormous ring of gold, and Passepartout was
amusing himself by calculating its value in pounds sterling, when he was
diverted from this interesting study by a strange-looking personage who made
his appearance on the platform.

This personage, who had taken the train at Elko, was tall and dark, with
black moustache, black stockings, a black silk hat, a black waistcoat, black
trousers, a white cravat, and dogskin gloves. He might have been taken for a
clergyman. He went from one end of the train to the other, and affixed to the
door of each car a notice written in manuscript.

Passepartout approached and read one of these notices, which stated that
Elder William Hitch, Mormon missionary, taking advantage of his presence on
train No. 48, would deliver a lecture on Mormonism in car No. 117, from eleven
to twelve o'clock; and that he invited all who were desirous of being instructed
concerning the mysteries of the religion of the "Latter Day Saints" to attend.

"T'll go," said Passepartout to himself. He knew nothing of Mormonism
except the custom of polygamy, which is its foundation.

The news quickly spread through the train, which contained about one
hundred passengers, thirty of whom, at most, attracted by the notice, ensconced
themselves in car No. 117. Passepartout took one of the front seats. Neither Mr.
Fogg nor Fix cared to attend.

At the appointed hour Elder William Hitch rose, and, in an irritated voice, as
if he had already been contradicted, said, "I tell you that Joe Smith is a martyr,
that his brother Hiram is a martyr, and that the persecutions of the United States
Government against the prophets will also make a martyr of Brigham Young.
Who dares to say the contrary?"

No one ventured to gainsay the missionary, whose excited tone contrasted
curiously with his naturally calm visage. No doubt his anger arose from the
hardships to which the Mormons were actually subjected. The government had


just succeeded, with some difficulty, in reducing these independent fanatics to its
rule. It had made itself master of Utah, and subjected that territory to the laws of
the Union, after imprisoning Brigham Young on a charge of rebellion and
polygamy. The disciples of the prophet had since redoubled their efforts, and
resisted, by words at least, the authority of Congress. Elder Hitch, as is seen, was
trying to make proselytes on the very railway trains.

Then, emphasising his words with his loud voice and frequent gestures, he
related the history of the Mormons from Biblical times: how that, in Israel, a
Mormon prophet of the tribe of Joseph published the annals of the new religion,
and bequeathed them to his son Mormon; how, many centuries later, a translation
of this precious book, which was written in Egyptian, was made by Joseph
Smith, junior, a Vermont farmer, who revealed himself as a mystical prophet in
1825; and how, in short, the celestial messenger appeared to him in an
illuminated forest, and gave him the annals of the Lord.

Several of the audience, not being much interested in the missionary's
narrative, here left the car; but Elder Hitch, continuing his lecture, related how
Smith, junior, with his father, two brothers, and a few disciples, founded the
church of the "Latter Day Saints," which, adopted not only in America, but in
England, Norway and Sweden, and Germany, counts many artisans, as well as
men engaged in the liberal professions, among its members; how a colony was
established in Ohio, a temple erected there at a cost of two hundred thousand
dollars, and a town built at Kirkland; how Smith became an enterprising banker,
and received from a simple mummy showman a papyrus scroll written by
Abraham and several famous Egyptians.

The Elder's story became somewhat wearisome, and his audience grew
gradually less, until it was reduced to twenty passengers. But this did not
disconcert the enthusiast, who proceeded with the story of Joseph Smith's
bankruptcy in 1837, and how his ruined creditors gave him a coat of tar and
feathers; his reappearance some years afterwards, more honourable and
honoured than ever, at Independence, Missouri, the chief of a flourishing colony
of three thousand disciples, and his pursuit thence by outraged Gentiles, and
retirement into the Far West.

Ten hearers only were now left, among them honest Passepartout, who was
listening with all his ears. Thus he learned that, after long persecutions, Smith
reappeared in Illinois, and in 1839 founded a community at Nauvoo, on the
Mississippi, numbering twenty-five thousand souls, of which he became mayor,
chief justice, and general-in-chief; that he announced himself, in 1843, as a
candidate for the Presidency of the United States; and that finally, being drawn
into ambuscade at Carthage, he was thrown into prison, and assassinated by a


band of men disguised in masks.

Passepartout was now the only person left in the car, and the Elder, looking
him full in the face, reminded him that, two years after the assassination of
Joseph Smith, the inspired prophet, Brigham Young, his successor, left Nauvoo
for the banks of the Great Salt Lake, where, in the midst of that fertile region,
directly on the route of the emigrants who crossed Utah on their way to
California, the new colony, thanks to the polygamy practised by the Mormons,
had flourished beyond expectations.

"And this," added Elder William Hitch, "this is why the jealousy of Congress
has been aroused against us! Why have the soldiers of the Union invaded the soil
of Utah? Why has Brigham Young, our chief, been imprisoned, in contempt of
all justice? Shall we yield to force? Never! Driven from Vermont, driven from
Illinois, driven from Ohio, driven from Missouri, driven from Utah, we shall yet
find some independent territory on which to plant our tents. And you, my
brother," continued the Elder, fixing his angry eyes upon his single auditor, "will
you not plant yours there, too, under the shadow of our flag?"

"No!" replied Passepartout courageously, in his turn retiring from the car, and
leaving the Elder to preach to vacancy.

During the lecture the train had been making good progress, and towards
half-past twelve it reached the northwest border of the Great Salt Lake. Thence
the passengers could observe the vast extent of this interior sea, which is also
called the Dead Sea, and into which flows an American Jordan. It is a
picturesque expanse, framed in lofty crags in large strata, encrusted with white
salt--a superb sheet of water, which was formerly of larger extent than now, its
shores having encroached with the lapse of time, and thus at once reduced its
breadth and increased its depth.

The Salt Lake, seventy miles long and thirty-five wide, is situated three miles
eight hundred feet above the sea. Quite different from Lake Asphaltite, whose
depression is twelve hundred feet below the sea, it contains considerable salt,
and one quarter of the weight of its water is solid matter, its specific weight
being 1,170, and, after being distilled, 1,000. Fishes are, of course, unable to live
in it, and those which descend through the Jordan, the Weber, and other streams
soon perish.

The country around the lake was well cultivated, for the Mormons are mostly
farmers; while ranches and pens for domesticated animals, fields of wheat, corn,
and other cereals, luxuriant prairies, hedges of wild rose, clumps of acacias and
milk-wort, would have been seen six months later. Now the ground was covered
with a thin powdering of snow.

The train reached Ogden at two o'clock, where it rested for six hours, Mr.


Fogg and his party had time to pay a visit to Salt Lake City, connected with
Ogden by a branch road; and they spent two hours in this strikingly American
town, built on the pattern of other cities of the Union, like a checker-board, "with
the sombre sadness of right-angles," as Victor Hugo expresses it. The founder of
the City of the Saints could not escape from the taste for symmetry which
distinguishes the Anglo-Saxons. In this strange country, where the people are
certainly not up to the level of their institutions, everything is done "squarely"--
cities, houses, and follies.

The travellers, then, were promenading, at three o'clock, about the streets of
the town built between the banks of the Jordan and the spurs of the Wahsatch
Range. They saw few or no churches, but the prophet's mansion, the court-house,
and the arsenal, blue-brick houses with verandas and porches, surrounded by
gardens bordered with acacias, palms, and locusts. A clay and pebble wall, built
in 1853, surrounded the town; and in the principal street were the market and
several hotels adorned with pavilions. The place did not seem thickly populated.
The streets were almost deserted, except in the vicinity of the temple, which they
only reached after having traversed several quarters surrounded by palisades.
There were many women, which was easily accounted for by the "peculiar
institution" of the Mormons; but it must not be supposed that all the Mormons
are polygamists. They are free to marry or not, as they please; but it is worth
noting that it is mainly the female citizens of Utah who are anxious to marry, as,
according to the Mormon religion, maiden ladies are not admitted to the
possession of its highest joys. These poor creatures seemed to be neither well off
nor happy. Some--the more well-to-do, no doubt--wore short, open, black silk
dresses, under a hood or modest shawl; others were habited in Indian fashion.

Passepartout could not behold without a certain fright these women, charged,
in groups, with conferring happiness on a single Mormon. His common sense
pitied, above all, the husband. It seemed to him a terrible thing to have to guide
sO Many wives at once across the vicissitudes of life, and to conduct them, as it
were, in a body to the Mormon paradise with the prospect of seeing them in the
company of the glorious Smith, who doubtless was the chief ornament of that
delightful place, to all eternity. He felt decidedly repelled from such a vocation,
and he imagined--perhaps he was mistaken--that the fair ones of Salt Lake City
cast rather alarming glances on his person. Happily, his stay there was but brief.
At four the party found themselves again at the station, took their places in the
train, and the whistle sounded for starting. Just at the moment, however, that the
locomotive wheels began to move, cries of "Stop! stop!" were heard.

Trains, like time and tide, stop for no one. The gentleman who uttered the
cries was evidently a belated Mormon. He was breathless with running. Happily


for him, the station had neither gates nor barriers. He rushed along the track,
jumped on the rear platform of the train, and fell, exhausted, into one of the
seats.

Passepartout, who had been anxiously watching this amateur gymnast,
approached him with lively interest, and learned that he had taken flight after an
unpleasant domestic scene.

When the Mormon had recovered his breath, Passepartout ventured to ask
him politely how many wives he had; for, from the manner in which he had
decamped, it might be thought that he had twenty at least.

"One, sir," replied the Mormon, raising his arms heavenward--"one, and that
was enough!"


Chapter XXVIII


IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT DOES NOT SUCCEED IN MAKING
ANYBODY LISTEN TO REASON

The train, on leaving Great Salt Lake at Ogden, passed northward for an hour
as far as Weber River, having completed nearly nine hundred miles from San
Francisco. From this point it took an easterly direction towards the jagged
Wahsatch Mountains. It was in the section included between this range and the
Rocky Mountains that the American engineers found the most formidable
difficulties in laying the road, and that the government granted a subsidy of
forty-eight thousand dollars per mile, instead of sixteen thousand allowed for the
work done on the plains. But the engineers, instead of violating nature, avoided
its difficulties by winding around, instead of penetrating the rocks. One tunnel
only, fourteen thousand feet in length, was pierced in order to arrive at the great
basin.

The track up to this time had reached its highest elevation at the Great Salt
Lake. From this point it described a long curve, descending towards Bitter Creek
Valley, to rise again to the dividing ridge of the waters between the Atlantic and
the Pacific. There were many creeks in this mountainous region, and it was
necessary to cross Muddy Creek, Green Creek, and others, upon culverts.

Passepartout grew more and more impatient as they went on, while Fix
longed to get out of this difficult region, and was more anxious than Phileas
Fogg himself to be beyond the danger of delays and accidents, and set foot on
English soil.

At ten o'clock at night the train stopped at Fort Bridger station, and twenty
minutes later entered Wyoming Territory, following the valley of Bitter Creek
throughout. The next day, 7th December, they stopped for a quarter of an hour at
Green River station. Snow had fallen abundantly during the night, but, being
mixed with rain, it had half melted, and did not interrupt their progress. The bad
weather, however, annoyed Passepartout; for the accumulation of snow, by
blocking the wheels of the cars, would certainly have been fatal to Mr. Fogg's
tour.

"What an idea!" he said to himself. "Why did my master make this journey
in winter? Couldn't he have waited for the good season to increase his chances?"

While the worthy Frenchman was absorbed in the state of the sky and the
depression of the temperature, Aouda was experiencing fears from a totally
different cause.


Several passengers had got off at Green River, and were walking up and
down the platforms; and among these Aouda recognised Colonel Stamp Proctor,
the same who had so grossly insulted Phileas Fogg at the San Francisco meeting.
Not wishing to be recognised, the young woman drew back from the window,
feeling much alarm at her discovery. She was attached to the man who, however
coldly, gave her daily evidences of the most absolute devotion. She did not
comprehend, perhaps, the depth of the sentiment with which her protector
inspired her, which she called gratitude, but which, though she was unconscious
of it, was really more than that. Her heart sank within her when she recognised
the man whom Mr. Fogg desired, sooner or later, to call to account for his
conduct. Chance alone, it was clear, had brought Colonel Proctor on this train;
but there he was, and it was necessary, at all hazards, that Phileas Fogg should
not perceive his adversary.

Aouda seized a moment when Mr. Fogg was asleep to tell Fix and
Passepartout whom she had seen.

"That Proctor on this train!" cried Fix. "Well, reassure yourself, madam;
before he settles with Mr. Fogg; he has got to deal with me! It seems to me that I
was the more insulted of the two."

"And, besides," added Passepartout, "I'll take charge of him, colonel as he
is."

"Mr. Fix," resumed Aouda, "Mr. Fogg will allow no one to avenge him. He
said that he would come back to America to find this man. Should he perceive
Colonel Proctor, we could not prevent a collision which might have terrible
results. He must not see him."

"You are right, madam," replied Fix; "a meeting between them might ruin all.
Whether he were victorious or beaten, Mr. Fogg would be delayed, and--"

"And," added Passepartout, "that would play the game of the gentlemen of
the Reform Club. In four days we shall be in New York. Well, if my master does
not leave this car during those four days, we may hope that chance will not bring
him face to face with this confounded American. We must, if possible, prevent
his stirring out of it."

The conversation dropped. Mr. Fogg had just woke up, and was looking out
of the window. Soon after Passepartout, without being heard by his master or
Aouda, whispered to the detective, "Would you really fight for him?"

"I would do anything," replied Fix, in a tone which betrayed determined will,
"to get him back living to Europe!"

Passepartout felt something like a shudder shoot through his frame, but his
confidence in his master remained unbroken.

Was there any means of detaining Mr. Fogg in the car, to avoid a meeting


between him and the colonel? It ought not to be a difficult task, since that
gentleman was naturally sedentary and little curious. The detective, at least,
seemed to have found a way; for, after a few moments, he said to Mr. Fogg,
"These are long and slow hours, sir, that we are passing on the railway."

"Yes," replied Mr. Fogg; "but they pass."

"You were in the habit of playing whist," resumed Fix, "on the steamers."

"Yes; but it would be difficult to do so here. I have neither cards nor
partners."

"Oh, but we can easily buy some cards, for they are sold on all the American
trains. And as for partners, if madam plays--"

"Certainly, sir," Aouda quickly replied; "I understand whist. It is part of an
English education."

"I myself have some pretensions to playing a good game. Well, here are three
of us, and a dummy--"

"As you please, sir," replied Phileas Fogg, heartily glad to resume his
favourite pastime even on the railway.

Passepartout was dispatched in search of the steward, and soon returned with
two packs of cards, some pins, counters, and a shelf covered with cloth.

The game commenced. Aouda understood whist sufficiently well, and even
received some compliments on her playing from Mr. Fogg. As for the detective,
he was simply an adept, and worthy of being matched against his present
opponent.

"Now," thought Passepartout, "we've got him. He won't budge.”

At eleven in the morning the train had reached the dividing ridge of the
waters at Bridger Pass, seven thousand five hundred and twenty-four feet above
the level of the sea, one of the highest points attained by the track in crossing the
Rocky Mountains. After going about two hundred miles, the travellers at last
found themselves on one of those vast plains which extend to the Atlantic, and
which nature has made so propitious for laying the iron road.

On the declivity of the Atlantic basin the first streams, branches of the North
Platte River, already appeared. The whole northern and eastern horizon was
bounded by the immense semi-circular curtain which is formed by the southern
portion of the Rocky Mountains, the highest being Laramie Peak. Between this
and the railway extended vast plains, plentifully irrigated. On the right rose the
lower spurs of the mountainous mass which extends southward to the sources of
the Arkansas River, one of the great tributaries of the Missouri.

At half-past twelve the travellers caught sight for an instant of Fort Halleck,
which commands that section; and in a few more hours the Rocky Mountains
were crossed. There was reason to hope, then, that no accident would mark the


journey through this difficult country. The snow had ceased falling, and the air
became crisp and cold. Large birds, frightened by the locomotive, rose and flew
off in the distance. No wild beast appeared on the plain. It was a desert in its vast
nakedness.

After a comfortable breakfast, served in the car, Mr. Fogg and his partners
had just resumed whist, when a violent whistling was heard, and the train
stopped. Passepartout put his head out of the door, but saw nothing to cause the
delay; no station was in view.

Aouda and Fix feared that Mr. Fogg might take it into his head to get out; but
that gentleman contented himself with saying to his servant, "See what is the
matter."

Passepartout rushed out of the car. Thirty or forty passengers had already
descended, amongst them Colonel Stamp Proctor.

The train had stopped before a red signal which blocked the way. The
engineer and conductor were talking excitedly with a signal-man, whom the
station-master at Medicine Bow, the next stopping place, had sent on before. The
passengers drew around and took part in the discussion, in which Colonel
Proctor, with his insolent manner, was conspicuous.

Passepartout, joining the group, heard the signal-man say, "No! you can't
pass. The bridge at Medicine Bow is shaky, and would not bear the weight of the
train.”

This was a suspension-bridge thrown over some rapids, about a mile from
the place where they now were. According to the signal-man, it was in a ruinous
condition, several of the iron wires being broken; and it was impossible to risk
the passage. He did not in any way exaggerate the condition of the bridge. It may
be taken for granted that, rash as the Americans usually are, when they are
prudent there is good reason for it.

Passepartout, not daring to apprise his master of what he heard, listened with
set teeth, immovable as a statue.

"Hum!" cried Colonel Proctor; "but we are not going to stay here, I imagine,
and take root in the snow?"

"Colonel," replied the conductor, "we have telegraphed to Omaha for a train,
but it is not likely that it will reach Medicine Bow is less than six hours."

"Six hours!" cried Passepartout.

"Certainly," returned the conductor, "besides, it will take us as long as that to
reach Medicine Bow on foot."

"But it is only a mile from here," said one of the passengers.

"Yes, but it's on the other side of the river."

"And can't we cross that in a boat?" asked the colonel.


"That's impossible. The creek is swelled by the rains. It is a rapid, and we
shall have to make a circuit of ten miles to the north to find a ford."

The colonel launched a volley of oaths, denouncing the railway company and
the conductor; and Passepartout, who was furious, was not disinclined to make
common cause with him. Here was an obstacle, indeed, which all his master's
banknotes could not remove.

There was a general disappointment among the passengers, who, without
reckoning the delay, saw themselves compelled to trudge fifteen miles over a
plain covered with snow. They grumbled and protested, and would certainly
have thus attracted Phileas Fogg's attention if he had not been completely
absorbed in his game.

Passepartout found that he could not avoid telling his master what had
occurred, and, with hanging head, he was turning towards the car, when the
engineer, a true Yankee, named Forster called out, "Gentlemen, perhaps there is
a way, after all, to get over."

"On the bridge?" asked a passenger.

"On the bridge."

"With our train?"

"With our train."

Passepartout stopped short, and eagerly listened to the engineer.

"But the bridge is unsafe," urged the conductor.

"No matter,” replied Forster; "I think that by putting on the very highest
speed we might have a chance of getting over."

"The devil!" muttered Passepartout.

But a number of the passengers were at once attracted by the engineer's
proposal, and Colonel Proctor was especially delighted, and found the plan a
very feasible one. He told stories about engineers leaping their trains over rivers
without bridges, by putting on full steam; and many of those present avowed
themselves of the engineer's mind.

"We have fifty chances out of a hundred of getting over," said one.

"Eighty! ninety!"

Passepartout was astounded, and, though ready to attempt anything to get
over Medicine Creek, thought the experiment proposed a little too American.
"Besides," thought he, "there's a still more simple way, and it does not even
occur to any of these people! Sir," said he aloud to one of the passengers, "the
engineer's plan seems to me a little dangerous, but--"

"Eighty chances!" replied the passenger, turning his back on him.

"I know it," said Passepartout, turning to another passenger, "but a simple
idea--"


"Ideas are no use," returned the American, shrugging his shoulders, "as the
engineer assures us that we can pass."

"Doubtless," urged Passepartout, "we can pass, but perhaps it would be more
prudent--"

"What! Prudent!" cried Colonel Proctor, whom this word seemed to excite
prodigiously. "At full speed, don't you see, at full speed!"

"I know--I see," repeated Passepartout; "but it would be, if not more prudent,
since that word displeases you, at least more natural--"

"Who! What! What's the matter with this fellow?" cried several.

The poor fellow did not know to whom to address himself.

"Are you afraid?" asked Colonel Proctor.

"I afraid? Very well; I will show these people that a Frenchman can be as
American as they!"

"All aboard!" cried the conductor.

"Yes, all aboard!" repeated Passepartout, and immediately. "But they can't
prevent me from thinking that it would be more natural for us to cross the bridge
on foot, and let the train come after!"

But no one heard this sage reflection, nor would anyone have acknowledged
its justice. The passengers resumed their places in the cars. Passepartout took his
seat without telling what had passed. The whist-players were quite absorbed in
their game.

The locomotive whistled vigorously; the engineer, reversing the steam,
backed the train for nearly a mile--retiring, like a jumper, in order to take a
longer leap. Then, with another whistle, he began to move forward; the train
increased its speed, and soon its rapidity became frightful; a prolonged screech
issued from the locomotive; the piston worked up and down twenty strokes to
the second. They perceived that the whole train, rushing on at the rate of a
hundred miles an hour, hardly bore upon the rails at all.

And they passed over! It was like a flash. No one saw the bridge. The train
leaped, so to speak, from one bank to the other, and the engineer could not stop it
until it had gone five miles beyond the station. But scarcely had the train passed
the river, when the bridge, completely ruined, fell with a crash into the rapids of
Medicine Bow.


Chapter XXIX


IN WHICH CERTAIN INCIDENTS ARE NARRATED WHICH ARE
ONLY TO BE MET WITH ON AMERICAN RAILROADS

The train pursued its course, that evening, without interruption, passing Fort
Saunders, crossing Cheyne Pass, and reaching Evans Pass. The road here
attained the highest elevation of the journey, eight thousand and ninety-two feet
above the level of the sea. The travellers had now only to descend to the Atlantic
by limitless plains, levelled by nature. A branch of the "grand trunk" led off
southward to Denver, the capital of Colorado. The country round about is rich in
gold and silver, and more than fifty thousand inhabitants are already settled
there.

Thirteen hundred and eighty-two miles had been passed over from San
Francisco, in three days and three nights; four days and nights more would
probably bring them to New York. Phileas Fogg was not as yet behind-hand.

During the night Camp Walbach was passed on the left; Lodge Pole Creek
ran parallel with the road, marking the boundary between the territories of
Wyoming and Colorado. They entered Nebraska at eleven, passed near
Sedgwick, and touched at Julesburg, on the southern branch of the Platte River.

It was here that the Union Pacific Railroad was inaugurated on the 23rd of
October, 1867, by the chief engineer, General Dodge. Two powerful
locomotives, carrying nine cars of invited guests, amongst whom was Thomas C.
Durant, vice-president of the road, stopped at this point; cheers were given, the
Sioux and Pawnees performed an imitation Indian battle, fireworks were let off,
and the first number of the Railway Pioneer was printed by a press brought on
the train. Thus was celebrated the inauguration of this great railroad, a mighty
instrument of progress and civilisation, thrown across the desert, and destined to
link together cities and towns which do not yet exist. The whistle of the
locomotive, more powerful than Amphion's lyre, was about to bid them rise from
American soil.

Fort McPherson was left behind at eight in the moming, and three hundred
and fifty-seven miles had yet to be traversed before reaching Omaha. The road
followed the capricious windings of the southern branch of the Platte River, on
its left bank. At nine the train stopped at the important town of North Platte, built
between the two arms of the river, which rejoin each other around it and form a
single artery, a large tributary, whose waters empty into the Missouri a little
above Omaha.


The one hundred and first meridian was passed.

Mr. Fogg and his partners had resumed their game; no one--not even the
dummy--complained of the length of the trip. Fix had begun by winning several
guineas, which he seemed likely to lose; but he showed himself a not less eager
whist-player than Mr. Fogg. During the morning, chance distinctly favoured that
gentleman. Trumps and honours were showered upon his hands.

Once, having resolved on a bold stroke, he was on the point of playing a
spade, when a voice behind him said, "I should play a diamond."

Mr. Fogg, Aouda, and Fix raised their heads, and beheld Colonel Proctor.

Stamp Proctor and Phileas Fogg recognised each other at once.

"Ah! it's you, is it, Englishman?" cried the colonel; "it's you who are going to
play a spade!"

"And who plays it," replied Phileas Fogg coolly, throwing down the ten of
spades.

"Well, it pleases me to have it diamonds," replied Colonel Proctor, in an
insolent tone.

He made a movement as if to seize the card which had just been played,
adding, "You don't understand anything about whist."

"Perhaps I do, as well as another," said Phileas Fogg, rising.

"You have only to try, son of John Bull," replied the colonel.

Aouda tured pale, and her blood ran cold. She seized Mr. Fogg's arm and
gently pulled him back. Passepartout was ready to pounce upon the American,
who was staring insolently at his opponent. But Fix got up, and, going to
Colonel Proctor said, "You forget that it is I with whom you have to deal, sir; for
it was I whom you not only insulted, but struck!"

"Mr. Fix," said Mr. Fogg, "pardon me, but this affair is mine, and mine only.
The colonel has again insulted me, by insisting that I should not play a spade,
and he shall give me satisfaction for it."

"When and where you will," replied the American, "and with whatever
weapon you choose."

Aouda in vain attempted to retain Mr. Fogg; as vainly did the detective
endeavour to make the quarrel his. Passepartout wished to throw the colonel out
of the window, but a sign from his master checked him. Phileas Fogg left the car,
and the American followed him upon the platform. "Sir," said Mr. Fogg to his
adversary, "I am in a great hurry to get back to Europe, and any delay whatever
will be greatly to my disadvantage."

"Well, what's that to me?" replied Colonel Proctor.

"Sir," said Mr. Fogg, very politely, "after our meeting at San Francisco, I
determined to return to America and find you as soon as I had completed the


business which called me to England."

"Really!"

"Will you appoint a meeting for six months hence?"

"Why not ten years hence?"

"I say six months," returned Phileas Fogg; "and I shall be at the place of
meeting promptly."

"All this is an evasion," cried Stamp Proctor. "Now or never!"

"Very good. You are going to New York?"

"No."

"To Chicago?"

"No."

"To Omaha?"

"What difference is it to you? Do you know Plum Creek?"

"No," replied Mr. Fogg.

"It's the next station. The train will be there in an hour, and will stop there ten
minutes. In ten minutes several revolver-shots could be exchanged."

"Very well," said Mr. Fogg. "I will stop at Plum Creek."

"And I guess you'll stay there too," added the American insolently.

"Who knows?" replied Mr. Fogg, returning to the car as coolly as usual. He
began to reassure Aouda, telling her that blusterers were never to be feared, and
begged Fix to be his second at the approaching duel, a request which the
detective could not refuse. Mr. Fogg resumed the interrupted game with perfect
calmness.

At eleven o'clock the locomotive's whistle announced that they were
approaching Plum Creek station. Mr. Fogg rose, and, followed by Fix, went out
upon the platform. Passepartout accompanied him, carrying a pair of revolvers.
Aouda remained in the car, as pale as death.

The door of the next car opened, and Colonel Proctor appeared on the
platform, attended by a Yankee of his own stamp as his second. But just as the
combatants were about to step from the train, the conductor hurried up, and
shouted, "You can't get off, gentlemen!"

"Why not?" asked the colonel.

"We are twenty minutes late, and we shall not stop."

"But I am going to fight a duel with this gentleman."

"I am sorry," said the conductor; "but we shall be off at once. There's the bell
ringing now."

The train started.

"I'm really very sorry, gentlemen," said the conductor. "Under any other
circumstances I should have been happy to oblige you. But, after all, as you have


not had time to fight here, why not fight as we go along?"

"That wouldn't be convenient, perhaps, for this gentleman," said the colonel,
in a jeering tone.

"It would be perfectly so," replied Phileas Fogg.

"Well, we are really in America," thought Passepartout, "and the conductor is
a gentleman of the first order!"

So muttering, he followed his master.

The two combatants, their seconds, and the conductor passed through the
cars to the rear of the train. The last car was only occupied by a dozen
passengers, whom the conductor politely asked if they would not be so kind as to
leave it vacant for a few moments, as two gentlemen had an affair of honour to
settle. The passengers granted the request with alacrity, and straightway
disappeared on the platform.

The car, which was some fifty feet long, was very convenient for their
purpose. The adversaries might march on each other in the aisle, and fire at their
ease. Never was duel more easily arranged. Mr. Fogg and Colonel Proctor, each
provided with two six-barrelled revolvers, entered the car. The seconds,
remaining outside, shut them in. They were to begin firing at the first whistle of
the locomotive. After an interval of two minutes, what remained of the two
gentlemen would be taken from the car.

Nothing could be more simple. Indeed, it was all so simple that Fix and
Passepartout felt their hearts beating as if they would crack. They were listening
for the whistle agreed upon, when suddenly savage cries resounded in the air,
accompanied by reports which certainly did not issue from the car where the
duellists were. The reports continued in front and the whole length of the train.
Cries of terror proceeded from the interior of the cars.

Colonel Proctor and Mr. Fogg, revolvers in hand, hastily quitted their prison,
and rushed forward where the noise was most clamorous. They then perceived
that the train was attacked by a band of Sioux.

This was not the first attempt of these daring Indians, for more than once
they had waylaid trains on the road. A hundred of them had, according to their
habit, jumped upon the steps without stopping the train, with the ease of a clown
mounting a horse at full gallop.

The Sioux were armed with guns, from which came the reports, to which the
passengers, who were almost all armed, responded by revolver-shots.

The Indians had first mounted the engine, and half stunned the engineer and
stoker with blows from their muskets. A Sioux chief, wishing to stop the train,
but not knowing how to work the regulator, had opened wide instead of closing
the steam-valve, and the locomotive was plunging forward with terrific velocity.


The Sioux had at the same time invaded the cars, skipping like enraged
monkeys over the roofs, thrusting open the doors, and fighting hand to hand with
the passengers. Penetrating the baggage-car, they pillaged it, throwing the trunks
out of the train. The cries and shots were constant. The travellers defended
themselves bravely; some of the cars were barricaded, and sustained a siege, like
moving forts, carried along at a speed of a hundred miles an hour.

Aouda behaved courageously from the first. She defended herself like a true
heroine with a revolver, which she shot through the broken windows whenever a
savage made his appearance. Twenty Sioux had fallen mortally wounded to the
ground, and the wheels crushed those who fell upon the rails as if they had been
worms. Several passengers, shot or stunned, lay on the seats.

It was necessary to put an end to the struggle, which had lasted for ten
minutes, and which would result in the triumph of the Sioux if the train was not
stopped. Fort Kearney station, where there was a garrison, was only two miles
distant; but, that once passed, the Sioux would be masters of the train between
Fort Kearney and the station beyond.

The conductor was fighting beside Mr. Fogg, when he was shot and fell. At
the same moment he cried, "Unless the train is stopped in five minutes, we are
lost!"

"It shall be stopped," said Phileas Fogg, preparing to rush from the car.

"Stay, Monsieur," cried Passepartout; "I will go."

Mr. Fogg had not time to stop the brave fellow, who, opening a door
unperceived by the Indians, succeeded in slipping under the car; and while the
struggle continued and the balls whizzed across each other over his head, he
made use of his old acrobatic experience, and with amazing agility worked his
way under the cars, holding on to the chains, aiding himself by the brakes and
edges of the sashes, creeping from one car to another with marvellous skill, and
thus gaining the forward end of the train.

There, suspended by one hand between the baggage-car and the tender, with
the other he loosened the safety chains; but, owing to the traction, he would
never have succeeded in unscrewing the yoking-bar, had not a violent
concussion jolted this bar out. The train, now detached from the engine,
remained a little behind, whilst the locomotive rushed forward with increased
speed.

Carried on by the force already acquired, the train still moved for several
minutes; but the brakes were worked and at last they stopped, less than a
hundred feet from Kearney station.

The soldiers of the fort, attracted by the shots, hurried up; the Sioux had not
expected them, and decamped in a body before the train entirely stopped.


But when the passengers counted each other on the station platform several
were found missing; among others the courageous Frenchman, whose devotion
had just saved them.


Chapter XXX


IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG SIMPLY DOES HIS DUTY

Three passengers including Passepartout had disappeared. Had they been
killed in the struggle? Were they taken prisoners by the Sioux? It was impossible
to tell.

There were many wounded, but none mortally. Colonel Proctor was one of
the most seriously hurt; he had fought bravely, and a ball had entered his groin.
He was carried into the station with the other wounded passengers, to receive
such attention as could be of avail.

Aouda was safe; and Phileas Fogg, who had been in the thickest of the fight,
had not received a scratch. Fix was slightly wounded in the arm. But
Passepartout was not to be found, and tears coursed down Aouda's cheeks.

All the passengers had got out of the train, the wheels of which were stained
with blood. From the tyres and spokes hung ragged pieces of flesh. As far as the
eye could reach on the white plain behind, red trails were visible. The last Sioux
were disappearing in the south, along the banks of Republican River.

Mr. Fogg, with folded arms, remained motionless. He had a serious decision
to make. Aouda, standing near him, looked at him without speaking, and he
understood her look. If his servant was a prisoner, ought he not to risk everything
to rescue him from the Indians? "I will find him, living or dead," said he quietly
to Aouda.

"Ah, Mr.--Mr. Fogg!" cried she, clasping his hands and covering them with
tears.

"Living," added Mr. Fogg, "if we do not lose a moment."

Phileas Fogg, by this resolution, inevitably sacrificed himself; he pronounced
his own doom. The delay of a single day would make him lose the steamer at
New York, and his bet would be certainly lost. But as he thought, "It is my duty,"
he did not hesitate.

The commanding officer of Fort Kearney was there. A hundred of his
soldiers had placed themselves in a position to defend the station, should the
Sioux attack it.

"Sir," said Mr. Fogg to the captain, "three passengers have disappeared."

"Dead?" asked the captain.

"Dead or prisoners; that is the uncertainty which must be solved. Do you
propose to pursue the Sioux?"

"That's a serious thing to do, sir," returned the captain. "These Indians may


retreat beyond the Arkansas, and I cannot leave the fort unprotected."

"The lives of three men are in question, sir," said Phileas Fogg.

"Doubtless; but can I risk the lives of fifty men to save three?"

"I don't know whether you can, sir; but you ought to do so."

"Nobody here," returned the other, "has a right to teach me my duty."

"Very well," said Mr. Fogg, coldly. "I will go alone."

"You, sir!" cried Fix, coming up; "you go alone in pursuit of the Indians?"

"Would you have me leave this poor fellow to perish--him to whom every
one present owes his life? I shall go."

"No, sir, you shall not go alone," cried the captain, touched in spite of
himself. "No! you are a brave man. Thirty volunteers!" he added, turning to the
soldiers.

The whole company started forward at once. The captain had only to pick his
men. Thirty were chosen, and an old sergeant placed at their head.

"Thanks, captain," said Mr. Fogg.

"Will you let me go with you?" asked Fix.

"Do as you please, sir. But if you wish to do me a favour, you will remain
with Aouda. In case anything should happen to me--"

A sudden pallor overspread the detective's face. Separate himself from the
man whom he had so persistently followed step by step! Leave him to wander
about in this desert! Fix gazed attentively at Mr. Fogg, and, despite his
suspicions and of the struggle which was going on within him, he lowered his
eyes before that calm and frank look.

"I will stay," said he.

A few moments after, Mr. Fogg pressed the young woman's hand, and,
having confided to her his precious carpet-bag, went off with the sergeant and
his little squad. But, before going, he had said to the soldiers, "My friends, I will
divide five thousand dollars among you, if we save the prisoners."

It was then a little past noon.

Aouda retired to a waiting-room, and there she waited alone, thinking of the
simple and noble generosity, the tranquil courage of Phileas Fogg. He had
sacrificed his fortune, and was now risking his life, all without hesitation, from
duty, in silence.

Fix did not have the same thoughts, and could scarcely conceal his agitation.
He walked feverishly up and down the platform, but soon resumed his outward
composure. He now saw the folly of which he had been guilty in letting Fogg go
alone. What! This man, whom he had just followed around the world, was
permitted now to separate himself from him! He began to accuse and abuse
himself, and, as if he were director of police, administered to himself a sound


lecture for his greenness.

"I have been an idiot!" he thought, "and this man will see it. He has gone,
and won't come back! But how is it that I, Fix, who have in my pocket a warrant
for his arrest, have been so fascinated by him? Decidedly, I am nothing but an
ass!"

So reasoned the detective, while the hours crept by all too slowly. He did not
know what to do. Sometimes he was tempted to tell Aouda all; but he could not
doubt how the young woman would receive his confidences. What course should
he take? He thought of pursuing Fogg across the vast white plains; it did not
seem impossible that he might overtake him. Footsteps were easily printed on
the snow! But soon, under a new sheet, every imprint would be effaced.

Fix became discouraged. He felt a sort of insurmountable longing to abandon
the game altogether. He could now leave Fort Kearney station, and pursue his
journey homeward in peace.

Towards two o'clock in the afternoon, while it was snowing hard, long
whistles were heard approaching from the east. A great shadow, preceded by a
wild light, slowly advanced, appearing still larger through the mist, which gave it
a fantastic aspect. No train was expected from the east, neither had there been
time for the succour asked for by telegraph to arrive; the train from Omaha to
San Francisco was not due till the next day. The mystery was soon explained.

The locomotive, which was slowly approaching with deafening whistles, was
that which, having been detached from the train, had continued its route with
such terrific rapidity, carrying off the unconscious engineer and stoker. It had run
several miles, when, the fire becoming low for want of fuel, the steam had
slackened; and it had finally stopped an hour after, some twenty miles beyond
Fort Kearney. Neither the engineer nor the stoker was dead, and, after remaining
for some time in their swoon, had come to themselves. The train had then
stopped. The engineer, when he found himself in the desert, and the locomotive
without cars, understood what had happened. He could not imagine how the
locomotive had become separated from the train; but he did not doubt that the
train left behind was in distress.

He did not hesitate what to do. It would be prudent to continue on to Omaha,
for it would be dangerous to return to the train, which the Indians might still be
engaged in pillaging. Nevertheless, he began to rebuild the fire in the furnace;
the pressure again mounted, and the locomotive returned, running backwards to
Fort Kearney. This it was which was whistling in the mist.

The travellers were glad to see the locomotive resume its place at the head of
the train. They could now continue the journey so terribly interrupted.

Aouda, on seeing the locomotive come up, hurried out of the station, and


asked the conductor, "Are you going to start?"

"At once, madam."

"But the prisoners, our unfortunate fellow-travellers--"

"I cannot interrupt the trip," replied the conductor. "We are already three
hours behind time."

"And when will another train pass here from San Francisco?"

"To-morrow evening, madam."

"To-morrow evening! But then it will be too late! We must wait--"

"It is impossible," responded the conductor. "If you wish to go, please get
in.”

"T will not go," said Aouda.

Fix had heard this conversation. A little while before, when there was no
prospect of proceeding on the journey, he had made up his mind to leave Fort
Kearney; but now that the train was there, ready to start, and he had only to take
his seat in the car, an irresistible influence held him back. The station platform
burned his feet, and he could not stir. The conflict in his mind again began; anger
and failure stifled him. He wished to struggle on to the end.

Meanwhile the passengers and some of the wounded, among them Colonel
Proctor, whose injuries were serious, had taken their places in the train. The
buzzing of the overheated boiler was heard, and the steam was escaping from the
valves. The engineer whistled, the train started, and soon disappeared, mingling
its white smoke with the eddies of the densely falling snow.

The detective had remained behind.

Several hours passed. The weather was dismal, and it was very cold. Fix sat
motionless on a bench in the station; he might have been thought asleep. Aouda,
despite the storm, kept coming out of the waiting-room, going to the end of the
platform, and peering through the tempest of snow, as if to pierce the mist which
narrowed the horizon around her, and to hear, if possible, some welcome sound.
She heard and saw nothing. Then she would return, chilled through, to issue out
again after the lapse of a few moments, but always in vain.

Evening came, and the little band had not returned. Where could they be?
Had they found the Indians, and were they having a conflict with them, or were
they still wandering amid the mist? The commander of the fort was anxious,
though he tried to conceal his apprehensions. As night approached, the snow fell
less plentifully, but it became intensely cold. Absolute silence rested on the
plains. Neither flight of bird nor passing of beast troubled the perfect calm.

Throughout the night Aouda, full of sad forebodings, her heart stifled with
anguish, wandered about on the verge of the plains. Her imagination carried her
far off, and showed her innumerable dangers. What she suffered through the


long hours it would be impossible to describe.

Fix remained stationary in the same place, but did not sleep. Once a man
approached and spoke to him, and the detective merely replied by shaking his
head.

Thus the night passed. At dawn, the half-extinguished disc of the sun rose
above a misty horizon; but it was now possible to recognise objects two miles
off. Phileas Fogg and the squad had gone southward; in the south all was still
vacancy. It was then seven o'clock.

The captain, who was really alarmed, did not know what course to take.

Should he send another detachment to the rescue of the first? Should he
sacrifice more men, with so few chances of saving those already sacrificed? His
hesitation did not last long, however. Calling one of his lieutenants, he was on
the point of ordering a reconnaissance, when gunshots were heard. Was it a
signal? The soldiers rushed out of the fort, and half a mile off they perceived a
little band returning in good order.

Mr. Fogg was marching at their head, and just behind him were Passepartout
and the other two travellers, rescued from the Sioux.

They had met and fought the Indians ten miles south of Fort Kearney.
Shortly before the detachment arrived, Passepartout and his companions had
begun to struggle with their captors, three of whom the Frenchman had felled
with his fists, when his master and the soldiers hastened up to their relief.

All were welcomed with joyful cries. Phileas Fogg distributed the reward he
had promised to the soldiers, while Passepartout, not without reason, muttered to
himself, "It must certainly be confessed that I cost my master dear!"

Fix, without saying a word, looked at Mr. Fogg, and it would have been
difficult to analyse the thoughts which struggled within him. As for Aouda, she
took her protector's hand and pressed it in her own, too much moved to speak.

Meanwhile, Passepartout was looking about for the train; he thought he
should find it there, ready to start for Omaha, and he hoped that the time lost
might be regained.

"The train! the train!" cried he.

"Gone," replied Fix.

"And when does the next train pass here?" said Phileas Fogg.

"Not till this evening."

"Ah!" returned the impassible gentleman quietly.


Chapter XXXI


IN WHICH FIX, THE DETECTIVE, CONSIDERABLY FURTHERS THE
INTERESTS OF PHILEAS FOGG

Phileas Fogg found himself twenty hours behind time. Passepartout, the
involuntary cause of this delay, was desperate. He had ruined his master!

At this moment the detective approached Mr. Fogg, and, looking him intently
in the face, said:

"Seriously, sir, are you in great haste?"

"Quite seriously."

"I have a purpose in asking,” resumed Fix. "Is it absolutely necessary that
you should be in New York on the 11th, before nine o'clock in the evening, the
time that the steamer leaves for Liverpool?"

"It is absolutely necessary."

"And, if your journey had not been interrupted by these Indians, you would
have reached New York on the morning of the 11th?"

"Yes; with eleven hours to spare before the steamer left."

"Good! you are therefore twenty hours behind. Twelve from twenty leaves
eight. You must regain eight hours. Do you wish to try to do so?"

"On foot?" asked Mr. Fogg.

"No; on a sledge," replied Fix. "On a sledge with sails. A man has proposed
such a method to me."

It was the man who had spoken to Fix during the night, and whose offer he
had refused.

Phileas Fogg did not reply at once; but Fix, having pointed out the man, who
was walking up and down in front of the station, Mr. Fogg went up to him. An
instant after, Mr. Fogg and the American, whose name was Mudge, entered a hut
built just below the fort.

There Mr. Fogg examined a curious vehicle, a kind of frame on two long
beams, a little raised in front like the runners of a sledge, and upon which there
was room for five or six persons. A high mast was fixed on the frame, held
firmly by metallic lashings, to which was attached a large brigantine sail. This
mast held an iron stay upon which to hoist a jib-sail. Behind, a sort of rudder
served to guide the vehicle. It was, in short, a sledge rigged like a sloop. During
the winter, when the trains are blocked up by the snow, these sledges make
extremely rapid journeys across the frozen plains from one station to another.
Provided with more sails than a cutter, and with the wind behind them, they slip


over the surface of the prairies with a speed equal if not superior to that of the
express trains.

Mr. Fogg readily made a bargain with the owner of this land-craft. The wind
was favourable, being fresh, and blowing from the west. The snow had
hardened, and Mudge was very confident of being able to transport Mr. Fogg in
a few hours to Omaha. Thence the trains eastward run frequently to Chicago and
New York. It was not impossible that the lost time might yet be recovered; and
such an opportunity was not to be rejected.

Not wishing to expose Aouda to the discomforts of travelling in the open air,
Mr. Fogg proposed to leave her with Passepartout at Fort Kearney, the servant
taking upon himself to escort her to Europe by a better route and under more
favourable conditions. But Aouda refused to separate from Mr. Fogg, and
Passepartout was delighted with her decision; for nothing could induce him to
leave his master while Fix was with him.

It would be difficult to guess the detective's thoughts. Was this conviction
shaken by Phileas Fogg's return, or did he still regard him as an exceedingly
shrewd rascal, who, his journey round the world completed, would think himself
absolutely safe in England? Perhaps Fix's opinion of Phileas Fogg was
somewhat modified; but he was nevertheless resolved to do his duty, and to
hasten the return of the whole party to England as much as possible.

At eight o'clock the sledge was ready to start. The passengers took their
places on it, and wrapped themselves up closely in their travelling-cloaks. The
two great sails were hoisted, and under the pressure of the wind the sledge slid
over the hardened snow with a velocity of forty miles an hour.

The distance between Fort Kearney and Omaha, as the birds fly, is at most
two hundred miles. If the wind held good, the distance might be traversed in five
hours; if no accident happened the sledge might reach Omaha by one o'clock.

What a journey! The travellers, huddled close together, could not speak for
the cold, intensified by the rapidity at which they were going. The sledge sped
on as lightly as a boat over the waves. When the breeze came skimming the earth
the sledge seemed to be lifted off the ground by its sails. Mudge, who was at the
rudder, kept in a straight line, and by a turn of his hand checked the lurches
which the vehicle had a tendency to make. All the sails were up, and the jib was
so arranged as not to screen the brigantine. A top-mast was hoisted, and another
jib, held out to the wind, added its force to the other sails. Although the speed
could not be exactly estimated, the sledge could not be going at less than forty
miles an hour.

"If nothing breaks," said Mudge, "we shall get there!"

Mr. Fogg had made it for Mudge's interest to reach Omaha within the time


agreed on, by the offer of a handsome reward.

The prairie, across which the sledge was moving in a straight line, was as flat
as a sea. It seemed like a vast frozen lake. The railroad which ran through this
section ascended from the south-west to the northwest by Great Island,
Columbus, an important Nebraska town, Schuyler, and Fremont, to Omaha. It
followed throughout the right bank of the Platte River. The sledge, shortening
this route, took a chord of the arc described by the railway. Mudge was not afraid
of being stopped by the Platte River, because it was frozen. The road, then, was
quite clear of obstacles, and Phileas Fogg had but two things to fear--an accident
to the sledge, and a change or calm in the wind.

But the breeze, far from lessening its force, blew as if to bend the mast,
which, however, the metallic lashings held firmly. These lashings, like the
chords of a stringed instrument, resounded as if vibrated by a violin bow. The
sledge slid along in the midst of a plaintively intense melody.

"Those chords give the fifth and the octave," said Mr. Fogg.

These were the only words he uttered during the journey. Aouda, cosily
packed in furs and cloaks, was sheltered as much as possible from the attacks of
the freezing wind. As for Passepartout, his face was as red as the sun's disc when
it sets in the mist, and he laboriously inhaled the biting air. With his natural
buoyancy of spirits, he began to hope again. They would reach New York on the
evening, if not on the moming, of the 11th, and there was still some chances that
it would be before the steamer sailed for Liverpool.

Passepartout even felt a strong desire to grasp his ally, Fix, by the hand. He
remembered that it was the detective who procured the sledge, the only means of
reaching Omaha in time; but, checked by some presentiment, he kept his usual
reserve. One thing, however, Passepartout would never forget, and that was the
sacrifice which Mr. Fogg had made, without hesitation, to rescue him from the
Sioux. Mr. Fogg had risked his fortune and his life. No! His servant would never
forget that!

While each of the party was absorbed in reflections so different, the sledge
flew past over the vast carpet of snow. The creeks it passed over were not
perceived. Fields and streams disappeared under the uniform whiteness. The
plain was absolutely deserted. Between the Union Pacific road and the branch
which unites Kearney with Saint Joseph it formed a great uninhabited island.
Neither village, station, nor fort appeared. From time to time they sped by some
phantom-like tree, whose white skeleton twisted and rattled in the wind.
Sometimes flocks of wild birds rose, or bands of gaunt, famished, ferocious
prairie-wolves ran howling after the sledge. Passepartout, revolver in hand, held
himself ready to fire on those which came too near. Had an accident then


happened to the sledge, the travellers, attacked by these beasts, would have been
in the most terrible danger; but it held on its even course, soon gained on the
wolves, and ere long left the howling band at a safe distance behind.

About noon Mudge perceived by certain landmarks that he was crossing the
Platte River. He said nothing, but he felt certain that he was now within twenty
miles of Omaha. In less than an hour he left the rudder and furled his sails,
whilst the sledge, carried forward by the great impetus the wind had given it,
went on half a mile further with its sails unspread.

It stopped at last, and Mudge, pointing to a mass of roofs white with snow,
said: "We have got there!"

Arrived! Arrived at the station which is in daily communication, by
numerous trains, with the Atlantic seaboard!

Passepartout and Fix jumped off, stretched their stiffened limbs, and aided
Mr. Fogg and the young woman to descend from the sledge. Phileas Fogg
generously rewarded Mudge, whose hand Passepartout warmly grasped, and the
party directed their steps to the Omaha railway station.

The Pacific Railroad proper finds its terminus at this important Nebraska
town. Omaha is connected with Chicago by the Chicago and Rock Island
Railroad, which runs directly east, and passes fifty stations.

A train was ready to start when Mr. Fogg and his party reached the station,
and they only had time to get into the cars. They had seen nothing of Omaha; but
Passepartout confessed to himself that this was not to be regretted, as they were
not travelling to see the sights.

The train passed rapidly across the State of Iowa, by Council Bluffs, Des
Moines, and Iowa City. During the night it crossed the Mississippi at Davenport,
and by Rock Island entered Illinois. The next day, which was the 10th, at four
o'clock in the evening, it reached Chicago, already risen from its ruins, and more
proudly seated than ever on the borders of its beautiful Lake Michigan.

Nine hundred miles separated Chicago from New York; but trains are not
wanting at Chicago. Mr. Fogg passed at once from one to the other, and the
locomotive of the Pittsburgh, Fort Wayne, and Chicago Railway left at full
speed, as if it fully comprehended that that gentleman had no time to lose. It
traversed Indiana, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and New Jersey like a flash, rushing
through towns with antique names, some of which had streets and car-tracks, but
as yet no houses. At last the Hudson came into view; and, at a quarter-past
eleven in the evening of the 11th, the train stopped in the station on the right
bank of the river, before the very pier of the Cunard line.

The China, for Liverpool, had started three-quarters of an hour before!


Chapter XXXII


IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG ENGAGES IN A DIRECT STRUGGLE
WITH BAD FORTUNE

The China, in leaving, seemed to have carried off Phileas Fogg's last hope.
None of the other steamers were able to serve his projects. The Pereire, of the
French Transatlantic Company, whose admirable steamers are equal to any in
speed and comfort, did not leave until the 14th; the Hamburg boats did not go
directly to Liverpool or London, but to Havre; and the additional trip from Havre
to Southampton would render Phileas Fogg's last efforts of no avail. The Inman
steamer did not depart till the next day, and could not cross the Atlantic in time
to save the wager.

Mr. Fogg learned all this in consulting his Bradshaw, which gave him the
daily movements of the transAtlantic steamers.

Passepartout was crushed; it overwhelmed him to lose the boat by three-
quarters of an hour. It was his fault, for, instead of helping his master, he had not
ceased putting obstacles in his path! And when he recalled all the incidents of
the tour, when he counted up the sums expended in pure loss and on his own
account, when he thought that the immense stake, added to the heavy charges of
this useless journey, would completely ruin Mr. Fogg, he overwhelmed himself
with bitter self-accusations. Mr. Fogg, however, did not reproach him; and, on
leaving the Cunard pier, only said: "We will consult about what is best to-
morrow. Come."

The party crossed the Hudson in the Jersey City ferryboat, and drove in a
carriage to the St. Nicholas Hotel, on Broadway. Rooms were engaged, and the
night passed, briefly to Phileas Fogg, who slept profoundly, but very long to
Aouda and the others, whose agitation did not permit them to rest.

The next day was the 12th of December. From seven in the morning of the
12th to a quarter before nine in the evening of the 21st there were nine days,
thirteen hours, and forty-five minutes. If Phileas Fogg had left in the China, one
of the fastest steamers on the Atlantic, he would have reached Liverpool, and
then London, within the period agreed upon.

Mr. Fogg left the hotel alone, after giving Passepartout instructions to await
his return, and inform Aouda to be ready at an instant's notice. He proceeded to
the banks of the Hudson, and looked about among the vessels moored or
anchored in the river, for any that were about to depart. Several had departure
signals, and were preparing to put to sea at morning tide; for in this immense and


admirable port there is not one day in a hundred that vessels do not set out for
every quarter of the globe. But they were mostly sailing vessels, of which, of
course, Phileas Fogg could make no use.

He seemed about to give up all hope, when he espied, anchored at the
Battery, a cable's length off at most, a trading vessel, with a screw, well-shaped,
whose funnel, puffing a cloud of smoke, indicated that she was getting ready for
departure.

Phileas Fogg hailed a boat, got into it, and soon found himself on board the
Henrietta, iron-hulled, wood-built above. He ascended to the deck, and asked for
the captain, who forthwith presented himself. He was a man of fifty, a sort of
sea-wolf, with big eyes, a complexion of oxidised copper, red hair and thick
neck, and a growling voice.

"The captain?" asked Mr. Fogg.

"T am the captain."

"I am Phileas Fogg, of London."

"And I am Andrew Speedy, of Cardiff."

"You are going to put to sea?"

"In an hour."

"You are bound for--"

"Bordeaux."

"And your cargo?"

"No freight. Going in ballast."

"Have you any passengers?"

"No passengers. Never have passengers. Too much in the way."

"Is your vessel a swift one?"

"Between eleven and twelve knots. The Henrietta, well known."

"Will you carry me and three other persons to Liverpool?"

"To Liverpool? Why not to China?"

"I said Liverpool."

"No!"

"No?"

"No. I am setting out for Bordeaux, and shall go to Bordeaux."

"Money is no object?"

"None."

The captain spoke in a tone which did not admit of a reply.

"But the owners of the Henrietta--" resumed Phileas Fogg.

"The owners are myself," replied the captain. "The vessel belongs to me.'

"T will freight it for you."

"No."


'


"I will buy it of you."

"No."

Phileas Fogg did not betray the least disappointment; but the situation was a
grave one. It was not at New York as at Hong Kong, nor with the captain of the
Henrietta as with the captain of the Tankadere. Up to this time money had
smoothed away every obstacle. Now money failed.

Still, some means must be found to cross the Atlantic on a boat, unless by
balloon--which would have been venturesome, besides not being capable of
being put in practice. It seemed that Phileas Fogg had an idea, for he said to the
captain, "Well, will you carry me to Bordeaux?"

"No, not if you paid me two hundred dollars."

"I offer you two thousand."

"Apiece?"

"Apiece."

"And there are four of you?"

"Four."

Captain Speedy began to scratch his head. There were eight thousand dollars
to gain, without changing his route; for which it was well worth conquering the
repugnance he had for all kinds of passengers. Besides, passenger's at two
thousand dollars are no longer passengers, but valuable merchandise. "I start at
nine o'clock," said Captain Speedy, simply. "Are you and your party ready?"

"We will be on board at nine o'clock," replied, no less simply, Mr. Fogg.

It was half-past eight. To disembark from the Henrietta, jump into a hack,
hurry to the St. Nicholas, and return with Aouda, Passepartout, and even the
inseparable Fix was the work of a brief time, and was performed by Mr. Fogg
with the coolness which never abandoned him. They were on board when the
Henrietta made ready to weigh anchor.

When Passepartout heard what this last voyage was going to cost, he uttered
a prolonged "Oh!" which extended throughout his vocal gamut.

As for Fix, he said to himself that the Bank of England would certainly not
come out of this affair well indemnified. When they reached England, even if
Mr. Fogg did not throw some handfuls of bank-bills into the sea, more than
seven thousand pounds would have been spent!


Chapter XXXII


IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG SHOWS HIMSELF EQUAL TO THE
OCCASION

An hour after, the Henrietta passed the lighthouse which marks the entrance
of the Hudson, turned the point of Sandy Hook, and put to sea. During the day
she skirted Long Island, passed Fire Island, and directed her course rapidly
eastward.

At noon the next day, a man mounted the bridge to ascertain the vessel's
position. It might be thought that this was Captain Speedy. Not the least in the
world. It was Phileas Fogg, Esquire. As for Captain Speedy, he was shut up in
his cabin under lock and key, and was uttering loud cries, which signified an
anger at once pardonable and excessive.

What had happened was very simple. Phileas Fogg wished to go to
Liverpool, but the captain would not carry him there. Then Phileas Fogg had
taken passage for Bordeaux, and, during the thirty hours he had been on board,
had so shrewdly managed with his banknotes that the sailors and stokers, who
were only an occasional crew, and were not on the best terms with the captain,
went over to him in a body. This was why Phileas Fogg was in command instead
of Captain Speedy; why the captain was a prisoner in his cabin; and why, in
short, the Henrietta was directing her course towards Liverpool. It was very
clear, to see Mr. Fogg manage the craft, that he had been a sailor.

How the adventure ended will be seen anon. Aouda was anxious, though she
said nothing. As for Passepartout, he thought Mr. Fogg's manoeuvre simply
glorious. The captain had said "between eleven and twelve knots," and the
Henrietta confirmed his prediction.

If, then--for there were "ifs" still--the sea did not become too boisterous, if
the wind did not veer round to the east, if no accident happened to the boat or its
machinery, the Henrietta might cross the three thousand miles from New York to
Liverpool in the nine days, between the 12th and the 21st of December. It is true
that, once arrived, the affair on board the Henrietta, added to that of the Bank of
England, might create more difficulties for Mr. Fogg than he imagined or could
desire.

During the first days, they went along smoothly enough. The sea was not
very unpropitious, the wind seemed stationary in the northeast, the sails were
hoisted, and the Henrietta ploughed across the waves like a real transAtlantic
steamer.


Passepartout was delighted. His master's last exploit, the consequences of
which he ignored, enchanted him. Never had the crew seen so jolly and
dexterous a fellow. He formed warm friendships with the sailors, and amazed
them with his acrobatic feats. He thought they managed the vessel like
gentlemen, and that the stokers fired up like heroes. His loquacious good-
humour infected everyone. He had forgotten the past, its vexations and delays.
He only thought of the end, so nearly accomplished; and sometimes he boiled
over with impatience, as if heated by the furnaces of the Henrietta. Often, also,
the worthy fellow revolved around Fix, looking at him with a keen, distrustful
eye; but he did not speak to him, for their old intimacy no longer existed.

Fix, it must be confessed, understood nothing of what was going on. The
conquest of the Henrietta, the bribery of the crew, Fogg managing the boat like a
skilled seaman, amazed and confused him. He did not know what to think. For,
after all, a man who began by stealing fifty-five thousand pounds might end by
stealing a vessel; and Fix was not unnaturally inclined to conclude that the
Henrietta under Fogg's command, was not going to Liverpool at all, but to some
part of the world where the robber, turned into a pirate, would quietly put
himself in safety. The conjecture was at least a plausible one, and the detective
began to seriously regret that he had embarked on the affair.

As for Captain Speedy, he continued to howl and growl in his cabin; and
Passepartout, whose duty it was to carry him his meals, courageous as he was,
took the greatest precautions. Mr. Fogg did not seem even to know that there was
a captain on board.

On the 13th they passed the edge of the Banks of Newfoundland, a
dangerous locality; during the winter, especially, there are frequent fogs and
heavy gales of wind. Ever since the evening before the barometer, suddenly
falling, had indicated an approaching change in the atmosphere; and during the
night the temperature varied, the cold became sharper, and the wind veered to
the south-east.

This was a misfortune. Mr. Fogg, in order not to deviate from his course,
furled his sails and increased the force of the steam; but the vessel's speed
slackened, owing to the state of the sea, the long waves of which broke against
the stern. She pitched violently, and this retarded her progress. The breeze little
by little swelled into a tempest, and it was to be feared that the Henrietta might
not be able to maintain herself upright on the waves.

Passepartout's visage darkened with the skies, and for two days the poor
fellow experienced constant fright. But Phileas Fogg was a bold mariner, and
knew how to maintain headway against the sea; and he kept on his course,
without even decreasing his steam. The Henrietta, when she could not rise upon


the waves, crossed them, swamping her deck, but passing safely. Sometimes the
screw rose out of the water, beating its protruding end, when a mountain of water
raised the stern above the waves; but the craft always kept straight ahead.

The wind, however, did not grow as boisterous as might have been feared; it
was not one of those tempests which burst, and rush on with a speed of ninety
miles an hour. It continued fresh, but, unhappily, it remained obstinately in the
south-east, rendering the sails useless.

The 16th of December was the seventy-fifth day since Phileas Fogg's
departure from London, and the Henrietta had not yet been seriously delayed.
Half of the voyage was almost accomplished, and the worst localities had been
passed. In summer, success would have been well-nigh certain. In winter, they
were at the mercy of the bad season. Passepartout said nothing; but he cherished
hope in secret, and comforted himself with the reflection that, if the wind failed
them, they might still count on the steam.

On this day the engineer came on deck, went up to Mr. Fogg, and began to
speak earnestly with him. Without knowing why it was a presentiment, perhaps
Passepartout became vaguely uneasy. He would have given one of his ears to
hear with the other what the engineer was saying. He finally managed to catch a
few words, and was sure he heard his master say, "You are certain of what you
tell me?"

"Certain, sir," replied the engineer. "You must remember that, since we
started, we have kept up hot fires in all our furnaces, and, though we had coal
enough to go on short steam from New York to Bordeaux, we haven't enough to
go with all steam from New York to Liverpool." "I will consider," replied Mr.
Fogg.

Passepartout understood it all; he was seized with mortal anxiety. The coal
was giving out! "Ah, if my master can get over that," muttered he, "he'll be a
famous man!" He could not help imparting to Fix what he had overheard.

"Then you believe that we really are going to Liverpool?"

"Of course."

"Ass!" replied the detective, shrugging his shoulders and turning on his heel.

Passepartout was on the point of vigorously resenting the epithet, the reason
of which he could not for the life of him comprehend; but he reflected that the
unfortunate Fix was probably very much disappointed and humiliated in his self-
esteem, after having so awkwardly followed a false scent around the world, and
refrained.

And now what course would Phileas Fogg adopt? It was difficult to imagine.
Nevertheless he seemed to have decided upon one, for that evening he sent for
the engineer, and said to him, "Feed all the fires until the coal is exhausted."


A few moments after, the funnel of the Henrietta vomited forth torrents of
smoke. The vessel continued to proceed with all steam on; but on the 18th, the
engineer, as he had predicted, announced that the coal would give out in the
course of the day.

"Do not let the fires go down," replied Mr. Fogg. "Keep them up to the last.
Let the valves be filled."

Towards noon Phileas Fogg, having ascertained their position, called
Passepartout, and ordered him to go for Captain Speedy. It was as if the honest
fellow had been commanded to unchain a tiger. He went to the poop, saying to
himself, "He will be like a madman!"

In a few moments, with cries and oaths, a bomb appeared on the poop-deck.
The bomb was Captain Speedy. It was clear that he was on the point of bursting.
"Where are we?" were the first words his anger permitted him to utter. Had the
poor man be an apoplectic, he could never have recovered from his paroxysm of
wrath.

"Where are we?" he repeated, with purple face.

"Seven hundred and seven miles from Liverpool," replied Mr. Fogg, with
imperturbable calmness.

"Pirate!" cried Captain Speedy.

"I have sent for you, sir--"

"Pickaroon!"

"--sir," continued Mr. Fogg, "to ask you to sell me your vessel."

"No! By all the devils, no!"

"But I shall be obliged to burn her."

"Burn the Henrietta!"

"Yes; at least the upper part of her. The coal has given out."

"Burn my vessel!" cried Captain Speedy, who could scarcely pronounce the
words. "A vessel worth fifty thousand dollars!"

"Here are sixty thousand," replied Phileas Fogg, handing the captain a roll of
bank-bills. This had a prodigious effect on Andrew Speedy. An American can
scarcely remain unmoved at the sight of sixty thousand dollars. The captain
forgot in an instant his anger, his imprisonment, and all his grudges against his
passenger. The Henrietta was twenty years old; it was a great bargain. The bomb
would not go off after all. Mr. Fogg had taken away the match.

"And I shall still have the iron hull," said the captain in a softer tone.

"The iron hull and the engine. Is it agreed?"

"Agreed."

And Andrew Speedy, seizing the banknotes, counted them and consigned
them to his pocket.


During this colloquy, Passepartout was as white as a sheet, and Fix seemed
on the point of having an apoplectic fit. Nearly twenty thousand pounds had
been expended, and Fogg left the hull and engine to the captain, that is, near the
whole value of the craft! It was true, however, that fifty-five thousand pounds
had been stolen from the Bank.

When Andrew Speedy had pocketed the money, Mr. Fogg said to him, "Don't
let this astonish you, sir. You must know that I shall lose twenty thousand
pounds, unless I arrive in London by a quarter before nine on the evening of the
21st of December. I missed the steamer at New York, and as you refused to take
me to Liverpool--"

"And I did well!" cried Andrew Speedy; "for I have gained at least forty
thousand dollars by it!" He added, more sedately, "Do you know one thing,
Captain--"

"Fogg."

"Captain Fogg, you've got something of the Yankee about you."

And, having paid his passenger what he considered a high compliment, he
was going away, when Mr. Fogg said, "The vessel now belongs to me?"

"Certainly, from the keel to the truck of the masts--all the wood, that is."

"Very well. Have the interior seats, bunks, and frames pulled down, and burn
them."

It was necessary to have dry wood to keep the steam up to the adequate
pressure, and on that day the poop, cabins, bunks, and the spare deck were
sacrificed. On the next day, the 19th of December, the masts, rafts, and spars
were burned; the crew worked lustily, keeping up the fires. Passepartout hewed,
cut, and sawed away with all his might. There was a perfect rage for demolition.

The railings, fittings, the greater part of the deck, and top sides disappeared
on the 20th, and the Henrietta was now only a flat hulk. But on this day they
sighted the Irish coast and Fastnet Light. By ten in the evening they were passing
Queenstown. Phileas Fogg had only twenty-four hours more in which to get to
London; that length of time was necessary to reach Liverpool, with all steam on.
And the steam was about to give out altogether!

"Sir," said Captain Speedy, who was now deeply interested in Mr. Fogg's
project, "I really commiserate you. Everything is against you. We are only
opposite Queenstown."


"Ah," said Mr. Fogg, "is that place where we see the lights Queenstown?"

"Yes."

"Can we enter the harbour?"

"Not under three hours. Only at high tide."

"Stay," replied Mr. Fogg calmly, without betraying in his features that by a
supreme inspiration he was about to attempt once more to conquer ill-fortune.

Queenstown is the Irish port at which the trans-Atlantic steamers stop to put
off the mails. These mails are carried to Dublin by express trains always held in
readiness to start; from Dublin they are sent on to Liverpool by the most rapid
boats, and thus gain twelve hours on the Atlantic steamers.

Phileas Fogg counted on gaining twelve hours in the same way. Instead of
arriving at Liverpool the next evening by the Henrietta, he would be there by
noon, and would therefore have time to reach London before a quarter before
nine in the evening.

The Henrietta entered Queenstown Harbour at one o'clock in the morning, it
then being high tide; and Phileas Fogg, after being grasped heartily by the hand
by Captain Speedy, left that gentleman on the levelled hulk of his craft, which
was still worth half what he had sold it for.

The party went on shore at once. Fix was greatly tempted to arrest Mr. Fogg
on the spot; but he did not. Why? What struggle was going on within him? Had
he changed his mind about "his man"? Did he understand that he had made a
grave mistake? He did not, however, abandon Mr. Fogg. They all got upon the
train, which was just ready to start, at half-past one; at dawn of day they were in
Dublin; and they lost no time in embarking on a steamer which, disdaining to
rise upon the waves, invariably cut through them.

Phileas Fogg at last disembarked on the Liverpool quay, at twenty minutes
before twelve, 21st December. He was only six hours distant from London.

But at this moment Fix came up, put his hand upon Mr. Fogg's shoulder, and,
showing his warrant, said, "You are really Phileas Fogg?"

"Tam."

"T arrest you in the Queen's name!"


Chapter XXXIV


IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG AT LAST REACHES LONDON

Phileas Fogg was in prison. He had been shut up in the Custom House, and
he was to be transferred to London the next day.

Passepartout, when he saw his master arrested, would have fallen upon Fix
had he not been held back by some policemen. Aouda was thunderstruck at the
suddenness of an event which she could not understand. Passepartout explained
to her how it was that the honest and courageous Fogg was arrested as a robber.
The young woman's heart revolted against so heinous a charge, and when she
saw that she could attempt to do nothing to save her protector, she wept bitterly.

As for Fix, he had arrested Mr. Fogg because it was his duty, whether Mr.
Fogg were guilty or not.

The thought then struck Passepartout, that he was the cause of this new
misfortune! Had he not concealed Fix's errand from his master? When Fix
revealed his true character and purpose, why had he not told Mr. Fogg? If the
latter had been warned, he would no doubt have given Fix proof of his
innocence, and satisfied him of his mistake; at least, Fix would not have
continued his journey at the expense and on the heels of his master, only to arrest
him the moment he set foot on English soil. Passepartout wept till he was blind,
and felt like blowing his brains out.

Aouda and he had remained, despite the cold, under the portico of the
Custom House. Neither wished to leave the place; both were anxious to see Mr.
Fogg again.

That gentleman was really ruined, and that at the moment when he was about
to attain his end. This arrest was fatal. Having arrived at Liverpool at twenty
minutes before twelve on the 21st of December, he had till a quarter before nine
that evening to reach the Reform Club, that is, nine hours and a quarter; the
journey from Liverpool to London was six hours.

If anyone, at this moment, had entered the Custom House, he would have
found Mr. Fogg seated, motionless, calm, and without apparent anger, upon a
wooden bench. He was not, it is true, resigned; but this last blow failed to force
him into an outward betrayal of any emotion. Was he being devoured by one of
those secret rages, all the more terrible because contained, and which only burst
forth, with an irresistible force, at the last moment? No one could tell. There he
sat, calmly waiting--for what? Did he still cherish hope? Did he still believe,
now that the door of this prison was closed upon him, that he would succeed?


However that may have been, Mr. Fogg carefully put his watch upon the
table, and observed its advancing hands. Not a word escaped his lips, but his
look was singularly set and stern. The situation, in any event, was a terrible one,
and might be thus stated: if Phileas Fogg was honest he was ruined; if he was a
knave, he was caught.

Did escape occur to him? Did he examine to see if there were any practicable
outlet from his prison? Did he think of escaping from it? Possibly; for once he
walked slowly around the room. But the door was locked, and the window
heavily barred with iron rods. He sat down again, and drew his journal from his
pocket. On the line where these words were written, "21st December, Saturday,
Liverpool," he added, "80th day, 11.40 a.m.," and waited.

The Custom House clock struck one. Mr. Fogg observed that his watch was
two hours too fast.

Two hours! Admitting that he was at this moment taking an express train, he
could reach London and the Reform Club by a quarter before nine, p.m. His
forehead slightly wrinkled.

At thirty-three minutes past two he heard a singular noise outside, then a
hasty opening of doors. Passepartout's voice was audible, and immediately after
that of Fix. Phileas Fogg's eyes brightened for an instant.

The door swung open, and he saw Passepartout, Aouda, and Fix, who hurried
towards him.

Fix was out of breath, and his hair was in disorder. He could not speak. "Sir,"
he stammered, "sir--forgive me--most--unfortunate resemblance--robber arrested
three days ago--you are free!"

Phileas Fogg was free! He walked to the detective, looked him steadily in the
face, and with the only rapid motion he had ever made in his life, or which he
ever would make, drew back his arms, and with the precision of a machine
knocked Fix down.

"Well hit!" cried Passepartout, "Parbleu! that's what you might call a good
application of English fists!"

Fix, who found himself on the floor, did not utter a word. He had only
received his deserts. Mr. Fogg, Aouda, and Passepartout left the Custom House
without delay, got into a cab, and in a few moments descended at the station.

Phileas Fogg asked if there was an express train about to leave for London. It
was forty minutes past two. The express train had left thirty-five minutes before.
Phileas Fogg then ordered a special train.

There were several rapid locomotives on hand; but the railway arrangements
did not permit the special train to leave until three o'clock.

At that hour Phileas Fogg, having stimulated the engineer by the offer of a


generous reward, at last set out towards London with Aouda and his faithful
servant.

It was necessary to make the journey in five hours and a half; and this would
have been easy on a Clear road throughout. But there were forced delays, and
when Mr. Fogg stepped from the train at the terminus, all the clocks in London
were striking ten minutes before nine.

Having made the tour of the world, he was behind-hand five minutes. He had
lost the wager!


Chapter XXXV


IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG DOES NOT HAVE TO REPEAT HIS
ORDERS TO PASSEPARTOUT TWICE

The dwellers in Saville Row would have been surprised the next day, if they
had been told that Phileas Fogg had returned home. His doors and windows were
still closed, no appearance of change was visible.

After leaving the station, Mr. Fogg gave Passepartout instructions to
purchase some provisions, and quietly went to his domicile.

He bore his misfortune with his habitual tranquillity. Ruined! And by the
blundering of the detective! After having steadily traversed that long journey,
overcome a hundred obstacles, braved many dangers, and still found time to do
some good on his way, to fail near the goal by a sudden event which he could not
have foreseen, and against which he was unarmed; it was terrible! But a few
pounds were left of the large sum he had carried with him. There only remained
of his fortune the twenty thousand pounds deposited at Barings, and this amount
he owed to his friends of the Reform Club. So great had been the expense of his
tour that, even had he won, it would not have enriched him; and it is probable
that he had not sought to enrich himself, being a man who rather laid wagers for
honour's sake than for the stake proposed. But this wager totally ruined him.

Mr. Fogg's course, however, was fully decided upon; he knew what remained
for him to do.

A room in the house in Saville Row was set apart for Aouda, who was
overwhelmed with grief at her protector's misfortune. From the words which Mr.
Fogg dropped, she saw that he was meditating some serious project.

Knowing that Englishmen governed by a fixed idea sometimes resort to the
desperate expedient of suicide, Passepartout kept a narrow watch upon his
master, though he carefully concealed the appearance of so doing.

First of all, the worthy fellow had gone up to his room, and had extinguished
the gas bummer, which had been burning for eighty days. He had found in the
letter-box a bill from the gas company, and he thought it more than time to put a
stop to this expense, which he had been doomed to bear.

The night passed. Mr. Fogg went to bed, but did he sleep? Aouda did not
once close her eyes. Passepartout watched all night, like a faithful dog, at his
master's door.

Mr. Fogg called him in the morning, and told him to get Aouda's breakfast,
and a cup of tea and a chop for himself. He desired Aouda to excuse him from


breakfast and dinner, as his time would be absorbed all day in putting his affairs
to rights. In the evening he would ask permission to have a few moment's
conversation with the young lady.

Passepartout, having received his orders, had nothing to do but obey them.
He looked at his imperturbable master, and could scarcely bring his mind to
leave him. His heart was full, and his conscience tortured by remorse; for he
accused himself more bitterly than ever of being the cause of the irretrievable
disaster. Yes! if he had warned Mr. Fogg, and had betrayed Fix's projects to him,
his master would certainly not have given the detective passage to Liverpool,
and then--

Passepartout could hold in no longer.

"My master! Mr. Fogg!" he cried, "why do you not curse me? It was my fault
that--"

"I blame no one," returned Phileas Fogg, with perfect calmness. "Go!"

Passepartout left the room, and went to find Aouda, to whom he delivered
his master's message.

"Madam," he added, "I can do nothing myself--nothing! I have no influence
over my master; but you, perhaps--"

"What influence could I have?" replied Aouda. "Mr. Fogg is influenced by
no one. Has he ever understood that my gratitude to him is overflowing? Has he
ever read my heart? My friend, he must not be left alone an instant! You say he
is going to speak with me this evening?"

"Yes, madam; probably to arrange for your protection and comfort in
England."

"We shall see," replied Aouda, becoming suddenly pensive.

Throughout this day (Sunday) the house in Saville Row was as if
uninhabited, and Phileas Fogg, for the first time since he had lived in that house,
did not set out for his club when Westminster clock struck half-past eleven.

Why should he present himself at the Reform? His friends no longer
expected him there. As Phileas Fogg had not appeared in the saloon on the
evening before (Saturday, the 21st of December, at a quarter before nine), he had
lost his wager. It was not even necessary that he should go to his bankers for the
twenty thousand pounds; for his antagonists already had his cheque in their
hands, and they had only to fill it out and send it to the Barings to have the
amount transferred to their credit.

Mr. Fogg, therefore, had no reason for going out, and so he remained at
home. He shut himself up in his room, and busied himself putting his affairs in
order. Passepartout continually ascended and descended the stairs. The hours
were long for him. He listened at his master's door, and looked through the


keyhole, as if he had a perfect right so to do, and as if he feared that something
terrible might happen at any moment. Sometimes he thought of Fix, but no
longer in anger. Fix, like all the world, had been mistaken in Phileas Fogg, and
had only done his duty in tracking and arresting him; while he, Passepartout. . . .
This thought haunted him, and he never ceased cursing his miserable folly.

Finding himself too wretched to remain alone, he knocked at Aouda's door,
went into her room, seated himself, without speaking, in a corner, and looked
ruefully at the young woman. Aouda was still pensive.

About half-past seven in the evening Mr. Fogg sent to know if Aouda would
receive him, and in a few moments he found himself alone with her.

Phileas Fogg took a chair, and sat down near the fireplace, opposite Aouda.
No emotion was visible on his face. Fogg returned was exactly the Fogg who
had gone away; there was the same calm, the same impassibility.

He sat several minutes without speaking; then, bending his eyes on Aouda,
"Madam," said he, "will you pardon me for bringing you to England?"

"I, Mr. Fogg!" replied Aouda, checking the pulsations of her heart.

"Please let me finish," returned Mr. Fogg. "When I decided to bring you far
away from the country which was so unsafe for you, I was rich, and counted on
putting a portion of my fortune at your disposal; then your existence would have
been free and happy. But now I am ruined."

"I know it, Mr. Fogg," replied Aouda; "and I ask you in my tur, will you
forgive me for having followed you, and--who knows?--for having, perhaps,
delayed you, and thus contributed to your ruin?"

"Madam, you could not remain in India, and your safety could only be
assured by bringing you to such a distance that your persecutors could not take
you."

"So, Mr. Fogg," resumed Aouda, "not content with rescuing me from a
terrible death, you thought yourself bound to secure my comfort in a foreign
land?"

"Yes, madam; but circumstances have been against me. Still, I beg to place
the little I have left at your service."

"But what will become of you, Mr. Fogg?"

"As for me, madam," replied the gentleman, coldly, "I have need of nothing."

"But how do you look upon the fate, sir, which awaits you?"

"As I am in the habit of doing."

"At least," said Aouda, "want should not overtake a man like you. Your
friends--"

"T have no friends, madam."

"Your relatives--"


"I have no longer any relatives."

"I pity you, then, Mr. Fogg, for solitude is a sad thing, with no heart to which
to confide your griefs. They say, though, that misery itself, shared by two
sympathetic souls, may be borne with patience."

"They say so, madam.”

"Mr. Fogg," said Aouda, rising and seizing his hand, "do you wish at once a
kinswoman and friend? Will you have me for your wife?"

Mr. Fogg, at this, rose in his turn. There was an unwonted light in his eyes,
and a slight trembling of his lips. Aouda looked into his face. The sincerity,
rectitude, firmness, and sweetness of this soft glance of a noble woman, who
could dare all to save him to whom she owed all, at first astonished, then
penetrated him. He shut his eyes for an instant, as if to avoid her look. When he
opened them again, "I love you!" he said, simply. "Yes, by all that is holiest, I
love you, and I am entirely yours!"

"Ah!" cried Aouda, pressing his hand to her heart.

Passepartout was summoned and appeared immediately. Mr. Fogg still held
Aouda's hand in his own; Passepartout understood, and his big, round face
became as radiant as the tropical sun at its zenith.

Mr. Fogg asked him if it was not too late to notify the Reverend Samuel
Wilson, of Marylebone parish, that evening.

Passepartout smiled his most genial smile, and said, "Never too late."

It was five minutes past eight.

"Will it be for to-morrow, Monday?"

"For to-morrow, Monday," said Mr. Fogg, turning to Aouda.

"Yes; for to-morrow, Monday," she replied.

Passepartout hurried off as fast as his legs could carry him.


Chapter XXXVI


IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG'S NAME IS ONCE MORE AT A PREMIUM
ON 'CHANGE

It is time to relate what a change took place in English public opinion when
it transpired that the real bankrobber, a certain James Strand, had been arrested,
on the 17th day of December, at Edinburgh. Three days before, Phileas Fogg had
been a criminal, who was being desperately followed up by the police; now he
was an honourable gentleman, mathematically pursuing his eccentric journey
round the world.

The papers resumed their discussion about the wager; all those who had laid
bets, for or against him, revived their interest, as if by magic; the "Phileas Fogg
bonds" again became negotiable, and many new wagers were made. Phileas
Fogg's name was once more at a premium on 'Change.

His five friends of the Reform Club passed these three days in a state of
feverish suspense. Would Phileas Fogg, whom they had forgotten, reappear
before their eyes! Where was he at this moment? The 17th of December, the day
of James Strand's arrest, was the seventy-sixth since Phileas Fogg's departure,
and no news of him had been received. Was he dead? Had he abandoned the
effort, or was he continuing his journey along the route agreed upon? And would
he appear on Saturday, the 21st of December, at a quarter before nine in the
evening, on the threshold of the Reform Club saloon?

The anxiety in which, for three days, London society existed, cannot be
described. Telegrams were sent to America and Asia for news of Phileas Fogg.
Messengers were dispatched to the house in Saville Row morning and evening.
No news. The police were ignorant what had become of the detective, Fix, who
had so unfortunately followed up a false scent. Bets increased, nevertheless, in
number and value. Phileas Fogg, like a racehorse, was drawing near his last
turning-point. The bonds were quoted, no longer at a hundred below par, but at
twenty, at ten, and at five; and paralytic old Lord Albemarle bet even in his
favour.

A great crowd was collected in Pall Mall and the neighbouring streets on
Saturday evening; it seemed like a multitude of brokers permanently established
around the Reform Club. Circulation was impeded, and everywhere disputes,
discussions, and financial transactions were going on. The police had great
difficulty in keeping back the crowd, and as the hour when Phileas Fogg was due
approached, the excitement rose to its highest pitch.


The five antagonists of Phileas Fogg had met in the great saloon of the club.
John Sullivan and Samuel Fallentin, the bankers, Andrew Stuart, the engineer,
Gauthier Ralph, the director of the Bank of England, and Thomas Flanagan, the
brewer, one and all waited anxiously.

When the clock indicated twenty minutes past eight, Andrew Stuart got up,
saying, "Gentlemen, in twenty minutes the time agreed upon between Mr. Fogg
and ourselves will have expired."

"What time did the last train arrive from Liverpool?" asked Thomas
Flanagan.

"At twenty-three minutes past seven," replied Gauthier Ralph; "and the next
does not arrive till ten minutes after twelve."

"Well, gentlemen," resumed Andrew Stuart, "if Phileas Fogg had come in the
7:23 train, he would have got here by this time. We can, therefore, regard the bet
as won."

"Wait; don't let us be too hasty," replied Samuel Fallentin. "You know that
Mr. Fogg is very eccentric. His punctuality is well known; he never arrives too
soon, or too late; and I should not be surprised if he appeared before us at the last
minute.”

"Why," said Andrew Stuart nervously, "if I should see him, I should not
believe it was he."

"The fact is," resumed Thomas Flanagan, "Mr. Fogg's project was absurdly
foolish. Whatever his punctuality, he could not prevent the delays which were
certain to occur; and a delay of only two or three days would be fatal to his tour."

"Observe, too," added John Sullivan, "that we have received no intelligence
from him, though there are telegraphic lines all along is route."

"He has lost, gentleman," said Andrew Stuart, "he has a hundred times lost!
You know, besides, that the China the only steamer he could have taken from
New York to get here in time arrived yesterday. I have seen a list of the
passengers, and the name of Phileas Fogg is not among them. Even if we admit
that fortune has favoured him, he can scarcely have reached America. I think he
will be at least twenty days behind-hand, and that Lord Albemarle will lose a
cool five thousand."

"It is clear," replied Gauthier Ralph; "and we have nothing to do but to
present Mr. Fogg's cheque at Barings to-morrow."

At this moment, the hands of the club clock pointed to twenty minutes to
nine.

"Five minutes more," said Andrew Stuart.

The five gentlemen looked at each other. Their anxiety was becoming
intense; but, not wishing to betray it, they readily assented to Mr. Fallentin's


proposal of a rubber.

"I wouldn't give up my four thousand of the bet," said Andrew Stuart, as he
took his seat, "for three thousand nine hundred and ninety-nine."

The clock indicated eighteen minutes to nine.

The players took up their cards, but could not keep their eyes off the clock.
Certainly, however secure they felt, minutes had never seemed so long to them!

"Seventeen minutes to nine," said Thomas Flanagan, as he cut the cards
which Ralph handed to him.

Then there was a moment of silence. The great saloon was perfectly quiet;
but the murmurs of the crowd outside were heard, with now and then a shrill cry.
The pendulum beat the seconds, which each player eagerly counted, as he
listened, with mathematical regularity.

"Sixteen minutes to nine!" said John Sullivan, in a voice which betrayed his
emotion.

One minute more, and the wager would be won. Andrew Stuart and his
partners suspended their game. They left their cards, and counted the seconds.

At the fortieth second, nothing. At the fiftieth, still nothing.

At the fifty-fifth, a loud cry was heard in the street, followed by applause,
hurrahs, and some fierce growls.

The players rose from their seats.

At the fifty-seventh second the door of the saloon opened; and the pendulum
had not beat the sixtieth second when Phileas Fogg appeared, followed by an
excited crowd who had forced their way through the club doors, and in his calm
voice, said, "Here I am, gentlemen!"


Chapter XXXVII


IN WHICH IT IS SHOWN THAT PHILEAS FOGG GAINED NOTHING
BY HIS TOUR AROUND THE WORLD, UNLESS IT WERE HAPPINESS

Yes; Phileas Fogg in person.

The reader will remember that at five minutes past eight in the evening--
about five and twenty hours after the arrival of the travellers in London--
Passepartout had been sent by his master to engage the services of the Reverend
Samuel Wilson in a certain marriage ceremony, which was to take place the next
day.

Passepartout went on his errand enchanted. He soon reached the clergyman's
house, but found him not at home. Passepartout waited a good twenty minutes,
and when he left the reverend gentleman, it was thirty-five minutes past eight.
But in what a state he was! With his hair in disorder, and without his hat, he ran
along the street as never man was seen to run before, overturning passers-by,
rushing over the sidewalk like a waterspout.

In three minutes he was in Saville Row again, and staggered back into Mr.
Fogg's room.

He could not speak.

"What is the matter?" asked Mr. Fogg.

"My master!" gasped Passepartout--"marriage--impossible--"

"Impossible?"

"Impossible--for to-morrow."

"Why so?"

"Because to-morrow--is Sunday!"

"Monday," replied Mr. Fogg.

"No--to-day is Saturday."

"Saturday? Impossible!"

"Yes, yes, yes, yes!" cried Passepartout. "You have made a mistake of one
day! We arrived twenty-four hours ahead of time; but there are only ten minutes
left!"

Passepartout had seized his master by the collar, and was dragging him along
with irresistible force.

Phileas Fogg, thus kidnapped, without having time to think, left his house,
jumped into a cab, promised a hundred pounds to the cabman, and, having run
over two dogs and overturned five carriages, reached the Reform Club.

The clock indicated a quarter before nine when he appeared in the great


saloon.

Phileas Fogg had accomplished the journey round the world in eighty days!

Phileas Fogg had won his wager of twenty thousand pounds!

How was it that a man so exact and fastidious could have made this error of a
day? How came he to think that he had arrived in London on Saturday, the
twenty-first day of December, when it was really Friday, the twentieth, the
seventy-ninth day only from his departure?

The cause of the error is very simple.

Phileas Fogg had, without suspecting it, gained one day on his journey, and
this merely because he had travelled constantly eastward; he would, on the
contrary, have lost a day had he gone in the opposite direction, that is, westward.

In journeying eastward he had gone towards the sun, and the days therefore
diminished for him as many times four minutes as he crossed degrees in this
direction. There are three hundred and sixty degrees on the circumference of the
earth; and these three hundred and sixty degrees, multiplied by four minutes,
gives precisely twenty-four hours--that is, the day unconsciously gained. In other
words, while Phileas Fogg, going eastward, saw the sun pass the meridian eighty
times, his friends in London only saw it pass the meridian seventy-nine times.
This is why they awaited him at the Reform Club on Saturday, and not Sunday,
as Mr. Fogg thought.

And Passepartout's famous family watch, which had always kept London
time, would have betrayed this fact, if it had marked the days as well as the
hours and the minutes!

Phileas Fogg, then, had won the twenty thousand pounds; but, as he had
spent nearly nineteen thousand on the way, the pecuniary gain was small. His
object was, however, to be victorious, and not to win money. He divided the one
thousand pounds that remained between Passepartout and the unfortunate Fix,
against whom he cherished no grudge. He deducted, however, from
Passepartout's share the cost of the gas which had burned in his room for
nineteen hundred and twenty hours, for the sake of regularity.

That evening, Mr. Fogg, as tranquil and phlegmatic as ever, said to Aouda:
"Is our marriage still agreeable to you?"

"Mr. Fogg," replied she, "it is for me to ask that question. You were ruined,
but now you are rich again."

"Pardon me, madam; my fortune belongs to you. If you had not suggested
our marriage, my servant would not have gone to the Reverend Samuel Wilson's,
I should not have been apprised of my error, and--"

"Dear Mr. Fogg!" said the young woman.

"Dear Aouda!" replied Phileas Fogg.


It need not be said that the marriage took place forty-eight hours after, and
that Passepartout, glowing and dazzling, gave the bride away. Had he not saved
her, and was he not entitled to this honour?

The next day, as soon as it was light, Passepartout rapped vigorously at his
master's door. Mr. Fogg opened it, and asked, "What's the matter, Passepartout?"

"What is it, sir? Why, I've just this instant found out--"

"What?"

"That we might have made the tour of the world in only seventy-eight days."

"No doubt," returned Mr. Fogg, "by not crossing India. But if I had not
crossed India, I should not have saved Aouda; she would not have been my wife,
and--"

Mr. Fogg quietly shut the door.

Phileas Fogg had won his wager, and had made his journey around the world
in eighty days. To do this he had employed every means of conveyance--
steamers, railways, carriages, yachts, trading-vessels, sledges, elephants. The
eccentric gentleman had throughout displayed all his marvellous qualities of
coolness and exactitude. But what then? What had he really gained by all this
trouble? What had he brought back from this long and weary journey?

Nothing, say you? Perhaps so; nothing but a charming woman, who, strange
as it may appear, made him the happiest of men!

Truly, would you not for less than that make the tour around the world?


THE MYSTERIOUS ISLAND
by Jules Verne


PART 1--DROPPED FROM THE CLOUDS


Chapter 1


"Are we rising again?" "No. On the contrary." "Are we descending?" "Worse
than that, captain! we are falling!" "For Heaven's sake heave out the ballast!"
"There! the last sack is empty!" "Does the balloon rise?" "No!" "I hear a noise
like the dashing of waves. The sea is below the car! It cannot be more than 500
feet from us!" "Overboard with every weight! ... everything!"

Such were the loud and startling words which resounded through the air,
above the vast watery desert of the Pacific, about four o'clock in the evening of
the 23rd of March, 1865.

Few can possibly have forgotten the terrible storm from the northeast, in the
middle of the equinox of that year. The tempest raged without intermission from
the 18th to the 26th of March. Its ravages were terrible in America, Europe, and
Asia, covering a distance of eighteen hundred miles, and extending obliquely to
the equator from the thirty-fifth north parallel to the fortieth south parallel.
Towns were overthrown, forests uprooted, coasts devastated by the mountains of
water which were precipitated on them, vessels cast on the shore, which the
published accounts numbered by hundreds, whole districts leveled by
waterspouts which destroyed everything they passed over, several thousand
people crushed on land or drowned at sea; such were the traces of its fury, left by
this devastating tempest. It surpassed in disasters those which so frightfully
ravaged Havana and Guadalupe, one on the 25th of October, 1810, the other on
the 26th of July, 1825.

But while so many catastrophes were taking place on land and at sea, a
drama not less exciting was being enacted in the agitated air.

In fact, a balloon, as a ball might be carried on the summit of a waterspout,
had been taken into the circling movement of a column of air and had traversed
space at the rate of ninety miles an hour, turning round and round as if seized by
some aerial maelstrom.

Beneath the lower point of the balloon swung a car, containing five
passengers, scarcely visible in the midst of the thick vapor mingled with spray
which hung over the surface of the ocean.

Whence, it may be asked, had come that plaything of the tempest? From
what part of the world did it rise? It surely could not have started during the
storm. But the storm had raged five days already, and the first symptoms were
manifested on the 18th. It cannot be doubted that the balloon came from a great
distance, for it could not have traveled less than two thousand miles in twenty-


four hours.

At any rate the passengers, destitute of all marks for their guidance, could
not have possessed the means of reckoning the route traversed since their
departure. It was a remarkable fact that, although in the very midst of the furious
tempest, they did not suffer from it. They were thrown about and whirled round
and round without feeling the rotation in the slightest degree, or being sensible
that they were removed from a horizontal position.

Their eyes could not pierce through the thick mist which had gathered
beneath the car. Dark vapor was all around them. Such was the density of the
atmosphere that they could not be certain whether it was day or night. No
reflection of light, no sound from inhabited land, no roaring of the ocean could
have reached them, through the obscurity, while suspended in those elevated
zones. Their rapid descent alone had informed them of the dangers which they
ran from the waves. However, the balloon, lightened of heavy articles, such as
ammunition, arms, and provisions, had risen into the higher layers of the
atmosphere, to a height of 4,500 feet. The voyagers, after having discovered that
the sea extended beneath them, and thinking the dangers above less dreadful
than those below, did not hesitate to throw overboard even their most useful
articles, while they endeavored to lose no more of that fluid, the life of their
enterprise, which sustained them above the abyss.

The night passed in the midst of alarms which would have been death to less
energetic souls. Again the day appeared and with it the tempest began to
moderate. From the beginning of that day, the 24th of March, it showed
symptoms of abating. At dawn, some of the lighter clouds had risen into the
more lofty regions of the air. In a few hours the wind had changed from a
hurricane to a fresh breeze, that is to say, the rate of the transit of the
atmospheric layers was diminished by half. It was still what sailors call "a close-
reefed topsail breeze," but the commotion in the elements had none the less
considerably diminished.

Towards eleven o'clock, the lower region of the air was sensibly clearer. The
atmosphere threw off that chilly dampness which is felt after the passage of a
great meteor. The storm did not seem to have gone farther to the west. It
appeared to have exhausted itself. Could it have passed away in electric sheets,
as is sometimes the case with regard to the typhoons of the Indian Ocean?

But at the same time, it was also evident that the balloon was again slowly
descending with a regular movement. It appeared as if it were, little by little,
collapsing, and that its case was lengthening and extending, passing from a
spherical to an oval form. Towards midday the balloon was hovering above the
sea at a height of only 2,000 feet. It contained 50,000 cubic feet of gas, and,


thanks to its capacity, it could maintain itself a long time in the air, although it
should reach a great altitude or might be thrown into a horizontal position.

Perceiving their danger, the passengers cast away the last articles which still
weighed down the car, the few provisions they had kept, everything, even to
their pocket-knives, and one of them, having hoisted himself on to the circles
which united the cords of the net, tried to secure more firmly the lower point of
the balloon.

It was, however, evident to the voyagers that the gas was failing, and that the
balloon could no longer be sustained in the higher regions. They must infallibly
perish!

There was not a continent, nor even an island, visible beneath them. The
watery expanse did not present a single speck of land, not a solid surface upon
which their anchor could hold.

It was the open sea, whose waves were still dashing with tremendous
violence! It was the ocean, without any visible limits, even for those whose gaze,
from their commanding position, extended over a radius of forty miles. The vast
liquid plain, lashed without mercy by the storm, appeared as if covered with
herds of furious chargers, whose white and disheveled crests were streaming in
the wind. No land was in sight, not a solitary ship could be seen. It was
necessary at any cost to arrest their downward course, and to prevent the balloon
from being engulfed in the waves. The voyagers directed all their energies to this
urgent work. But, notwithstanding their efforts, the balloon still fell, and at the
same time shifted with the greatest rapidity, following the direction of the wind,
that is to say, from the northeast to the southwest.

Frightful indeed was the situation of these unfortunate men. They were
evidently no longer masters of the machine. All their attempts were useless. The
case of the balloon collapsed more and more. The gas escaped without any
possibility of retaining it. Their descent was visibly accelerated, and soon after
midday the car hung within 600 feet of the ocean.

It was impossible to prevent the escape of gas, which rushed through a large
rent in the silk. By lightening the car of all the articles which it contained, the
passengers had been able to prolong their suspension in the air for a few hours.
But the inevitable catastrophe could only be retarded, and if land did not appear
before night, voyagers, car, and balloon must to a certainty vanish beneath the
waves.

They now resorted to the only remaining expedient. They were truly
dauntless men, who knew how to look death in the face. Not a single murmur
escaped from their lips. They were determined to struggle to the last minute, to
do anything to retard their fall. The car was only a sort of willow basket, unable


to float, and there was not the slightest possibility of maintaining it on the
surface of the sea.

Two more hours passed and the balloon was scarcely 400 feet above the
water.

At that moment a loud voice, the voice of a man whose heart was
inaccessible to fear, was heard. To this voice responded others not less
determined. "Is everything thrown out?" "No, here are still 2,000 dollars in
gold." A heavy bag immediately plunged into the sea. "Does the balloon rise?"
"A little, but it will not be long before it falls again." "What still remains to be
thrown out?" "Nothing." "Yes! the car!" "Let us catch hold of the net, and into
the sea with the car."

This was, in fact, the last and only mode of lightening the balloon. The ropes
which held the car were cut, and the balloon, after its fall, mounted 2,000 feet.
The five voyagers had hoisted themselves into the net, and clung to the meshes,
gazing at the abyss.

The delicate sensibility of balloons is well known. It is sufficient to throw
out the lightest article to produce a difference in its vertical position. The
apparatus in the air is like a balance of mathematical precision. It can be thus
easily understood that when it is lightened of any considerable weight its
movement will be impetuous and sudden. So it happened on this occasion. But
after being suspended for an instant aloft, the balloon began to redescend, the
gas escaping by the rent which it was impossible to repair.

The men had done all that men could do. No human efforts could save them
now.

They must trust to the mercy of Him who rules the elements.

At four o'clock the balloon was only 500 feet above the surface of the water.

A loud barking was heard. A dog accompanied the voyagers, and was held
pressed close to his master in the meshes of the net.

"Top has seen something,” cried one of the men. Then immediately a loud
voice shouted,--

"Land! land!" The balloon, which the wind still drove towards the southwest,
had since daybreak gone a considerable distance, which might be reckoned by
hundreds of miles, and a tolerably high land had, in fact, appeared in that
direction. But this land was still thirty miles off. It would not take less than an
hour to get to it, and then there was the chance of falling to leeward.

An hour! Might not the balloon before that be emptied of all the fluid it yet
retained?

Such was the terrible question! The voyagers could distinctly see that solid
spot which they must reach at any cost. They were ignorant of what it was,


whether an island or a continent, for they did not know to what part of the world
the hurricane had driven them. But they must reach this land, whether inhabited
or desolate, whether hospitable or not.

It was evident that the balloon could no longer support itself! Several times
already had the crests of the enormous billows licked the bottom of the net,
making it still heavier, and the balloon only half rose, like a bird with a wounded
wing. Half an hour later the land was not more than a mile off, but the balloon,
exhausted, flabby, hanging in great folds, had gas in its upper part alone. The
voyagers, clinging to the net, were still too heavy for it, and soon, half plunged
into the sea, they were beaten by the furious waves. The balloon-case bulged out
again, and the wind, taking it, drove it along like a vessel. Might it not possibly
thus reach the land?

But, when only two fathoms off, terrible cries resounded from four pairs of
lungs at once. The balloon, which had appeared as if it would never again rise,
suddenly made an unexpected bound, after having been struck by a tremendous
sea. As if it had been at that instant relieved of a new part of its weight, it
mounted to a height of 1,500 feet, and here it met a current of wind, which
instead of taking it directly to the coast, carried it in a nearly parallel direction.

At last, two minutes later, it reproached obliquely, and finally fell on a sandy
beach, out of the reach of the waves.

The voyagers, aiding each other, managed to disengage themselves from the
meshes of the net. The balloon, relieved of their weight, was taken by the wind,
and like a wounded bird which revives for an instant, disappeared into space.

But the car had contained five passengers, with a dog, and the balloon only
left four on the shore.

The missing person had evidently been swept off by the sea, which had just
struck the net, and it was owing to this circumstance that the lightened balloon
rose the last time, and then soon after reached the land. Scarcely had the four
castaways set foot on firm ground, than they all, thinking of the absent one,
simultaneously exclaimed, "Perhaps he will try to swim to land! Let us save him!
let us save him!"


Chapter 2


Those whom the hurricane had just thrown on this coast were neither
aeronauts by profession nor amateurs. They were prisoners of war whose
boldness had induced them to escape in this extraordinary manner.

A hundred times they had almost perished! A hundred times had they almost
fallen from their torn balloon into the depths of the ocean. But Heaven had
reserved them for a strange destiny, and after having, on the 20th of March,
escaped from Richmond, besieged by the troops of General Ulysses Grant, they
found themselves seven thousand miles from the capital of Virginia, which was
the principal stronghold of the South, during the terrible War of Secession. Their
aerial voyage had lasted five days.

The curious circumstances which led to the escape of the prisoners were as
follows:

That same year, in the month of February, 1865, in one of the coups de main
by which General Grant attempted, though in vain, to possess himself of
Richmond, several of his officers fell into the power of the enemy and were
detained in the town. One of the most distinguished was Captain Cyrus Harding.
He was a native of Massachusetts, a first-class engineer, to whom the
government had confided, during the war, the direction of the railways, which
were so important at that time. A true Northerner, thin, bony, lean, about forty-
five years of age; his close-cut hair and his beard, of which he only kept a thick
mustache, were already getting gray. He had one-of those finely-developed
heads which appear made to be struck on a medal, piercing eyes, a serious
mouth, the physiognomy of a clever man of the military school. He was one of
those engineers who began by handling the hammer and pickaxe, like generals
who first act as common soldiers. Besides mental power, he also possessed great
manual dexterity. His muscles exhibited remarkable proofs of tenacity. A man of
action as well as a man of thought, all he did was without effort to one of his
vigorous and sanguine temperament. Learned, clear-headed, and practical, he
fulfilled in all emergencies those three conditions which united ought to insure
human success--activity of mind and body, impetuous wishes, and powerful will.
He might have taken for his motto that of William of Orange in the 17th century:
"I can undertake and persevere even without hope of success." Cyrus Harding
was courage personified. He had been in all the battles of that war. After having
begun as a volunteer at Illinois, under Ulysses Grant, he fought at Paducah,
Belmont, Pittsburg Landing, at the siege of Corinth, Port Gibson, Black River,


Chattanooga, the Wilderness, on the Potomac, everywhere and valiantly, a
soldier worthy of the general who said, "I never count my dead!" And hundreds
of times Captain Harding had almost been among those who were not counted
by the terrible Grant; but in these combats where he never spared himself,
fortune favored him till the moment when he was wounded and taken prisoner
on the field of battle near Richmond. At the same time and on the same day
another important personage fell into the hands of the Southerners. This was no
other than Gideon Spilen, a reporter for the New York Herald, who had been
ordered to follow the changes of the war in the midst of the Northern armies.

Gideon Spilett was one of that race of indomitable English or American
chroniclers, like Stanley and others, who stop at nothing to obtain exact
information, and transmit it to their journal in the shortest possible time. The
newspapers of the Union, such as the New York Herald, are genuine powers, and
their reporters are men to be reckoned with. Gideon Spilett ranked among the
first of those reporters: a man of great merit, energetic, prompt and ready for
anything, full of ideas, having traveled over the whole world, soldier and artist,
enthusiastic in council, resolute in action, caring neither for trouble, fatigue, nor
danger, when in pursuit of information, for himself first, and then for his journal,
a perfect treasury of knowledge on all sorts of curious subjects, of the
unpublished, of the unknown, and of the impossible. He was one of those
intrepid observers who write under fire, "reporting" among bullets, and to whom
every danger is welcome.

He also had been in all the battles, in the first rank, revolver in one hand,
notebook in the other; grape-shot never made his pencil tremble. He did not
fatigue the wires with incessant telegrams, like those who speak when they have
nothing to say, but each of his notes, short, decisive, and clear, threw light on
some important point. Besides, he was not wanting in humor. It was he who,
after the affair of the Black River, determined at any cost to keep his place at the
wicket of the telegraph office, and after having announced to his journal the
result of the battle, telegraphed for two hours the first chapters of the Bible. It
cost the New York Herald two thousand dollars, but the New York Herald
published the first intelligence.

Gideon Spilett was tall. He was rather more than forty years of age. Light
whiskers bordering on red surrounded his face. His eye was steady, lively, rapid
in its changes. It was the eye of a man accustomed to take in at a glance all the
details of a scene. Well built, he was inured to all climates, like a bar of steel
hardened in cold water.

For ten years Gideon Spilett had been the reporter of the New York Herald,
which he enriched by his letters and drawings, for he was as skilful in the use of


the pencil as of the pen. When he was captured, he was in the act of making a
description and sketch of the battle. The last words in his notebook were these:
"A Southern rifleman has just taken aim at me, but--" The Southerner
notwithstanding missed Gideon Spilett, who, with his usual fortune, came out of
this affair without a scratch.

Cyrus Harding and Gideon Spilett, who did not know each other except by
reputation, had both been carried to Richmond. The engineer's wounds rapidly
healed, and it was during his convalescence that he made acquaintance with the
reporter. The two men then learned to appreciate each other. Soon their common
aim had but one object, that of escaping, rejoining Grant's army, and fighting
together in the ranks of the Federals.

The two Americans had from the first determined to seize every chance; but
although they were allowed to wander at liberty in the town, Richmond was so
strictly guarded, that escape appeared impossible. In the meanwhile Captain
Harding was rejoined by a servant who was devoted to him in life and in death.
This intrepid fellow was a Negro born on the engineer's estate, of a slave father
and mother, but to whom Cyrus, who was an Abolitionist from conviction and
heart, had long since given his freedom. The once slave, though free, would not
leave his master. He would have died for him. He was a man of about thirty,
vigorous, active, clever, intelligent, gentle, and calm, sometimes naive, always
merry, obliging, and honest. His name was Nebuchadnezzar, but he only
answered to the familiar abbreviation of Neb.

When Neb heard that his master had been made prisoner, he left
Massachusetts without hesitating an instant, arrived before Richmond, and by
dint of stratagem and shrewdness, after having risked his life twenty times over,
managed to penetrate into the besieged town. The pleasure of Harding on seeing
his servant, and the joy of Neb at finding his master, can scarcely be described.

But though Neb had been able to make his way into Richmond, it was quite
another thing to get out again, for the Northern prisoners were very strictly
watched. Some extraordinary opportunity was needed to make the attempt with
any chance of success, and this opportunity not only did not present itself, but
was very difficult to find.

Meanwhile Grant continued his energetic operations. The victory of
Petersburg had been very dearly bought. His forces, united to those of Butler,
had as yet been unsuccessful before Richmond, and nothing gave the prisoners
any hope of a speedy deliverance.

The reporter, to whom his tedious captivity did not offer a single incident
worthy of note, could stand it no longer. His usually active mind was occupied
with one sole thought--how he might get out of Richmond at any cost. Several


times had he even made the attempt, but was stopped by some insurmountable
obstacle. However, the siege continued; and if the prisoners were anxious to
escape and join Grant's army, certain of the besieged were no less anxious to join
the Southern forces. Among them was one Jonathan Forster, a determined
Southerner. The truth was, that if the prisoners of the Secessionists could not
leave the town, neither could the Secessionists themselves while the Northern
army invested it. The Governor of Richmond for a long time had been unable to
communicate with General Lee, and he very much wished to make known to
him the situation of the town, so as to hasten the march of the army to their
relief. Thus Jonathan Forster accordingly conceived the idea of rising in a
balloon, so as to pass over the besieging lines, and in that way reach the
Secessionist camp.

The Governor authorized the attempt. A balloon was manufactured and
placed at the disposal of Forster, who was to be accompanied by five other
persons. They were furnished with arms in case they might have to defend
themselves when they alighted, and provisions in the event of their aerial voyage
being prolonged.

The departure of the balloon was fixed for the 18th of March. It should be
effected during the night, with a northwest wind of moderate force, and the
aeronauts calculated that they would reach General Lee's camp in a few hours.

But this northwest wind was not a simple breeze. From the 18th it was
evident that it was changing to a hurricane. The tempest soon became such that
Forster's departure was deferred, for it was impossible to risk the balloon and
those whom it carried in the midst of the furious elements.

The balloon, inflated on the great square of Richmond, was ready to depart
on the first abatement of the wind, and, as may be supposed, the impatience
among the besieged to see the storm moderate was very great.

The 18th, the 19th of March passed without any alteration in the weather.
There was even great difficulty in keeping the balloon fastened to the ground, as
the squalls dashed it furiously about.

The night of the 19th passed, but the next moming the storm blew with
redoubled force. The departure of the balloon was impossible.

On that day the engineer, Cyrus Harding, was accosted in one of the streets
of Richmond by a person whom he did not in the least know. This was a sailor
named Pencroft, a man of about thirty-five or forty years of age, strongly built,
very sunburnt, and possessed of a pair of bright sparkling eyes and a remarkably
good physiognomy. Pencroft was an American from the North, who had sailed
all the ocean over, and who had gone through every possible and almost
impossible adventure that a being with two feet and no wings would encounter.


It is needless to say that he was a bold, dashing fellow, ready to dare anything
and was astonished at nothing. Pencroft at the beginning of the year had gone to
Richmond on business, with a young boy of fifteen from New Jersey, son of a
former captain, an orphan, whom he loved as if he had been his own child. Not
having been able to leave the town before the first operations of the siege, he
found himself shut up, to his great disgust; but, not accustomed to succumb to
difficulties, he resolved to escape by some means or other. He knew the
engineer-officer by reputation; he knew with what impatience that determined
man chafed under his restraint. On this day he did not, therefore, hesitate to
accost him, saying, without circumlocution, "Have you had enough of
Richmond, captain?"

The engineer looked fixedly at the man who spoke, and who added, in a low
voice,--

"Captain Harding, will you try to escape?"

"When?" asked the engineer quickly, and it was evident that this question
was uttered without consideration, for he had not yet examined the stranger who
addressed him. But after having with a penetrating eye observed the open face of
the sailor, he was convinced that he had before him an honest man.

"Who are you?" he asked briefly.

Pencroft made himself known.

"Well," replied Harding, "and in what way do you propose to escape?"

"By that lazy balloon which is left there doing nothing, and which looks to
me as if it was waiting on purpose for us--"

There was no necessity for the sailor to finish his sentence. The engineer
understood him at once. He seized Pencroft by the arm, and dragged him to his
house. There the sailor developed his project, which was indeed extremely
simple. They risked nothing but their lives in its execution. The hurricane was in
all its violence, it is true, but so clever and daring an engineer as Cyrus Harding
knew perfectly well how to manage a balloon. Had he himself been as well
acquainted with the art of sailing in the air as he was with the navigation of a
ship, Pencroft would not have hesitated to set out, of course taking his young
friend Herbert with him; for, accustomed to brave the fiercest tempests of the
ocean, he was not to be hindered on account of the hurricane.

Captain Harding had listened to the sailor without saying a word, but his
eyes shone with satisfaction. Here was the long-sought-for opportunity--he was
not a man to let it pass. The plan was feasible, though, it must be confessed,
dangerous in the extreme. In the night, in spite of their guards, they might
approach the balloon, slip into the car, and then cut the cords which held it.
There was no doubt that they might be killed, but on the other hand they might


succeed, and without this storm!--Without this storm the balloon would have
started already and the looked-for opportunity would not have then presented
itself.

"T am not alone!" said Harding at last.

"How many people do you wish to bring with you?" asked the sailor.

"Two; my friend Spilett, and my servant Neb."

"That will be three," replied Pencroft; "and with Herbert and me five. But the
balloon will hold six--"

"That will be enough, we will go," answered Harding in a firm voice.

This "we" included Spilett, for the reporter, as his friend well knew, was not
a man to draw back, and when the project was communicated to him he
approved of it unreservedly. What astonished him was, that so simple an idea
had not occurred to him before. As to Neb, he followed his master wherever his
master wished to go.

"This evening, then," said Pencroft, "we will all meet out there."

"This evening, at ten o'clock," replied Captain Harding; "and Heaven grant
that the storm does not abate before our departure."

Pencroft took leave of the two friends, and returned to his lodging, where
young Herbert Brown had remained. The courageous boy knew of the sailor's
plan, and it was not without anxiety that he awaited the result of the proposal
being made to the engineer. Thus five determined persons were about to abandon
themselves to the mercy of the tempestuous elements!

No! the storm did not abate, and neither Jonathan Forster nor his companions
dreamed of confronting it in that frail car.

It would be a terrible journey. The engineer only feared one thing; it was that
the balloon, held to the ground and dashed about by the wind, would be torn into
shreds. For several hours he roamed round the nearly-deserted square, surveying
the apparatus. Pencroft did the same on his side, his hands in his pockets,
yawning now and then like a man who did not know how to kill the time, but
really dreading, like his friend, either the escape or destruction of the balloon.
Evening arrived. The night was dark in the extreme. Thick mists passed like
clouds close to the ground. Rain fell mingled with snow, it was very cold. A mist
hung over Richmond. It seemed as if the violent storm had produced a truce
between the besiegers and the besieged, and that the cannon were silenced by the
louder detonations of the storm. The streets of the town were deserted. It had not
even appeared necessary in that horrible weather to place a guard in the square,
in the midst of which plunged the balloon. Everything favored the departure of
the prisoners, but what might possibly be the termination of the hazardous
voyage they contemplated in the midst of the furious elements?--


"Dirty weather!" exclaimed Pencroft, fixing his hat firmly on his head with a
blow of his fist; "but pshaw, we shall succeed all the same!"

At half-past nine, Harding and his companions glided from different
directions into the square, which the gas-lamps, extinguished by the wind, had
left in total obscurity. Even the enormous balloon, almost beaten to the ground,
could not be seen. Independently of the sacks of ballast, to which the cords of
the net were fastened, the car was held by a strong cable passed through a ring in
the pavement. The five prisoners met by the car. They had not been perceived,
and such was the darkness that they could not even see each other.

Without speaking a word, Harding, Spilett, Neb, and Herbert took their
places in the car, while Pencroft by the engineer's order detached successively
the bags of ballast. It was the work of a few minutes only, and the sailor rejoined
his companions.

The balloon was then only held by the cable, and the engineer had nothing to
do but to give the word.

At that moment a dog sprang with a bound into the car. It was Top, a favorite
of the engineer. The faithful creature, having broken his chain, had followed his
master. He, however, fearing that its additional weight might impede their
ascent, wished to send away the animal.

"One more will make but little difference, poor beast!" exclaimed Pencroft,
heaving out two bags of sand, and as he spoke letting go the cable; the balloon
ascending in an oblique direction, disappeared, after having dashed the car
against two chimneys, which it threw down as it swept by them.

Then, indeed, the full rage of the hurricane was exhibited to the voyagers.
During the night the engineer could not dream of descending, and when day
broke, even a glimpse of the earth below was intercepted by fog.

Five days had passed when a partial clearing allowed them to see the wide
extending ocean beneath their feet, now lashed into the maddest fury by the gale.

Our readers will recollect what befell these five daring individuals who set
out on their hazardous expedition in the balloon on the 20th of March. Five days
afterwards four of them were thrown on a desert coast, seven thousand miles
from their country! But one of their number was missing, the man who was to be
their guide, their leading spirit, the engineer, Captain Harding! The instant they
had recovered their feet, they all hurried to the beach in the hopes of rendering
him assistance.


Chapter 3


The engineer, the meshes of the net having given way, had been carried off
by a wave. His dog also had disappeared. The faithful animal had voluntarily
leaped out to help his master. "Forward," cried the reporter; and all four, Spilett,
Herbert, Pencroft, and Neb, forgetting their fatigue, began their search. Poor Neb
shed bitter tears, giving way to despair at the thought of having lost the only
being he loved on earth.

Only two minutes had passed from the time when Cyrus Harding
disappeared to the moment when his companions set foot on the ground. They
had hopes therefore of arriving in time to save him. "Let us look for him! let us
look for him!" cried Neb.

"Yes, Neb," replied Gideon Spilett, "and we will find him too!"

"Living, I trust!"

"Still living!"

"Can he swim?" asked Pencroft.

"Yes," replied Neb, "and besides, Top is there."

The sailor, observing the heavy surf on the shore, shook his head.

The engineer had disappeared to the north of the shore, and nearly half a
mile from the place where the castaways had landed. The nearest point of the
beach he could reach was thus fully that distance off.

It was then nearly six o'clock. A thick fog made the night very dark. The
castaways proceeded toward the north of the land on which chance had thrown
them, an unknown region, the geographical situation of which they could not
even guess. They were walking upon a sandy soil, mingled with stones, which
appeared destitute of any sort of vegetation. The ground, very unequal and
rough, was in some places perfectly riddled with holes, making walking
extremely painful. From these holes escaped every minute great birds of clumsy
flight, which flew in all directions. Others, more active, rose in flocks and passed
in clouds over their heads. The sailor thought he recognized gulls and
cormorants, whose shrill cries rose above the roaring of the sea.

From time to time the castaways stopped and shouted, then listened for some
response from the ocean, for they thought that if the engineer had landed, and
they had been near to the place, they would have heard the barking of the dog
Top, even should Harding himself have been unable to give any sign of
existence. They stopped to listen, but no sound arose above the roaring of the
waves and the dashing of the surf. The little band then continued their march


forward, searching into every hollow of the shore.

After walking for twenty minutes, the four castaways were suddenly brought
to a standstill by the sight of foaming billows close to their feet. The solid
ground ended here. They found themselves at the extremity of a sharp point on
which the sea broke furiously.

"It is a promontory," said the sailor; "Wwe must retrace our steps, holding
towards the right, and we shall thus gain the mainland."

"But if he is there," said Neb, pointing to the ocean, whose waves shone of a
snowy white in the darkness. "Well, let us call again," and all uniting their
voices, they gave a vigorous shout, but there came no reply. They waited for a
lull, then began again; still no reply.

The castaways accordingly returned, following the opposite side of the
promontory, over a soil equally sandy and rugged. However, Pencroft observed
that the shore was more equal, that the ground rose, and he declared that it was
joined by a long slope to a hill, whose massive front he thought that he could see
looming indistinctly through the mist. The birds were less numerous on this part
of the shore; the sea was also less tumultuous, and they observed that the
agitation of the waves was diminished. The noise of the surf was scarcely heard.
This side of the promontory evidently formed a semicircular bay, which the
sharp point sheltered from the breakers of the open sea. But to follow this
direction was to go south, exactly opposite to that part of the coast where
Harding might have landed. After a walk of a mile and a half, the shore
presented no curve which would permit them to return to the north. This
promontory, of which they had turned the point, must be attached to the
mainland. The castaways, although their strength was nearly exhausted, still
marched courageously forward, hoping every moment to meet with a sudden
angle which would set them in the first direction. What was_ their
disappointment, when, after trudging nearly two miles, having reached an
elevated point composed of slippery rocks, they found themselves again stopped
by the sea.

"We are on an islet," said Pencroft, "and we have surveyed it from one
extremity to the other."

The sailor was right; they had been thrown, not on a continent, not even on
an island, but on an islet which was not more than two miles in length, with even
a less breadth.

Was this barren spot the desolate refuge of sea-birds, strewn with stones and
destitute of vegetation, attached to a more important archipelago? It was
impossible to say. When the voyagers from their car saw the land through the
mist, they had not been able to reconnoiter it sufficiently. However, Pencroft,


accustomed with his sailor eyes to piece through the gloom, was almost certain
that he could clearly distinguish in the west confused masses which indicated an
elevated coast. But they could not in the dark determine whether it was a single
island, or connected with others. They could not leave it either, as the sea
surrounded them; they must therefore put off till the next day their search for the
engineer, from whom, alas! not a single cry had reached them to show that he
was still in existence.

"The silence of our friend proves nothing," said the reporter. "Perhaps he has
fainted or is wounded, and unable to reply directly, so we will not despair."

The reporter then proposed to light a fire on a point of the islet, which would
serve as a signal to the engineer. But they searched in vain for wood or dry
brambles; nothing but sand and stones were to be found. The grief of Neb and
his companions, who were all strongly attached to the intrepid Harding, can be
better pictured than described. It was too evident that they were powerless to
help him. They must wait with what patience they could for daylight. Either the
engineer had been able to save himself, and had already found a refuge on some
point of the coast, or he was lost for ever! The long and painful hours passed by.
The cold was intense. The castaways suffered cruelly, but they scarcely
perceived it. They did not even think of taking a minute's rest. Forgetting
everything but their chief, hoping or wishing to hope on, they continued to walk
up and down on this sterile spot, always returning to its northern point, where
they could approach nearest to the scene of the catastrophe. They listened, they
called, and then uniting their voices, they endeavored to raise even a louder
shout than before, which would be transmitted to a great distance. The wind had
now fallen almost to a calm, and the noise of the sea began also to subside. One
of Neb's shouts even appeared to produce an echo. Herbert directed Pencroft's
attention to it, adding, "That proves that there is a coast to the west, at no great
distance." The sailor nodded; besides, his eyes could not deceive him. If he had
discovered land, however indistinct it might appear, land was sure to be there.
But that distant echo was the only response produced by Neb's shouts, while a
heavy gloom hung over all the part east of the island.

Meanwhile, the sky was clearing little by little. Towards midnight the stars
shone out, and if the engineer had been there with his companions he would
have remarked that these stars did not belong to the Northern Hemisphere. The
Polar Star was not visible, the constellations were not those which they had been
accustomed to see in the United States; the Southern Cross glittered brightly in
the sky.

The night passed away. Towards five o'clock in the morning of the 25th of
March, the sky began to lighten; the horizon still remained dark, but with


daybreak a thick mist rose from the sea, so that the eye could scarcely penetrate
beyond twenty feet or so from where they stood. At length the fog gradually
unrolled itself in great heavily moving waves.

It was unfortunate, however, that the castaways could distinguish nothing
around them. While the gaze of the reporter and Neb were cast upon the ocean,
the sailor and Herbert looked eagerly for the coast in the west. But not a speck of
land was visible. "Never mind," said Pencroft, "though I do not see the land, I
feel it... it is there... there... as sure as the fact that we are no longer at
Richmond." But the fog was not long in rising. It was only a fine-weather mist.
A hot sun soon penetrated to the surface of the island. About half-past six, three-
quarters of an hour after sunrise, the mist became more transparent. It grew
thicker above, but cleared away below. Soon the isle appeared as if it had
descended from a cloud, then the sea showed itself around them, spreading far
away towards the east, but bounded on the west by an abrupt and precipitous
coast.

Yes! the land was there. Their safety was at least provisionally insured. The
islet and the coast were separated by a channel about half a mile in breadth,
through which rushed an extremely rapid current.

However, one of the castaways, following the impulse of his heart,
immediately threw himself into the current, without consulting his companions,
without saying a single word. It was Neb. He was in haste to be on the other
side, and to climb towards the north. It had been impossible to hold him back.
Pencroft called him in vain. The reporter prepared to follow him, but Pencroft
stopped him. "Do you want to cross the channel?" he asked. "Yes," replied
Spilett. "All right!" said the seaman; "wait a bit; Neb is well able to carry help to
his master. If we venture into the channel, we risk being carried into the open sea
by the current, which is running very strong; but, if I'm not wrong, it is ebbing.
See, the tide is going down over the sand. Let us have patience, and at low water
it is possible we may find a fordable passage." "You are right," replied the
reporter, "we will not separate more than we can help."

During this time Neb was struggling vigorously against the current. He was
crossing in an oblique direction. His black shoulders could be seen emerging at
each stroke. He was carried down very quickly, but he also made way towards
the shore. It took more than half an hour to cross from the islet to the land, and
he reached the shore several hundred feet from the place which was opposite to
the point from which he had started.

Landing at the foot of a high wall of granite, he shook himself vigorously;
and then, setting off running, soon disappeared behind a rocky point, which
projected to nearly the height of the northern extremity of the islet.


Neb's companions had watched his daring attempt with painful anxiety, and
when he was out of sight, they fixed their attention on the land where their hope
of safety lay, while eating some shell-fish with which the sand was strewn. It
was a wretched repast, but still it was better than nothing. The opposite coast
formed one vast bay, terminating on the south by a very sharp point, which was
destitute of all vegetation, and was of a very wild aspect. This point abutted on
the shore in a grotesque outline of high granite rocks. Towards the north, on the
contrary, the bay widened, and a more rounded coast appeared, trending from the
southwest to the northeast, and terminating in a slender cape. The distance
between these two extremities, which made the bow of the bay, was about eight
miles. Half a mile from the shore rose the islet, which somewhat resembled the
carcass of a gigantic whale. Its extreme breadth was not more than a quarter of a
mile.

Opposite the islet, the beach consisted first of sand, covered with black
stones, which were now appearing little by little above the retreating tide. The
second level was separated by a perpendicular granite cliff, terminated at the top
by an unequal edge at a height of at least 300 feet. It continued thus for a length
of three miles, ending suddenly on the right with a precipice which looked as if
cut by the hand of man. On the left, above the promontory, this irregular and
jagged cliff descended by a long slope of conglomerated rocks till it mingled
with the ground of the southern point. On the upper plateau of the coast not a
tree appeared. It was a flat tableland like that above Cape Town at the Cape of
Good Hope, but of reduced proportions; at least so it appeared seen from the
islet. However, verdure was not wanting to the right beyond the precipice. They
could easily distinguish a confused mass of great trees, which extended beyond
the limits of their view. This verdure relieved the eye, so long wearied by the
continued ranges of granite. Lastly, beyond and above the plateau, in a
northwesterly direction and at a distance of at least seven miles, glittered a white
summit which reflected the sun's rays. It was that of a lofty mountain, capped
with snow.

The question could not at present be decided whether this land formed an
island, or whether it belonged to a continent. But on beholding the convulsed
masses heaped up on the left, no geologist would have hesitated to give them a
volcanic origin, for they were unquestionably the work of subterranean
convulsions.

Gideon Spilett, Pencroft, and Herbert attentively examined this land, on
which they might perhaps have to live many long years; on which indeed they
might even die, should it be out of the usual track of vessels, as was likely to be
the case.


"Well," asked Herbert, "what do you say, Pencroft?"

"There is some good and some bad, as in everything," replied the sailor. "We
shall see. But now the ebb is evidently making. In three hours we will attempt
the passage, and once on the other side, we will try to get out of this scrape, and
I hope may find the captain." Pencroft was not wrong in his anticipations. Three
hours later at low tide, the greater part of the sand forming the bed of the channel
was uncovered. Between the islet and the coast there only remained a narrow
channel which would no doubt be easy to cross.

About ten o'clock, Gideon Spilett and his companions stripped themselves of
their clothes, which they placed in bundles on their heads, and then ventured into
the water, which was not more than five feet deep. Herbert, for whom it was too
deep, swam like a fish, and got through capitally. All three arrived without
difficulty on the opposite shore. Quickly drying themselves in the sun, they put
on their clothes, which they had preserved from contact with the water, and sat
down to take counsel together what to do next.


Chapter 4


All at once the reporter sprang up, and telling the sailor that he would rejoin
them at that same place, he climbed the cliff in the direction which the Negro
Neb had taken a few hours before. Anxiety hastened his steps, for he longed to
obtain news of his friend, and he soon disappeared round an angle of the cliff.
Herbert wished to accompany him.

"Stop here, my boy," said the sailor; "we have to prepare an encampment,
and to try and find rather better grub than these shell-fish. Our friends will want
something when they come back. There is work for everybody."

"I am ready," replied Herbert.

"All right," said the sailor; "that will do. We must set about it regularly. We
are tired, cold, and hungry; therefore we must have shelter, fire, and food. There
is wood in the forest, and eggs in nests; we have only to find a house."

"Very well," returned Herbert, "I will look for a cave among the rocks, and I
shall be sure to discover some hole into which we can creep."

"All right," said Pencroft; "go on, my boy."

They both walked to the foot of the enormous wall over the beach, far from
which the tide had now retreated; but instead of going towards the north, they
went southward. Pencroft had remarked, several hundred feet from the place at
which they landed, a narrow cutting, out of which he thought a river or stream
might issue. Now, on the one hand it was important to settle themselves in the
neighborhood of a good stream of water, and on the other it was possible that the
current had thrown Cyrus Harding on the shore there.

The cliff, as has been said, rose to a height of three hundred feet, but the
mass was unbroken throughout, and even at its base, scarcely washed by the sea,
it did not offer the smallest fissure which would serve as a dwelling. It was a
perpendicular wall of very hard granite, which even the waves had not worn
away. Towards the summit fluttered myriads of sea-fowl, and especially those of
the web-footed species with long, flat, pointed beaks--a clamorous tribe, bold in
the presence of man, who probably for the first time thus invaded their domains.
Pencroft recognized the skua and other gulls among them, the voracious little
sea-mew, which in great numbers nestled in the crevices of the granite. A shot
fired among this swarm would have killed a great number, but to fire a shot a
gun was needed, and neither Pencroft nor Herbert had one; besides this, gulls
and sea-mews are scarcely eatable, and even their eggs have a detestable taste.
However, Herbert, who had gone forward a little more to the left, soon came


upon rocks covered with sea-weed, which, some hours later, would be hidden by
the high tide. On these rocks, in the midst of slippery wrack, abounded bivalve
shell-fish, not to be despised by starving people. Herbert called Pencroft, who
ran up hastily.

"Here are mussels!" cried the sailor; "these will do instead of eggs!"

"They are not mussels," replied Herbert, who was attentively examining the
molluscs attached to the rocks; "they are lithodomes."

"Are they good to eat?" asked Pencroft.

"Perfectly so."

"Then let us eat some lithodomes."

The sailor could rely upon Herbert; the young boy was well up in natural
history, and always had had quite a passion for the science. His father had
encouraged him in it, by letting him attend the lectures of the best professors in
Boston, who were very fond of the intelligent, industrious lad. And his turn for
natural history was, more than once in the course of time, of great use, and he
was not mistaken in this instance. These lithodomes were oblong shells,
suspended in clusters and adhering very tightly to the rocks. They belong to that
species of molluscous perforators which excavate holes in the hardest stone;
their shell is rounded at both ends, a feature which is not remarked in the
common mussel.

Pencroft and Herbert made a good meal of the lithodomes, which were then
half opened to the sun. They ate them as oysters, and as they had a strong
peppery taste, they were palatable without condiments of any sort.

Their hunger was thus appeased for the time, but not their thirst, which
increased after eating these naturally-spiced molluscs. They had then to find
fresh water, and it was not likely that it would be wanting in such a capriciously
uneven region. Pencroft and Herbert, after having taken the precaution of
collecting an ample supply of lithodomes, with which they filled their pockets
and handkerchiefs, regained the foot of the cliff.

Two hundred paces farther they arrived at the cutting, through which, as
Pencroft had guessed, ran a stream of water, whether fresh or not was to be
ascertained. At this place the wall appeared to have been separated by some
violent subterranean force. At its base was hollowed out a little creek, the
farthest part of which formed a tolerably sharp angle. The watercourse at that
part measured one hundred feet in breadth, and its two banks on each side were
scarcely twenty feet high. The river became strong almost directly between the
two walls of granite, which began to sink above the mouth; it then suddenly
turned and disappeared beneath a wood of stunted trees half a mile off.

"Here is the water, and yonder is the wood we require!" said Pencroft. "Well,


Herbert, now we only want the house."

The water of the river was limpid. The sailor ascertained that at this time--
that is to say, at low tide, when the rising floods did not reach it--it was sweet.
This important point established, Herbert looked for some cavity which would
serve them as a retreat, but in vain; everywhere the wall appeared smooth, plain,
and perpendicular.

However, at the mouth of the watercourse and above the reach of the high
tide, the convulsions of nature had formed, not a grotto, but a pile of enormous
rocks, such as are often met with in granite countries and which bear the name of
"Chimneys."

Pencroft and Herbert penetrated quite far in among the rocks, by sandy
passages in which light was not wanting, for it entered through the openings
which were left between the blocks, of which some were only sustained by a
miracle of equilibrium; but with the light came also air--a regular corridor-gale--
and with the wind the sharp cold from the exterior. However, the sailor thought
that by stopping-up some of the openings with a mixture of stones and sand, the
Chimneys could be rendered habitable. Their geometrical plan represented the
typographical sign "&," which signifies "et cetera" abridged, but by isolating the
upper mouth of the sign, through which the south and west winds blew so
strongly, they could succeed in making the lower part of use.

"Here's our work," said Pencroft, "and if we ever see Captain Harding again,
he will know how to make something of this labyrinth."

"We shall see him again, Pencroft," cried Herbert, "and when he returns he
must find a tolerable dwelling here. It will be so, if we can make a fireplace in
the left passage and keep an opening for the smoke."

"So we can, my boy," replied the sailor, "and these Chimneys will serve our
turn. Let us set to work, but first come and get a store of fuel. I think some
branches will be very useful in stopping up these openings, through which the
wind shrieks like so many fiends."

Herbert and Pencroft left the Chimneys, and, turning the angle, they began to
climb the left bank of the river. The current here was quite rapid, and drifted
down some dead wood. The rising tide--and it could already be perceived--must
drive it back with force to a considerable distance. The sailor then thought that
they could utilize this ebb and flow for the transport of heavy objects.

After having walked for a quarter of an hour, the sailor and the boy arrived at
the angle which the river made in turning towards the left. From this point its
course was pursued through a forest of magnificent trees. These trees still
retained their verdure, notwithstanding the advanced season, for they belonged
to the family of "coniferae," which is spread over all the regions of the globe,


from northern climates to the tropics. The young naturalist recognized especially
the "deedara," which are very numerous in the Himalayan zone, and which
spread around them a most agreeable odor. Between these beautiful trees sprang
up clusters of firs, whose opaque open parasol boughs spread wide around.
Among the long grass, Pencroft felt that his feet were crushing dry branches
which crackled like fireworks.

"Well, my boy," said he to Herbert, "if I don't know the name of these trees,
at any rate I reckon that we may call them ‘burning wood, ' and just now that's the
chief thing we want."

"Let us get a supply," replied Herbert, who immediately set to work.

The collection was easily made. It was not even necessary to lop the trees,
for enormous quantities of dead wood were lying at their feet; but if fuel was not
wanting, the means of transporting it was not yet found. The wood, being very
dry, would burn rapidly; it was therefore necessary to carry to the Chimneys a
considerable quantity, and the loads of two men would not be sufficient. Herbert
remarked this.

"Well, my boy," replied the sailor, "there must be some way of carrying this
wood; there is always a way of doing everything. If we had a cart or a boat, it
would be easy enough."

"But we have the river," said Herbert.

"Right," replied Pencroft; "the river will be to us like a road which carries of
itself, and rafts have not been invented for nothing."

"Only," observed Herbert, "at this moment our road is going the wrong way,
for the tide is rising!"

"We shall be all right if we wait till it ebbs," replied the sailor, "and then we
will trust it to carry our fuel to the Chimneys. Let us get the raft ready."

The sailor, followed by Herbert, directed his steps towards the river. They
both carried, each in proportion to his strength, a load of wood bound in fagots.
They found on the bank also a great quantity of dead branches in the midst of
grass, among which the foot of man had probably never before trod. Pencroft
began directly to make his raft. In a kind of little bay, created by a point of the
shore which broke the current, the sailor and the lad placed some good-sized
pieces of wood, which they had fastened together with dry creepers. A raft was
thus formed, on which they stacked all they had collected, sufficient, indeed, to
have loaded at least twenty men. In an hour the work was finished, and the raft
moored to the bank, awaited the turning of the tide.

There were still several hours to be occupied, and with one consent Pencroft
and Herbert resolved to gain the upper plateau, so as to have a more extended
view of the surrounding country.


Exactly two hundred feet behind the angle formed by the river, the wall,
terminated by a fall of rocks, died away in a gentle slope to the edge of the
forest. It was a natural staircase. Herbert and the sailor began their ascent; thanks
to the vigor of their muscles they reached the summit in a few minutes; and
proceeded to the point above the mouth of the river.

On attaining it, their first look was cast upon the ocean which not long before
they had traversed in such a terrible condition. They observed, with emotion, all
that part to the north of the coast on which the catastrophe had taken place. It
was there that Cyrus Harding had disappeared. They looked to see if some
portion of their balloon, to which a man might possibly cling, yet existed.
Nothing! The sea was but one vast watery desert. As to the coast, it was solitary
also. Neither the reporter nor Neb could be anywhere seen. But it was possible
that at this time they were both too far away to be perceived.

"Something tells me," cried Herbert, "that a man as energetic as Captain
Harding would not let himself be drowned like other people. He must have
reached some point of the shore; don't you think so, Pencroft?"

The sailor shook his head sadly. He little expected ever to see Cyrus Harding
again; but wishing to leave some hope to Herbert: "Doubtless, doubtless," said
he; "our engineer is a man who would get out of a scrape to which any one else
would yield."

In the meantime he examined the coast with great attention. Stretched out
below them was the sandy shore, bounded on the right of the river's mouth by
lines of breakers. The rocks which were visible appeared like amphibious
monsters reposing in the surf. Beyond the reef, the sea sparkled beneath the sun's
rays. To the south a sharp point closed the horizon, and it could not be seen if the
land was prolonged in that direction, or if it ran southeast and southwest, which
would have made this coast a very long peninsula. At the northern extremity of
the bay the outline of the shore was continued to a great distance in a wider
curve. There the shore was low, flat, without cliffs, and with great banks of sand,
which the tide left uncovered. Pencroft and Herbert then returned towards the
west. Their attention was first arrested by the snow-topped mountain which rose
at a distance of six or seven miles. From its first declivities to within two miles
of the coast were spread vast masses of wood, relieved by large green patches,
caused by the presence of evergreen trees. Then, from the edge of this forest to
the shore extended a plain, scattered irregularly with groups of trees. Here and
there on the left sparkled through glades the waters of the little river; they could
trace its winding course back towards the spurs of the mountain, among which it
seemed to spring. At the point where the sailor had left his raft of wood, it began
to run between the two high granite walls; but if on the left bank the wall


remained clear and abrupt, on the right bank, on the contrary, it sank gradually,
the massive sides changed to isolated rocks, the rocks to stones, the stones to
shingle running to the extremity of the point.

"Are we on an island?" murmured the sailor.

"At any rate, it seems to be big enough," replied the lad.

"An island, ever so big, is an island all the same!" said Pencroft.

But this important question could not yet be answered. A more perfect
survey had to be made to settle the point. As to the land itself, island or
continent, it appeared fertile, agreeable in its aspect, and varied in its
productions.

"This is satisfactory," observed Pencroft; "and in our misfortune, we must
thank Providence for it."

"God be praised!" responded Herbert, whose pious heart was full of gratitude
to the Author of all things.

Pencroft and Herbert examined for some time the country on which they had
been cast; but it was difficult to guess after so hasty an inspection what the future
had in store for them.

They then returned, following the southern crest of the granite platform,
bordered by a long fringe of jagged rocks, of the most whimsical shapes. Some
hundreds of birds lived there nestled in the holes of the stone; Herbert, jumping
over the rocks, startled a whole flock of these winged creatures.

"Oh!" cried he, "those are not gulls nor sea-mews!"

"What are they then?” asked Pencroft.

"Upon my word, one would say they were pigeons!"

"Just so, but these are wild or rock pigeons. I recognize them by the double
band of black on the wing, by the white tail, and by their slate-colored plumage.
But if the rock-pigeon is good to eat, its eggs must be excellent, and we will
soon see how many they may have left in their nests!"

"We will not give them time to hatch, unless it is in the shape of an omelet!"
replied Pencroft merrily.

"But what will you make your omelet in?" asked Herbert; "in your hat?"

"Well!" replied the sailor, "I am not quite conjuror enough for that; we must
come down to eggs in the shell, my boy, and I will undertake to despatch the
hardest!"

Pencroft and Herbert attentively examined the cavities in the granite, and
they really found eggs in some of the hollows. A few dozen being collected,
were packed in the sailor's handkerchief, and as the time when the tide would be
full was approaching, Pencroft and Herbert began to redescend towards the
watercourse. When they arrived there, it was an hour after midday. The tide had


already turned. They must now avail themselves of the ebb to take the wood to
the mouth. Pencroft did not intend to let the raft go away in the current without
guidance, neither did he mean to embark on it himself to steer it. But a sailor is
never at a loss when there is a question of cables or ropes, and Pencroft rapidly
twisted a cord, a few fathoms long, made of dry creepers. This vegetable cable
was fastened to the after-part of the raft, and the sailor held it in his hand while
Herbert, pushing off the raft with a long pole, kept it in the current. This
succeeded capitally. The enormous load of wood drifted down the current. The
bank was very equal; there was no fear that the raft would run aground, and
before two o'clock they arrived at the river's mouth, a few paces from the
Chimneys.


Chapter 5


Pencroft's first care, after unloading the raft, was to render the cave habitable
by stopping up all the holes which made it draughty. Sand, stones, twisted
branches, wet clay, closed up the galleries open to the south winds. One narrow
and winding opening at the side was kept, to lead out the smoke and to make the
fire draw. The cave was thus divided into three or four rooms, if such dark dens
with which a donkey would scarcely have been contented deserved the name.
But they were dry, and there was space to stand upright, at least in the principal
room, which occupied the center. The floor was covered with fine sand, and
taking all in all they were well pleased with it for want of a better.

"Perhaps," said Herbert, while he and Pencroft were working, "our
companions have found a superior place to ours."

"Very likely," replied the seaman; "but, as we don't know, we must work all
the same. Better to have two strings to one's bow than no string at all!"

"Oh!" exclaimed Herbert, "how jolly it will be if they were to find Captain
Harding and were to bring him back with them!"

"Yes, indeed!" said Pencroft, "that was a man of the right sort."

"Was!" exclaimed Herbert, "do you despair of ever seeing him again?"

"God forbid!" replied the sailor. Their work was soon done, and Pencroft
declared himself very well satisfied.

"Now," said he, "our friends can come back when they like. They will find a
good enough shelter."

They now had only to make a fireplace and to prepare the supper--an easy
task. Large flat stones were placed on the ground at the opening of the narrow
passage which had been kept. This, if the smoke did not take the heat out with it,
would be enough to maintain an equal temperature inside. Their wood was
stowed away in one of the rooms, and the sailor laid in the fireplace some logs
and brushwood. The seaman was busy with this, when Herbert asked him if he
had any matches.

"Certainly," replied Pencroft, "and I may say happily, for without matches or
tinder we should be in a fix."

"Still we might get fire as the savages do," replied Herbert, "by rubbing two
bits of dry stick one against the other."

"All right; try, my boy, and let's see if you can do anything besides exercising
your arms."

"Well, it's a very simple proceeding, and much used in the islands of the


Pacific."

"I don't deny it," replied Pencroft, "but the savages must know how to do it
or employ a peculiar wood, for more than once I have tried to get fire in that
way, but I could never manage it. I must say I prefer matches. By the bye, where
are my matches?"

Pencroft searched in his waistcoat for the box, which was always there, for
he was a confirmed smoker. He could not find it; he rummaged the pockets of
his trousers, but, to his horror, he could nowhere discover the box.

"Here's a go!" said he, looking at Herbert. "The box must have fallen out of
my pocket and got lost! Surely, Herbert, you must have something--a tinder-box-
-anything that can possibly make fire!"

"No, I haven't, Pencroft."

The sailor rushed out, followed by the boy. On the sand, among the rocks,
near the river's bank, they both searched carefully, but in vain. The box was of
copper, and therefore would have been easily seen.

"Pencroft," asked Herbert, "didn't you throw it out of the car?"

"I knew better than that," replied the sailor; "but such a small article could
easily disappear in the tumbling about we have gone through. I would rather
even have lost my pipe! Confound the box! Where can it be?"

"Look here, the tide is going down," said Herbert; "let's run to the place
where we landed."

It was scarcely probable that they would find the box, which the waves had
rolled about among the pebbles, at high tide, but it was as well to try. Herbert
and Pencroft walked rapidly to the point where they had landed the day before,
about two hundred feet from the cave. They hunted there, among the shingle, in
the clefts of the rocks, but found nothing. If the box had fallen at this place it
must have been swept away by the waves. As the sea went down, they searched
every little crevice with no result. It was a grave loss in their circumstances, and
for the time irreparable. Pencroft could not hide his vexation; he looked very
anxious, but said not a word. Herbert tried to console him by observing, that if
they had found the matches, they would, very likely, have been wetted by the sea
and useless.

"No, my boy," replied the sailor; "they were in a copper box which shut very
tightly; and now what are we to do?"

"We shall certainly find some way of making a fire," said Herbert. "Captain
Harding or Mr. Spilett will not be without them."

"Yes," replied Pencroft; "but in the meantime we are without fire, and our
companions will find but a sorry repast on their return."

"But," said Herbert quickly, "do you think it possible that they have no tinder


or matches?"

"T doubt it," replied the sailor, shaking his head, "for neither Neb nor Captain
Harding smoke, and I believe that Mr. Spilett would rather keep his notebook
than his match-box."

Herbert did not reply. The loss of the box was certainly to be regretted, but
the boy was still sure of procuring fire in some way or other. Pencroft, more
experienced, did not think so, although he was not a man to trouble himself
about a small or great grievance. At any rate, there was only one thing to be
done--to await the return of Neb and the reporter; but they must give up the feast
of hard eggs which they had meant to prepare, and a meal of raw flesh was not
an agreeable prospect either for themselves or for the others.

Before returning to the cave, the sailor and Herbert, in the event of fire being
positively unattainable, collected some more shell-fish, and then silently retraced
their steps to their dwelling.

Pencroft, his eyes fixed on the ground, still looked for his box. He even
climbed up the left bank of the river from its mouth to the angle where the raft
had been moored. He returned to the plateau, went over it in every direction,
searched among the high grass on the border of the forest, all in vain.

It was five in the evening when he and Herbert reentered the cave. It is
useless to say that the darkest corners of the passages were ransacked before
they were obliged to give it up in despair. Towards six o'clock, when the sun was
disappearing behind the high lands of the west, Herbert, who was walking up
and down on the strand, signalized the return of Neb and Spilett.

They were returning alone!... The boy's heart sank; the sailor had not been
deceived in his forebodings; the engineer, Cyrus Harding, had not been found!

The reporter, on his arrival, sat down on a rock, without saying anything.
Exhausted with fatigue, dying of hunger, he had not strength to utter a word.

As to Neb, his red eyes showed how he had cried, and the tears which he
could not restrain told too clearly that he had lost all hope.

The reporter recounted all that they had done in their attempt to recover
Cyrus Harding. He and Neb had surveyed the coast for a distance of eight miles
and consequently much beyond the place where the balloon had fallen the last
time but one, a fall which was followed by the disappearance of the engineer and
the dog Top. The shore was solitary; not a vestige of a mark. Not even a pebble
recently displaced; not a trace on the sand; not a human footstep on all that part
of the beach. It was clear that that portion of the shore had never been visited by
a human being. The sea was as deserted as the land, and it was there, a few
hundred feet from the coast, that the engineer must have found a tomb.

As Spilett ended his account, Neb jumped up, exclaiming in a voice which


showed how hope struggled within him, "No! he is not dead! he can't be dead! It
might happen to any one else, but never to him! He could get out of anything!"
Then his strength forsaking him, "Oh! I can do no more!" he murmured.

"Neb," said Herbert, running to him, "we will find him! God will give him
back to us! But in the meantime you are hungry, and you must eat something."

So saying, he offered the poor Negro a few handfuls of shell-fish, which was
indeed wretched and insufficient food. Neb had not eaten anything for several
hours, but he refused them. He could not, would not live without his master.

As to Gideon Spilett, he devoured the shell-fish, then he laid himself down
on the sand, at the foot of a rock. He was very weak, but calm. Herbert went up
to him, and taking his hand, "Sir," said he, "we have found a shelter which will
be better than lying here. Night is advancing. Come and rest! To-morrow we will
search farther."

The reporter got up, and guided by the boy went towards the cave. On the
way, Pencroft asked him in the most natural tone, if by chance he happened to
have a match or two.

The reporter stopped, felt in his pockets, but finding nothing said, "I had
some, but I must have thrown them away."

The seaman then put the same question to Neb and received the same
answer.

"Confound it!" exclaimed the sailor.

The reporter heard him and seizing his arm, "Have you no matches?" he
asked.

"Not one, and no fire in consequence."

"Ah!" cried Neb, "if my master was here, he would know what to do!"

The four castaways remained motionless, looking uneasily at each other.
Herbert was the first to break the silence by saying, "Mr. Spilett, you are a
smoker and always have matches about you; perhaps you haven't looked well,
try again, a single match will be enough!"

The reporter hunted again in the pockets of his trousers, waistcoat, and great-
coat, and at last to Pencroft's great joy, no less to his extreme surprise, he felt a
tiny piece of wood entangled in the lining of his waistcoat. He seized it with his
fingers through the stuff, but he could not get it out. If this was a match and a
single one, it was of great importance not to rub off the phosphorus.

"Will you let me try?" said the boy, and very cleverly, without breaking it, he
managed to draw out the wretched yet precious little bit of wood which was of
such great importance to these poor men. It was unused.

"Hurrah!" cried Pencroft; "it is as good as having a whole cargo!" He took
the match, and, followed by his companions, entered the cave.


This small piece of wood, of which so many in an inhabited country are
wasted with indifference and are of no value, must here be used with the greatest
caution.

The sailor first made sure that it was quite dry; that done, "We must have
some paper," said he.

"Here," replied Spilett, after some hesitation tearing a leaf out of his
notebook.

Pencroft took the piece of paper which the reporter held out to him, and knelt
down before the fireplace. Some handfuls of grass, leaves, and dry moss were
placed under the fagots and disposed in such a way that the air could easily
circulate, and the dry wood would rapidly catch fire.

Pencroft then twisted the piece of paper into the shape of a cone, as smokers
do in a high wind, and poked it in among the moss. Taking a small, rough stone,
he wiped it carefully, and with a beating heart, holding his breath, he gently
rubbed the match. The first attempt did not produce any effect. Pencroft had not
struck hard enough, fearing to rub off the phosphorus.

"No, I can't do it," said he, "my hand trembles, the match has missed fire; I
cannot, I will not!" and rising, he told Herbert to take his place.

Certainly the boy had never in all his life been so nervous. Prometheus going
to steal the fire from heaven could not have been more anxious. He did not
hesitate, however, but struck the match directly.

A little spluttering was heard and a tiny blue flame sprang up, making a
choking smoke. Herbert quickly turned the match so as to augment the flame,
and then slipped it into the paper cone, which in a few seconds too caught fire,
and then the moss.

A minute later the dry wood crackled and a cheerful flame, assisted by the
vigorous blowing of the sailor, sprang up in the midst of the darkness.

"At last!" cried Pencroft, getting up; "I was never so nervous before in all my
life!"

The flat stones made a capital fireplace. The smoke went quite easily out at
the narrow passage, the chimney drew, and an agreeable warmth was not long in
being felt.

They must now take great care not to let the fire go out, and always to keep
some embers alight. It only needed care and attention, as they had plenty of
wood and could renew their store at any time.

Pencroft's first thought was to use the fire by preparing a more nourishing
supper than a dish of shell-fish. Two dozen eggs were brought by Herbert. The
reporter leaning up in a comer, watched these preparations without saying
anything. A threefold thought weighed on his mind. Was Cyrus still alive? If he


was alive, where was he? If he had survived from his fall, how was it that he had
not found some means of making known his existence? As to Neb, he was
roaming about the shore. He was like a body without a soul.

Pencroft knew fifty ways of cooking eggs, but this time he had no choice,
and was obliged to content himself with roasting them under the hot cinders. In a
few minutes the cooking was done, and the seaman invited the reporter to take
his share of the supper. Such was the first repast of the castaways on this
unknown coast. The hard eggs were excellent, and as eggs contain everything
indispensable to man's nourishment, these poor people thought themselves well
off, and were much strengthened by them. Oh! if only one of them had not been
missing at this meal! If the five prisoners who escaped from Richmond had been
all there, under the piled-up rocks, before this clear, crackling fire on the dry
sand, what thanksgiving must they have rendered to Heaven! But the most
ingenious, the most learned, he who was their unquestioned chief, Cyrus
Harding, was, alas! missing, and his body had not even obtained a burial-place.

Thus passed the 25th of March. Night had come on. Outside could be heard
the howling of the wind and the monotonous sound of the surf breaking on the
shore. The waves rolled the shingle backwards and forwards with a deafening
noise.

The reporter retired into a dark comer after having shortly noted down the
occurrences of the day; the first appearance of this new land, the loss of their
leader, the exploration of the coast, the incident of the matches, etc.; and then
overcome by fatigue, he managed to forget his sorrows in sleep. Herbert went to
sleep directly. As to the sailor, he passed the night with one eye on the fire, on
which he did not spare fuel. But one of the castaways did not sleep in the cave.
The inconsolable, despairing Neb, notwithstanding all that his companions could
say to induce him to take some rest, wandered all night long on the shore calling
on his master.


Chapter 6


The inventory of the articles possessed by these castaways from the clouds,
thrown upon a coast which appeared to be uninhabited, was soon made out.
They had nothing, save the clothes which they were wearing at the time of the
catastrophe. We must mention, however, a notebook and a watch which Gideon
Spilett had kept, doubtless by inadvertence, not a weapon, not a tool, not even a
pocket-knife; for while in the car they had thrown out everything to lighten the
balloon. The imaginary heroes of Daniel Defoe or of Wyss, as well as Selkirk
and Raynal shipwrecked on Juan Fernandez and on the archipelago of the
Aucklands, were never in such absolute destitution. Either they had abundant
resources from their stranded vessels, in grain, cattle, tools, ammunition, or else
some things were thrown up on the coast which supplied them with all the first
necessities of life. But here, not any instrument whatever, not a utensil. From
nothing they must supply themselves with everything.

And yet, if Cyrus Harding had been with them, if the engineer could have
brought his practical science, his inventive mind to bear on their situation,
perhaps all hope would not have been lost. Alas! they must hope no longer again
to see Cyrus Harding. The castaways could expect nothing but from themselves
and from that Providence which never abandons those whose faith is sincere.

But ought they to establish themselves on this part of the coast, without
trying to know to what continent it belonged, if it was inhabited, or if they were
on the shore of a desert island?

It was an important question, and should be solved with the shortest possible
delay. From its answer they would know what measures to take. However,
according to Pencroft's advice, it appeared best to wait a few days before
commencing an exploration. They must, in fact, prepare some provisions and
procure more strengthening food than eggs and molluscs. The explorers, before
undertaking new fatigues, must first of all recruit their strength.

The Chimneys offered a retreat sufficient for the present. The fire was
lighted, and it was easy to preserve some embers. There were plenty of shell-fish
and eggs among the rocks and on the beach. It would be easy to kill a few of the
pigeons which were flying by hundreds about the summit of the plateau, either
with sticks or stones. Perhaps the trees of the neighboring forest would supply
them with eatable fruit. Lastly, the sweet water was there.

It was accordingly settled that for a few days they would remain at the
Chimneys so as to prepare themselves for an expedition, either along the shore


or into the interior of the country. This plan suited Neb particularly. As obstinate
in his ideas as in his presentiments, he was in no haste to abandon this part of the
coast, the scene of the catastrophe. He did not, he would not believe in the loss
of Cyrus Harding. No, it did not seem to him possible that such a man had ended
in this vulgar fashion, carried away by a wave, drowned in the floods, a few
hundred feet from a shore. As long as the waves had not cast up the body of the
engineer, as long as he, Neb, had not seen with his eyes, touched with his hands
the corpse of his master, he would not believe in his death! And this idea rooted
itself deeper than ever in his determined heart. An illusion perhaps, but still an
illusion to be respected, and one which the sailor did not wish to destroy. As for
him, he hoped no longer, but there was no use in arguing with Neb. He was like
the dog who will not leave the place where his master is buried, and his grief
was such that most probably he would not survive him.

This same morning, the 26th of March, at daybreak, Neb had set out on the
shore in a northerly direction, and he had returned to the spot where the sea, no
doubt, had closed over the unfortunate Harding.

That day's breakfast was composed solely of pigeon's eggs and lithodomes.
Herbert had found some salt deposited by evaporation in the hollows of the
rocks, and this mineral was very welcome.

The repast ended, Pencroft asked the reporter if he wished to accompany
Herbert and himself to the forest, where they were going to try to hunt. But on
consideration, it was thought necessary that someone should remain to keep in
the fire, and to be at hand in the highly improbable event of Neb requiring aid.
The reporter accordingly remained behind.

"To the chase, Herbert," said the sailor. "We shall find ammunition on our
way, and cut our weapons in the forest." But at the moment of starting, Herbert
observed, that since they had no tinder, it would perhaps be prudent to replace it
by another substance.

"What?" asked Pencroft.

"Burnt linen," replied the boy. "That could in case of need serve for tinder."

The sailor thought it very sensible advice. Only it had the inconvenience of
necessitating the sacrifice of a piece of handkerchief. Notwithstanding, the thing
was well worth while trying, and a part of Pencroft's large checked handkerchief
was soon reduced to the state of a half-burnt rag. This inflammable material was
placed in the central chamber at the bottom of a little cavity in the rock, sheltered
from all wind and damp.

It was nine o'clock in the morning. The weather was threatening and the
breeze blew from the southeast. Herbert and Pencroft turned the angle of the
Chimneys, not without having cast a look at the smoke which, just at that place,


curled round a point of rock: they ascended the left bank of the river.

Arrived at the forest, Pencroft broke from the first tree two stout branches
which he transformed into clubs, the ends of which Herbert rubbed smooth on a
rock. Oh! what would they not have given for a knife!

The two hunters now advanced among the long grass, following the bank.
From the turning which directed its course to the southwest, the river narrowed
gradually and the channel lay between high banks, over which the trees formed a
double arch. Pencroft, lest they should lose themselves, resolved to follow the
course of the stream, which would always lead them back to the point from
which they started. But the bank was not without some obstacles: here, the
flexible branches of the trees bent level with the current; there, creepers and
thorns which they had to break down with their sticks. Herbert often glided
among the broken stumps with the agility of a young cat, and disappeared in the
underwood. But Pencroft called him back directly, begging him not to wander
away. Meanwhile, the sailor attentively observed the disposition and nature of
the surrounding country. On the left bank, the ground, which was flat and
marshy, rose imperceptibly towards the interior. It looked there like a network of
liquid threads which doubtless reached the river by some underground drain.
Sometimes a stream ran through the underwood, which they crossed without
difficulty. The opposite shore appeared to be more uneven, and the valley of
which the river occupied the bottom was more clearly visible. The hill, covered
with trees disposed in terraces, intercepted the view. On the right bank walking
would have been difficult, for the declivities fell suddenly, and the trees bending
over the water were only sustained by the strength of their roots.

It is needless to add that this forest, as well as the coast already surveyed,
was destitute of any sign of human life. Pencroft only saw traces of quadrupeds,
fresh footprints of animals, of which he could not recognize the species. In all
probability, and such was also Herbert's opinion, some had been left by
formidable wild beasts which doubtless would give them some trouble; but
nowhere did they observe the mark of an axe on the trees, nor the ashes of a fire,
nor the impression of a human foot. On this they might probably congratulate
themselves, for on any land in the middle of the Pacific the presence of man was
perhaps more to be feared than desired. Herbert and Pencroft speaking little, for
the difficulties of the way were great, advanced very slowly, and after walking
for an hour they had scarcely gone more than a mile. As yet the hunt had not
been successful. However, some birds sang and fluttered in the foliage, and
appeared very timid, as if man had inspired them with an instinctive fear. Among
others, Herbert described, in a marshy part of the forest, a bird with a long
pointed beak, closely resembling the king-fisher, but its plumage was not fine,


though of a metallic brilliancy.

"That must be a jacamar," said Herbert, trying to get nearer.

"This will be a good opportunity to taste jacamar," replied the sailor, "if that
fellow is in a humor to be roasted!"

Just then, a stone cleverly thrown by the boy, struck the creature on the wing,
but the blow did not disable it, and the jacamar ran off and disappeared in an
instant.

"How clumsy I am!" cried Herbert.

"No, no, my boy!" replied the sailor. "The blow was well aimed; many a one
would have missed it altogether! Come, don't be vexed with yourself. We shall
catch it another day!"

As the hunters advanced, the trees were found to be more scattered, many
being magnificent, but none bore eatable fruit. Pencroft searched in vain for
some of those precious palm-trees which are employed in so many ways in
domestic life, and which have been found as far as the fortieth parallel in the
Northern Hemisphere, and to the thirty-fifth only in the Southern Hemisphere.
But this forest was only composed of coniferae, such as deodaras, already
recognized by Herbert, and Douglas pine, similar to those which grow on the
northwest coast of America, and splendid firs, measuring a hundred and fifty feet
in height.

At this moment a flock of birds, of a small size and pretty plumage, with
long glancing tails, dispersed themselves among the branches strewing their
feathers, which covered the ground as with fine down. Herbert picked up a few
of these feathers, and after having examined them,--

"These are couroucous," said he.

"I should prefer a moor-cock or guinea-fowl," replied Pencroft, "still, if they
are good to eat--"

"They are good to eat, and also their flesh is very delicate," replied Herbert.
"Besides, if I don't mistake, it is easy to approach and kill them with a stick."

The sailor and the lad, creeping among the grass, arrived at the foot of a tree,
whose lower branches were covered with little birds. The couroucous were
waiting the passage of insects which served for their nourishment. Their feathery
feet could be seen clasping the slender twigs which supported them.

The hunters then rose, and using their sticks like scythes, they mowed down
whole rows of these couroucous, who never thought of flying away, and stupidly
allowed themselves to be knocked off. A hundred were already heaped on the
ground, before the others made up their minds to fly.

"Well," said Pencroft, "here is game, which is quite within the reach of
hunters like us. We have only to put out our hands and take it!"


The sailor having strung the couroucous like larks on flexible twigs, they
then continued their exploration. The stream here made a bend towards the
south, but this detour was probably not prolonged for the river must have its
source in the mountain, and be supplied by the melting of the snow which
covered the sides of the central cone.

The particular object of their expedition was, as has been said, to procure the
greatest possible quantity of game for the inhabitants of the Chimneys. It must
be acknowledged that as yet this object had not been attained. So the sailor
actively pursued his researches, though he exclaimed, when some animal which
he had not even time to recognize fled into the long grass, "If only we had had
the dog Top!" But Top had disappeared at the same time as his master, and had
probably perished with him.

Towards three o'clock new flocks of birds were seen through certain trees, at
whose aromatic berries they were pecking, those of the juniper-tree among
others. Suddenly a loud trumpet call resounded through the forest. This strange
and sonorous cry was produced by a game bird called grouse in the United
States. They soon saw several couples, whose plumage was rich chestnut-brown
mottled with dark brown, and tail of the same color. Herbert recognized the
males by the two wing-like appendages raised on the neck. Pencroft determined
to get hold of at least one of these gallinaceae, which were as large as a fowl, and
whose flesh is better than that of a pullet. But it was difficult, for they would not
allow themselves to be approached. After several fruitless attempts, which
resulted in nothing but scaring the grouse, the sailor said to the lad,--

"Decidedly, since we can't kill them on the wing, we must try to take them
with a line."

"Like a fish?" cried Herbert, much surprised at the proposal.

"Like a fish," replied the sailor quite seriously. Pencroft had found among the
grass half a dozen grouse nests, each having three or four eggs. He took great
care not to touch these nests, to which their proprietors would not fail to return.
It was around these that he meant to stretch his lines, not snares, but real fishing-
lines. He took Herbert to some distance from the nests, and there prepared his
singular apparatus with all the care which a disciple of Izaak Walton would have
used. Herbert watched the work with great interest, though rather doubting its
success. The lines were made of fine creepers, fastened one to the other, of the
length of fifteen or twenty feet. Thick, strong thorns, the points bent back (which
were supplied from a dwarf acacia bush) were fastened to the ends of the
creepers, by way of hooks. Large red worms, which were crawling on the
ground, furnished bait.

This done, Pencroft, passing among the grass and concealing himself


skillfully, placed the end of his lines armed with hooks near the grouse nests;
then he returned, took the other ends and hid with Herbert behind a large tree.
There they both waited patiently; though, it must be said, that Herbert did not
reckon much on the success of the inventive Pencroft.

A whole half-hour passed, but then, as the sailor had surmised, several
couple of grouse returned to their nests. They walked along, pecking the ground,
and not suspecting in any way the presence of the hunters, who, besides, had
taken care to place themselves to leeward of the gallinaceae.

The lad felt at this moment highly interested. He held his breath, and
Pencroft, his eyes staring, his mouth open, his lips advanced, as if about to taste
a piece of grouse, scarcely breathed.

Meanwhile, the birds walked about the hooks, without taking any notice of
them. Pencroft then gave little tugs which moved the bait as if the worms had
been still alive.

The sailor undoubtedly felt much greater anxiety than does the fisherman, for
he does not see his prey coming through the water. The jerks attracted the
attention of the gallinaceae, and they attacked the hooks with their beaks. Three
voracious grouse swallowed at the same moment bait and hook. Suddenly with a
smart jerk, Pencroft "struck" his line, and a flapping of wings showed that the
birds were taken.

"Hurrah!" he cried, rushing towards the game, of which he made himself
master in an instant.

Herbert clapped his hands. It was the first time that he had ever seen birds
taken with a line, but the sailor modestly confessed that it was not his first
attempt, and that besides he could not claim the merit of invention.

"And at any rate," added he, "situated as we are, we must hope to hit upon
many other contrivances."

The grouse were fastened by their claws, and Pencroft, delighted at not
having to appear before their companions with empty hands, and observing that
the day had begun to decline, judged it best to return to their dwelling.

The direction was indicated by the river, whose course they had only to
follow, and, towards six o'clock, tired enough with their excursion, Herbert and
Pencroft arrived at the Chimneys.


Chapter 7


Gideon Spilett was standing motionless on the shore, his arms crossed,
gazing over the sea, the horizon of which was lost towards the east in a thick
black cloud which was spreading rapidly towards the zenith. The wind was
already strong, and increased with the decline of day. The whole sky was of a
threatening aspect, and the first symptoms of a violent storm were clearly
visible.

Herbert entered the Chimneys, and Pencroft went towards the reporter. The
latter, deeply absorbed, did not see him approach.

"We are going to have a dirty night, Mr. Spilett!" said the sailor: "Petrels
delight in wind and rain."

The reporter, turning at the moment, saw Pencroft, and his first words were,--

"At what distance from the coast would you say the car was, when the waves
carried off our companion?"

The sailor had not expected this question. He reflected an instant and
replied,--

"Two cables lengths at the most."

"But what is a cable's length?" asked Gideon Spilett.

"About a hundred and twenty fathoms, or six hundred feet."

"Then," said the reporter, "Cyrus Harding must have disappeared twelve
hundred feet at the most from the shore?"

"About that," replied Pencroft.

"And his dog also?"

"Also."

"What astonishes me," rejoined the reporter, "while admitting that our
companion has perished, is that Top has also met his death, and that neither the
body of the dog nor of his master has been cast on the shore!"

"It is not astonishing, with such a heavy sea," replied the sailor. "Besides, it
is possible that currents have carried them farther down the coast."

"Then, it is your opinion that our friend has perished in the waves?" again
asked the reporter.

"That is my opinion."

"My own opinion," said Gideon Spilett, "with due deference to your
experience, Pencroft, is that in the double fact of the absolute disappearance of
Cyrus and Top, living or dead, there is something unaccountable and unlikely."

"I wish I could think like you, Mr. Spilett," replied Pencroft; "unhappily, my


mind is made up on this point." Having said this, the sailor returned to the
Chimneys. A good fire crackled on the hearth. Herbert had just thrown on an
armful of dry wood, and the flame cast a bright light into the darkest parts of the
passage.

Pencroft immediately began to prepare the dinner. It appeared best to
introduce something solid into the bill of fare, for all needed to get up their
strength. The strings of couroucous were kept for the next day, but they plucked
a couple of grouse, which were soon spitted on a stick, and roasting before a
blazing fire.

At seven in the evening Neb had not returned. The prolonged absence of the
Negro made Pencroft very uneasy. It was to be feared that he had met with an
accident on this unknown land, or that the unhappy fellow had been driven to
some act of despair. But Herbert drew very different conclusions from this
absence. According to him, Neb's delay was caused by some new circumstances
which had induced him to prolong his search. Also, everything new must be to
the advantage of Cyrus Harding. Why had Neb not returned unless hope still
detained him? Perhaps he had found some mark, a footstep, a trace which had
put him in the right path. Perhaps he was at this moment on a certain track.
Perhaps even he was near his master.

Thus the lad reasoned. Thus he spoke. His companions let him talk. The
reporter alone approved with a gesture. But what Pencroft thought most probable
was, that Neb had pushed his researches on the shore farther than the day before,
and that he had not as yet had time to return.

Herbert, however, agitated by vague presentiments, several times manifested
an intention to go to meet Neb. But Pencroft assured him that that would be a
useless course, that in the darkness and deplorable weather he could not find any
traces of Neb, and that it would be much better to wait. If Neb had not made his
appearance by the next day, Pencroft would not hesitate to join him in his search.

Gideon Spilett approved of the sailor's opinion that it was best not to divide,
and Herbert was obliged to give up his project; but two large tears fell from his
eyes.

The reporter could not refrain from embracing the generous boy.

Bad weather now set in. A furious gale from the southeast passed over the
coast. The sea roared as it beat over the reef. Heavy rain was dashed by the
storm into particles like dust. Ragged masses of vapor drove along the beach, on
which the tormented shingles sounded as if poured out in cart-loads, while the
sand raised by the wind added as it were mineral dust to that which was liquid,
and rendered the united attack insupportable. Between the river's mouth and the
end of the cliff, eddies of wind whirled and gusts from this maelstrom lashed the


water which ran through the narrow valley. The smoke from the fireplace was
also driven back through the opening, filling the passages and rendering them
uninhabitable.

Therefore, as the grouse were cooked, Pencroft let the fire die away, and only
preserved a few embers buried under the ashes.

At eight o'clock Neb had not appeared, but there was no doubt that the
frightful weather alone hindered his return, and that he must have taken refuge in
some cave, to await the end of the storm or at least the return of day. As to going
to meet him, or attempting to find him, it was impossible.

The game constituted the only dish at supper; the meat was excellent, and
Pencroft and Herbert, whose long excursion had rendered them very hungry,
devoured it with infinite satisfaction.

Their meal concluded, each retired to the corner in which he had rested the
preceding night, and Herbert was not long in going to sleep near the sailor, who
had stretched himself beside the fireplace.

Outside, as the night advanced, the tempest also increased in strength, until it
was equal to that which had carried the prisoners from Richmond to this land in
the Pacific. The tempests which are frequent during the seasons of the equinox,
and which are so prolific in catastrophes, are above all terrible over this immense
ocean, which opposes no obstacle to their fury. No description can give an idea
of the terrific violence of the gale as it beat upon the unprotected coast.

Happily the pile of rocks which formed the Chimneys was solid. It was
composed of enormous blocks of granite, a few of which, insecurely balanced,
seemed to tremble on their foundations, and Pencroft could feel rapid quiverings
under his head as it rested on the rock. But he repeated to himself, and rightly,
that there was nothing to fear, and that their retreat would not give way. However
he heard the noise of stones torn from the summit of the plateau by the wind,
falling down on to the beach. A few even rolled on to the upper part of the
Chimneys, or flew off in fragments when they were projected perpendicularly.
Twice the sailor rose and intrenched himself at the opening of the passage, so as
to take a look in safety at the outside. But there was nothing to be feared from
these showers, which were not considerable, and he returned to his couch before
the fireplace, where the embers glowed beneath the ashes.

Notwithstanding the fury of the hurricane, the uproar of the tempest, the
thunder, and the tumult, Herbert slept profoundly. Sleep at last took possession
of Pencroft, whom a seafaring life had habituated to anything. Gideon Spilett
alone was kept awake by anxiety. He reproached himself with not having
accompanied Neb. It was evident that he had not abandoned all hope. The
presentiments which had troubled Herbert did not cease to agitate him also. His


thoughts were concentrated on Neb. Why had Neb not returned? He tossed about
on his sandy couch, scarcely giving a thought to the struggle of the elements.
Now and then, his eyes, heavy with fatigue, closed for an instant, but some
sudden thought reopened them almost immediately.

Meanwhile the night advanced, and it was perhaps two hours from morning,
when Pencroft, then sound asleep, was vigorously shaken.

"What's the matter?" he cried, rousing himself, and collecting his ideas with
the promptitude usual to seamen.

The reporter was leaning over him, and saying,--

"Listen, Pencroft, listen!"

The sailor strained his ears, but could hear no noise beyond those caused by
the storm.

"Tt is the wind," said he.

"No," replied Gideon Spilett, listening again, "I thought I heard--"

"What?"

"The barking of a dog!"

"A dog!" cried Pencroft, springing up.

"Yes--barking--"

"It's not possible!" replied the sailor. "And besides, how, in the roaring of the
storm--"

"Stop--listen--" said the reporter.

Pencroft listened more attentively, and really thought he heard, during a lull,
distant barking.

"Well!" said the reporter, pressing the sailor's hand.

"Yes--yes!" replied Pencroft.

"It is Top! It is Top!" cried Herbert, who had just awoke; and all three rushed
towards the opening of the Chimneys. They had great difficulty in getting out.
The wind drove them back. But at last they succeeded, and could only remain
standing by leaning against the rocks. They looked about, but could not speak.
The darkness was intense. The sea, the sky, the land were all mingled in one
black mass. Not a speck of light was visible.

The reporter and his companions remained thus for a few minutes,
overwhelmed by the wind, drenched by the rain, blinded by the sand.

Then, in a pause of the tumult, they again heard the barking, which they
found must be at some distance.

It could only be Top! But was he alone or accompanied? He was most
probably alone, for, if Neb had been with him, he would have made his way
more directly towards the Chimneys. The sailor squeezed the reporter's hand, for
he could not make himself heard, in a way which signified "Wait!" then he


reentered the passage.

An instant after he issued with a lighted fagot, which he threw into the
darkness, whistling shrilly.

It appeared as if this signal had been waited for; the barking immediately
came nearer, and soon a dog bounded into the passage. Pencroft, Herbert, and
Spilett entered after him.

An armful of dry wood was thrown on the embers. The passage was lighted
up with a bright flame.

"It is Top!" cried Herbert.

It was indeed Top, a magnificent Anglo-Norman, who derived from these
two races crossed the swiftness of foot and the acuteness of smell which are the
preeminent qualities of coursing dogs. It was the dog of the engineer, Cyrus
Harding. But he was alone! Neither Neb nor his master accompanied him!

How was it that his instinct had guided him straight to the Chimneys, which
he did not know? It appeared inexplicable, above all, in the midst of this black
night and in such a tempest! But what was still more inexplicable was, that Top
was neither tired, nor exhausted, nor even soiled with mud or sand!--Herbert had
drawn him towards him, and was patting his head, the dog rubbing his neck
against the lad's hands.

"If the dog is found, the master will be found also!" said the reporter.

"God grant it!" responded Herbert. "Let us set off! Top will guide us!"

Pencroft did not make any objection. He felt that Top's arrival contradicted
his conjectures. "Come along then!" said he.

Pencroft carefully covered the embers on the hearth. He placed a few pieces
of wood among them, so as to keep in the fire until their return. Then, preceded
by the dog, who seemed to invite them by short barks to come with him, and
followed by the reporter and the boy, he dashed out, after having put up in his
handkerchief the remains of the supper.

The storm was then in all its violence, and perhaps at its height. Not a single
ray of light from the moon pierced through the clouds. To follow a straight
course was difficult. It was best to rely on Top's instinct. They did so. The
reporter and Herbert walked behind the dog, and the sailor brought up the rear. It
was impossible to exchange a word. The rain was not very heavy, but the wind
was terrific.

However, one circumstance favored the seaman and his two companions.
The wind being southeast, consequently blew on their backs. The clouds of sand,
which otherwise would have been insupportable, from being received behind,
did not in consequence impede their progress. In short, they sometimes went
faster than they liked, and had some difficulty in keeping their feet; but hope


gave them strength, for it was not at random that they made their way along the
shore. They had no doubt that Neb had found his master, and that he had sent
them the faithful dog. But was the engineer living, or had Neb only sent for his
companions that they might render the last duties to the corpse of the unfortunate
Harding?

After having passed the precipice, Herbert, the reporter, and Pencroft
prudently stepped aside to stop and take breath. The turn of the rocks sheltered
them from the wind, and they could breathe after this walk or rather run of a
quarter of an hour.

They could now hear and reply to each other, and the lad having pronounced
the name of Cyrus Harding, Top gave a few short barks, as much as to say that
his master was saved.

"Saved, isn't he?" repeated Herbert; "saved, Top?"

And the dog barked in reply.

They once more set out. The tide began to rise, and urged by the wind it
threatened to be unusually high, as it was a spring tide. Great billows thundered
against the reef with such violence that they probably passed entirely over the
islet, then quite invisible. The mole no longer protected the coast, which was
directly exposed to the attacks of the open sea.

As soon as the sailor and his companions left the precipice, the wind struck
them again with renewed fury. Though bent under the gale they walked very
quickly, following Top, who did not hesitate as to what direction to take.

They ascended towards the north, having on their left an interminable extent
of billows, which broke with a deafening noise, and on their right a dark country,
the aspect of which it was impossible to guess. But they felt that it was
comparatively flat, for the wind passed completely over them, without being
driven back as it was when it came in contact with the cliff.

At four o'clock in the morning, they reckoned that they had cleared about
five miles. The clouds were slightly raised, and the wind, though less damp, was
very sharp and cold. Insufficiently protected by their clothing, Pencroft, Herbert
and Spilett suffered cruelly, but not a complaint escaped their lips. They were
determined to follow Top, wherever the intelligent animal wished to lead them.

Towards five o'clock day began to break. At the zenith, where the fog was
less thick, gray shades bordered the clouds; under an opaque belt, a luminous
line clearly traced the horizon. The crests of the billows were tipped with a wild
light, and the foam regained its whiteness. At the same time on the left the hilly
parts of the coast could be seen, though very indistinctly.

At six o'clock day had broken. The clouds rapidly lifted. The seaman and his
companions were then about six miles from the Chimneys. They were following


a very flat shore bounded by a reef of rocks, whose heads scarcely emerged from
the sea, for they were in deep water. On the left, the country appeared to be one
vast extent of sandy downs, bristling with thistles. There was no cliff, and the
shore offered no resistance to the ocean but a chain of irregular hillocks. Here
and there grew two or three trees, inclined towards the west, their branches
projecting in that direction. Quite behind, in the southwest, extended the border
of the forest.

At this moment, Top became very excited. He ran forward, then returned,
and seemed to entreat them to hasten their steps. The dog then left the beach, and
guided by his wonderful instinct, without showing the least hesitation, went
straight in among the downs. They followed him. The country appeared an
absolute desert. Not a living creature was to be seen.

The downs, the extent of which was large, were composed of hillocks and
even of hills, very irregularly distributed. They resembled a Switzerland
modeled in sand, and only an amazing instinct could have possibly recognized
the way.

Five minutes after having left the beach, the reporter and his two companions
arrived at a sort of excavation, hollowed out at the back of a high mound. There
Top stopped, and gave a loud, clear bark. Spilett, Herbert, and Pencroft dashed
into the cave.

Neb was there, kneeling beside a body extended on a bed of grass.

The body was that of the engineer, Cyrus Harding.


Chapter 8


Neb did not move. Pencroft only uttered one word.

"Living?" he cried.

Neb did not reply. Spilett and the sailor turned pale. Herbert clasped his
hands, and remained motionless. The poor Negro, absorbed in his grief,
evidently had neither seen his companions nor heard the sailor speak.

The reporter knelt down beside the motionless body, and placed his ear to the
engineer's chest, having first torn open his clothes.

A minute--an age!--passed, during which he endeavored to catch the faintest
throb of the heart.

Neb had raised himself a little and gazed without seeing. Despair had
completely changed his countenance. He could scarcely be recognized,
exhausted with fatigue, broken with grief. He believed his master was dead.

Gideon Spilett at last rose, after a long and attentive examination.

"He lives!" said he.

Pencroft knelt in his turn beside the engineer, he also heard a throbbing, and
even felt a slight breath on his cheek.

Herbert at a word from the reporter ran out to look for water. He found, a
hundred feet off, a limpid stream, which seemed to have been greatly increased
by the rains, and which filtered through the sand; but nothing in which to put the
water, not even a shell among the downs. The lad was obliged to content himself
with dipping his handkerchief in the stream, and with it hastened back to the
grotto.

Happily the wet handkerchief was enough for Gideon Spilett, who only
wished to wet the engineer's lips. The cold water produced an almost immediate
effect. His chest heaved and he seemed to try to speak.

"We will save him!" exclaimed the reporter.

At these words hope revived in Neb's heart. He undressed his master to see if
he was wounded, but not so much as a bruise was to be found, either on the
head, body, or limbs, which was surprising, as he must have been dashed against
the rocks; even the hands were uninjured, and it was difficult to explain how the
engineer showed no traces of the efforts which he must have made to get out of
reach of the breakers.

But the explanation would come later. When Cyrus was able to speak he
would say what had happened. For the present the question was, how to recall
him to life, and it appeared likely that rubbing would bring this about; so they set


to work with the sailor's jersey.

The engineer, revived by this rude shampooing, moved his arm slightly and
began to breathe more regularly. He was sinking from exhaustion, and certainly,
had not the reporter and his companions arrived, it would have been all over
with Cyrus Harding.

"You thought your master was dead, didn't you?" said the seaman to Neb.

"Yes! quite dead!" replied Neb, "and if Top had not found you, and brought
you here, I should have buried my master, and then have lain down on his grave
to die!"

It had indeed been a narrow escape for Cyrus Harding!

Neb then recounted what had happened. The day before, after having left the
Chimneys at daybreak, he had ascended the coast in a northerly direction, and
had reached that part of the shore which he had already visited.

There, without any hope he acknowledged, Neb had searched the beach,
among the rocks, on the sand, for the smallest trace to guide him. He examined
particularly that part of the beach which was not covered by the high tide, for
near the sea the water would have obliterated all marks. Neb did not expect to
find his master living. It was for a corpse that he searched, a corpse which he
wished to bury with his own hands!

He sought long in vain. This desert coast appeared never to have been visited
by a human creature. The shells, those which the sea had not reached, and which
might be met with by millions above high-water mark, were untouched. Not a
shell was broken.

Neb then resolved to walk along the beach for some miles. It was possible
that the waves had carried the body to quite a distant point. When a corpse floats
a little distance from a low shore, it rarely happens that the tide does not throw it
up, sooner or later. This Neb knew, and he wished to see his master again for the
last time.

"I went along the coast for another two miles, carefully examining the beach,
both at high and low water, and I had despaired of finding anything, when
yesterday, above five in the evening, I saw footprints on the sand."

"Footprints?" exclaimed Pencroft.

"Yes!" replied Neb.

"Did these footprints begin at the water's edge?" asked the reporter.

"No," replied Neb, "only above high-water mark, for the others must have
been washed out by the tide."

"Go on, Neb," said Spilett.

"I went half crazy when I saw these footprints. They were very clear and
went towards the downs. I followed them for a quarter of a mile, running, but


taking care not to destroy them. Five minutes after, as it was getting dark, I heard
the barking of a dog. It was Top, and Top brought me here, to my master!"

Neb ended his account by saying what had been his grief at finding the
inanimate body, in which he vainly sought for the least sign of life. Now that he
had found him dead he longed for him to be alive. All his efforts were useless!
Nothing remained to be done but to render the last duties to the one whom he
had loved so much! Neb then thought of his companions. They, no doubt, would
wish to see the unfortunate man again. Top was there. Could he not rely on the
sagacity of the faithful animal? Neb several times pronounced the name of the
reporter, the one among his companions whom Top knew best.

Then he pointed to the south, and the dog bounded off in the direction
indicated to him.

We have heard how, guided by an instinct which might be looked upon
almost as supernatural, Top had found them.

Neb's companions had listened with great attention to this account.

It was unaccountable to them how Cyrus Harding, after the efforts which he
must have made to escape from the waves by crossing the rocks, had not
received even a scratch. And what could not be explained either was how the
engineer had managed to get to this cave in the downs, more than a mile from
the shore.

"So, Neb," said the reporter, "it was not you who brought your master to this
place."

"No, it was not I," replied the Negro.

"It's very clear that the captain came here by himself," said Pencroft.

"Tt is clear in reality," observed Spilett, "but it is not credible!"

The explanation of this fact could only be produced from the engineer's own
lips, and they must wait for that till speech returned. Rubbing had re-established
the circulation of the blood. Cyrus Harding moved his arm again, then his head,
and a few incomprehensible words escaped him.

Neb, who was bending over him, spoke, but the engineer did not appear to
hear, and his eyes remained closed. Life was only exhibited in him by
movement, his senses had not as yet been restored.

Pencroft much regretted not having either fire, or the means of procuring it,
for he had, unfortunately, forgotten to bring the burnt linen, which would easily
have ignited from the sparks produced by striking together two flints. As to the
engineer's pockets, they were entirely empty, except that of his waistcoat, which
contained his watch. It was necessary to carry Harding to the Chimneys, and that
as soon as possible. This was the opinion of all.

Meanwhile, the care which was lavished on the engineer brought him back to


consciousness sooner than they could have expected. The water with which they
wetted his lips revived him gradually. Pencroft also thought of mixing with the
water some moisture from the titra's flesh which he had brought. Herbert ran to
the beach and returned with two large bivalve shells. The sailor concocted
something which he introduced between the lips of the engineer, who eagerly
drinking it opened his eyes.

Neb and the reporter were leaning over him.

"My master! my master!" cried Neb.

The engineer heard him. He recognized Neb and Spilett, then his other two
companions, and his hand slightly pressed theirs.

A few words again escaped him, which showed what thoughts were, even
then, troubling his brain. This time he was understood. Undoubtedly they were
the same words he had before attempted to utter.

"Island or continent?" he murmured.

"Bother the continent," cried Pencroft hastily; "there is time enough to see
about that, captain! we don't care for anything, provided you are living."

The engineer nodded faintly, and then appeased to sleep.

They respected this sleep, and the reporter began immediately to make
arrangements for transporting Harding to a more comfortable place. Neb,
Herbert, and Pencroft left the cave and directed their steps towards a high mound
crowned with a few distorted trees. On the way the sailor could not help
repeating,--

"Island or continent! To think of that, when at one's last gasp! What a man!"

Arrived at the summit of the mound, Pencroft and his two companions set to
work, with no other tools than their hands, to despoil of its principal branches a
rather sickly tree, a sort of marine fir; with these branches they made a litter, on
which, covered with grass and leaves, they could carry the engineer.

This occupied them nearly forty minutes, and it was ten o'clock when they
returned to Cyrus Harding whom Spilett had not left.

The engineer was just awaking from the sleep, or rather from the drowsiness,
in which they had found him. The color was returning to his cheeks, which till
now had been as pale as death. He raised himself a little, looked around him, and
appeared to ask where he was.

"Can you listen to me without fatigue, Cyrus?" asked the reporter.

"Yes," replied the engineer.

"It's my opinion," said the sailor, "that Captain Harding will be able to listen
to you still better, if he will have some more grouse jelly,--for we have grouse,
captain,” added he, presenting him with a little of this jelly, to which he this time
added some of the flesh.


Cyrus Harding ate a little of the grouse, and the rest was divided among his
companions, who found it but a meager breakfast, for they were suffering
extremely from hunger.

"Well!" said the sailor, "there is plenty of food at the Chimneys, for you must
know, captain, that down there, in the south, we have a house, with rooms, beds,
and fireplace, and in the pantry, several dozen of birds, which our Herbert calls
couroucous. Your litter is ready, and as soon as you feel strong enough we will
carry you home."

"Thanks, my friend," replied the engineer; "wait another hour or two, and
then we will set out. And now speak, Spilett."

The reporter then told him all that had occurred. He recounted all the events
with which Cyrus was unacquainted, the last fall of the balloon, the landing on
this unknown land, which appeared a desert (whatever it was, whether island or
continent), the discovery of the Chimneys, the search for him, not forgetting of
course Neb's devotion, the intelligence exhibited by the faithful Top, as well as
many other matters.

"But," asked Harding, in a still feeble voice, "you did not, then, pick me up
on the beach?"

"No," replied the reporter.

"And did you not bring me to this cave?"

"No."

"At what distance is this cave from the sea?"

"About a mile," replied Pencroft; "and if you are astonished, captain, we are
not less surprised ourselves at seeing you in this place!"

"Indeed," said the engineer, who was recovering gradually, and who took
great interest in these details, "indeed it is very singular!"

"But," resumed the sailor, "can you tell us what happened after you were
carried off by the sea?"

Cyrus Harding considered. He knew very little. The wave had torn him from
the balloon net. He sank at first several fathoms. On returning to the surface, in
the half light, he felt a living creature struggling near him. It was Top, who had
sprung to his help. He saw nothing of the balloon, which, lightened both of his
weight and that of the dog, had darted away like an arrow.

There he was, in the midst of the angry sea, at a distance which could not be
less than half a mile from the shore. He attempted to struggle against the billows
by swimming vigorously. Top held him up by his clothes; but a strong current
seized him and drove him towards the north, and after half an hour of exertion,
he sank, dragging Top with him into the depths. From that moment to the
moment in which he recovered to find himself in the arms of his friends he


remembered nothing.

"However," remarked Pencroft, "you must have been thrown on to the beach,
and you must have had strength to walk here, since Neb found your footmarks!"

"Yes... of course," replied the engineer, thoughtfully; "and you found no
traces of human beings on this coast?"

"Not a trace," replied the reporter; "besides, if by chance you had met with
some deliverer there, just in the nick of time, why should he have abandoned you
after having saved you from the waves?"

"You are right, my dear Spilett. Tell me, Neb," added the engineer, turning to
his servant, "it was not you who... you can't have had a moment of
unconsciousness... during which no, that's absurd.... Do any of the footsteps still
remain?" asked Harding.

"Yes, master," replied Neb; "here, at the entrance, at the back of the mound,
in a place sheltered from the rain and wind. The storm has destroyed the others."

"Pencroft," said Cyrus Harding, "will you take my shoe and see if it fits
exactly to the footprints?"

The sailor did as the engineer requested. While he and Herbert, guided by
Neb, went to the place where the footprints were to be found, Cyrus remarked to
the reporter,--

"Tt is a most extraordinary thing!"

"Perfectly inexplicable!" replied Gideon Spilett.

"But do not dwell upon it just now, my dear Spilett, we will talk about it by-
and-by."

A moment after the others entered.

There was no doubt about it. The engineer's shoe fitted exactly to the
footmarks. It was therefore Cyrus Harding who had left them on the sand.

"Come," said he, "I must have experienced this unconsciousness which I
attributed to Neb. I must have walked like a somnambulist, without any
knowledge of my steps, and Top must have guided me here, after having dragged
me from the waves... Come, Top! Come, old dog!"

The magnificent animal bounded barking to his master, and caresses were
lavished on him. It was agreed that there was no other way of accounting for the
rescue of Cyrus Harding, and that Top deserved all the honor of the affair.

Towards twelve o'clock, Pencroft having asked the engineer if they could
now remove him, Harding, instead of replying, and by an effort which exhibited
the most energetic will, got up. But he was obliged to lean on the sailor, or he
would have fallen.

"Well done!" cried Pencroft; "bring the captain's litter."

The litter was brought; the transverse branches had been covered with leaves


and long grass. Harding was laid on it, and Pencroft, having taken his place at
one end and Neb at the other, they started towards the coast. There was a
distance of eight miles to be accomplished; but, as they could not go fast, and it
would perhaps be necessary to stop frequently, they reckoned that it would take
at least six hours to reach the Chimneys. The wind was still strong, but
fortunately it did not rain. Although lying down, the engineer, leaning on his
elbow, observed the coast, particularly inland. He did not speak, but he gazed;
and, no doubt, the appearance of the country, with its inequalities of ground, its
forests, its various productions, were impressed on his mind. However, after
traveling for two hours, fatigue overcame him, and he slept.

At half-past five the little band arrived at the precipice, and a short time after
at the Chimneys.

They stopped, and the litter was placed on the sand; Cyrus Harding was
sleeping profoundly, and did not awake.

Pencroft, to his extreme surprise, found that the terrible storm had quite
altered the aspect of the place. Important changes had occurred; great blocks of
stone lay on the beach, which was also covered with a thick carpet of sea-weed,
algae, and wrack. Evidently the sea, passing over the islet, had been carried right
up to the foot of the enormous curtain of granite. The soil in front of the cave
had been torn away by the violence of the waves. A horrid presentiment flashed
across Pencroft's mind. He rushed into the passage, but returned almost
immediately, and stood motionless, staring at his companions.... The fire was
out; the drowned cinders were nothing but mud; the burnt linen, which was to
have served as tinder, had disappeared! The sea had penetrated to the end of the
passages, and everything was overthrown and destroyed in the interior of the
Chimneys!


Chapter 9


In a few words, Gideon Spilett, Herbert, and Neb were made acquainted with
what had happened. This accident, which appeared so very serious to Pencroft,
produced different effects on the companions of the honest sailor.

Neb, in his delight at having found his master, did not listen, or rather, did
not care to trouble himself with what Pencroft was saying.

Herbert shared in some degree the sailor's feelings.

As to the reporter, he simply replied,--

"Upon my word, Pencroft, it's perfectly indifferent to me!"

"But, I repeat, that we haven't any fire!"

"Pooh!"

"Nor any means of relighting it!"

"Nonsense!"

"But I say, Mr. Spilett--"

"Isn't Cyrus here?" replied the reporter.

"Is not our engineer alive? He will soon find some way of making fire for
us!"

"With what?"

"With nothing.”

What had Pencroft to say? He could say nothing, for, in the bottom of his
heart he shared the confidence which his companions had in Cyrus Harding. The
engineer was to them a microcosm, a compound of every science, a possessor of
all human knowledge. It was better to be with Cyrus in a desert island, than
without him in the most flourishing town in the United States. With him they
could want nothing; with him they would never despair. If these brave men had
been told that a volcanic eruption would destroy the land, that this land would be
engulfed in the depths of the Pacific, they would have imperturbably replied,--

"Cyrus is here!"

While in the palanquin, however, the engineer had again relapsed into
unconsciousness, which the jolting to which he had been subjected during his
journey had brought on, so that they could not now appeal to his ingenuity. The
supper must necessarily be very meager. In fact, all the grouse flesh had been
consumed, and there no longer existed any means of cooking more game.
Besides, the couroucous which had been reserved had disappeared. They must
consider what was to be done.

First of all, Cyrus Harding was carried into the central passage. There they


managed to arrange for him a couch of sea-weed which still remained almost
dry. The deep sleep which had overpowered him would no doubt be more
beneficial to him than any nourishment.

Night had closed in, and the temperature, which had modified when the wind
shifted to the northwest, again became extremely cold. Also, the sea having
destroyed the partitions which Pencroft had put up in certain places in the
passages, the Chimneys, on account of the draughts, had become scarcely
habitable. The engineer's condition would, therefore, have been bad enough, if
his companions had not carefully covered him with their coats and waistcoats.

Supper, this evening, was of course composed of the inevitable lithodomes,
of which Herbert and Neb picked up a plentiful supply on the beach. However,
to these molluscs, the lad added some edible sea-weed, which he gathered on
high rocks, whose sides were only washed by the sea at the time of high tides.
This sea-weed, which belongs to the order of Fucacae, of the genus Sargassum,
produces, when dry, a gelatinous matter, rich and nutritious. The reporter and his
companions, after having eaten a quantity of lithodomes, sucked the sargassum,
of which the taste was very tolerable. It is used in parts of the East very
considerably by the natives. "Never mind!" said the sailor, "the captain will help
us soon." Meanwhile the cold became very severe, and unhappily they had no
means of defending themselves from it.

The sailor, extremely vexed, tried in all sorts of ways to procure fire. Neb
helped him in this work. He found some dry moss, and by striking together two
pebbles he obtained some sparks, but the moss, not being inflammable enough,
did not take fire, for the sparks were really only incandescent, and not at all of
the same consistency as those which are emitted from flint when struck in the
same manner. The experiment, therefore, did not succeed.

Pencroft, although he had no confidence in the proceeding, then tried
rubbing two pieces of dry wood together, as savages do. Certainly, the
movement which he and Neb exhibited, if it had been transformed into heat,
according to the new theory, would have been enough to heat the boiler of a
steamer! It came to nothing. The bits of wood became hot, to be sure, but much
less so than the operators themselves.

After working an hour, Pencroft, who was in a complete state of perspiration,
threw down the pieces of wood in disgust.

"I can never be made to believe that savages light their fires in this way, let
them say what they will," he exclaimed. "I could sooner light my arms by
rubbing them against each other!"

The sailor was wrong to despise the proceeding. Savages often kindle wood
by means of rapid rubbing. But every sort of wood does not answer for the


purpose, and besides, there is "the knack," following the usual expression, and it
is probable that Pencroft had not "the knack."

Pencroft's ill humor did not last long. Herbert had taken the bits of wood
which he had turned down, and was exerting himself to rub them. The hardy
sailor could not restrain a burst of laughter on seeing the efforts of the lad to
succeed where he had failed.

"Rub, my boy, rub!" said he.

"I am rubbing," replied Herbert, laughing, "but I don't pretend to do anything
else but warm myself instead of shivering, and soon I shall be as hot as you are,
my good Pencroft!"

This soon happened. However, they were obliged to give up, for this night at
least, the attempt to procure fire. Gideon Spilett repeated, for the twentieth time,
that Cyrus Harding would not have been troubled for so small a difficulty. And,
in the meantime, he stretched himself in one of the passages on his bed of sand.
Herbert, Neb, and Pencroft did the same, while Top slept at his master's feet.

Next day, the 28th of March, when the engineer awoke, about eight in the
morning, he saw his companions around him watching his sleep, and, as on the
day before, his first words were:--

"Island or continent?" This was his uppermost thought.

"Well!" replied Pencroft, "we don't know anything about it, captain!"

"You don't know yet?"

"But we shall know," rejoined Pencroft, "when you have guided us into the
country."

"I think I am able to try it," replied the engineer, who, without much effort,
rose and stood upright.

"That's capital!" cried the sailor.

"I feel dreadfully weak," replied Harding. "Give me something to eat, my
friends, and it will soon go off. You have fire, haven't you?"

This question was not immediately replied to. But, in a few seconds--

"Alas! we have no fire," said Pencroft, "or rather, captain, we have it no
longer!"

And the sailor recounted all that had passed the day before. He amused the
engineer by the history of the single match, then his abortive attempt to procure
fire in the savages' way.

"We shall consider," replied the engineer, "and if we do not find some
substance similar to tinder--"

"Well?" asked the sailor.

"Well, we will make matches.

"Chemicals?"


"Chemicals!"

"Tt is not more difficult than that," cried the reporter, striking the sailor on the
shoulder.

The latter did not think it so simple, but he did not protest. All went out. The
weather had become very fine. The sun was rising from the sea's horizon, and
touched with golden spangles the prismatic rugosities of the huge precipice.

Having thrown a rapid glance around him, the engineer seated himself on a
block of stone. Herbert offered him a few handfuls of shell-fish and sargassum,
saying,--

"Tt is all that we have, Captain Harding.”

"Thanks, my boy," replied Harding; "it will do--for this morning at least."

He ate the wretched food with appetite, and washed it down with a little
fresh water, drawn from the river in an immense shell.

His companions looked at him without speaking. Then, feeling somewhat
refreshed, Cyrus Harding crossed his arms, and said,--

"So, my friends, you do not know yet whether fate has thrown us on an
island, or on a continent?"

"No, captain," replied the boy.

"We shall know to-morrow," said the engineer; "till then, there is nothing to
be done.”

"Yes," replied Pencroft.

"What?"

"Fire," said the sailor, who, also, had a fixed idea.

"We will make it, Pencroft," replied Harding.

"While you were carrying me yesterday, did I not see in the west a mountain
which commands the country?"

"Yes," replied Spilett, "a mountain which must be rather high--"

"Well," replied the engineer, "we will climb to the summit to-morrow, and
then we shall see if this land is an island or a continent. Till then, I repeat, there
is nothing to be done."

"Yes, fire!" said the obstinate sailor again.

"But he will make us a fire!" replied Gideon Spilett, "only have a little
patience, Pencroft!"

The seaman looked at Spilett in a way which seemed to say, "If it depended
upon you to do it, we wouldn't taste roast meat very soon"; but he was silent.

Meanwhile Captain Harding had made no reply. He appeared to be very little
troubled by the question of fire. For a few minutes he remained absorbed in
thought; then again speaking,--

"My friends," said he, "our situation is, perhaps, deplorable; but, at any rate,


it is very plain. Either we are on a continent, and then, at the expense of greater
or less fatigue, we shall reach some inhabited place, or we are on an island. In
the latter case, if the island is inhabited, we will try to get out of the scrape with
the help of its inhabitants; if it is desert, we will try to get out of the scrape by
ourselves."

"Certainly, nothing could be plainer," replied Pencroft.

"But, whether it is an island or a continent," asked Gideon Spilett,
"whereabouts do you think, Cyrus, this storm has thrown us?"

"I cannot say exactly," replied the engineer, "but I presume it is some land in
the Pacific. In fact, when we left Richmond, the wind was blowing from the
northeast, and its very violence greatly proves that it could not have varied. If the
direction has been maintained from the northeast to the southwest, we have
traversed the States of North Carolina, of South Carolina, of Georgia, the Gulf of
Mexico, Mexico, itself, in its narrow part, then a part of the Pacific Ocean. I
cannot estimate the distance traversed by the balloon at less than six to seven
thousand miles, and, even supposing that the wind had varied half a quarter, it
must have brought us either to the archipelago of Mendava, either on the
Pomotous, or even, if it had a greater strength than I suppose, to the land of New
Zealand. If the last hypothesis is correct, it will be easy enough to get home
again. English or Maoris, we shall always find some one to whom we can speak.
If, on the contrary, this is the coast of a desert island in some tiny archipelago,
perhaps we shall be able to reconnoiter it from the summit of that peak which
overlooks the country, and then we shall see how best to establish ourselves here
as if we are never to go away."

"Never?" cried the reporter. "You say ‘Never,’ my dear Cyrus?"

"Better to put things at the worst at first," replied the engineer, "and reserve
the best for a surprise."

"Well said," remarked Pencroft. "It is to be hoped, too, that this island, if it
be one, is not situated just out of the course of ships; that would be really
unlucky!"

"We shall not know what we have to rely on until we have first made the
ascent of the mountain," replied the engineer.

"But to-morrow, captain," asked Herbert, "shall you be in a state to bear the
fatigue of the ascent?"

"I hope so," replied the engineer, "provided you and Pencroft, my boy, show
yourselves quick and clever hunters."

"Captain," said the sailor, "since you are speaking of game, if on my return, I
was as certain of roasting it as I am of bringing it back--"

"Bring it back all the same, Pencroft," replied Harding.


It was then agreed that the engineer and the reporter were to pass the day at
the Chimneys, so as to examine the shore and the upper plateau. Neb, Herbert,
and the sailor were to return to the forest, renew their store of wood, and lay
violent hands on every creature, feathered or hairy, which might come within
their reach.

They set out accordingly about ten o'clock in the morning, Herbert confident,
Neb joyous, Pencroft murmuring aside,--

"If, on my return, I find a fire at the house, I shall believe that the thunder
itself came to light it." All three climbed the bank; and arrived at the angle made
by the river, the sailor, stopping, said to his two companions,--

"Shall we begin by being hunters or wood-men?"

"Hunters," replied Herbert. "There is Top already in quest."

"We will hunt, then," said the sailor, "and afterwards we can come back and
collect our wood."

This agreed to, Herbert, Neb, and Pencroft, after having torn three sticks
from the trunk of a young fir, followed Top, who was bounding about among the
long grass.

This time, the hunters, instead of following the course of the river, plunged
straight into the heart of the forest. There were still the same trees, belonging, for
the most part, to the pine family. In certain places, less crowded, growing in
clumps, these pines exhibited considerable dimensions, and appeared to indicate,
by their development, that the country was situated in a higher latitude than the
engineer had supposed. Glades, bristling with stumps worn away by time, were
covered with dry wood, which formed an inexhaustible store of fuel. Then, the
glade passed, the underwood thickened again, and became almost impenetrable.

It was difficult enough to find the way among the groups of trees, without
any beaten track. So the sailor from time to time broke off branches which might
be easily recognized. But, perhaps, he was wrong not to follow the watercourse,
as he and Herbert had done on their first excursion, for after walking an hour not
a creature had shown itself. Top, running under the branches, only roused birds
which could not be approached. Even the couroucous were invisible, and it was
probable that the sailor would be obliged to return to the marshy part of the
forest, in which he had so happily performed his grouse fishing.

"Well, Pencroft," said Neb, in a slightly sarcastic tone, "if this is all the game
which you promised to bring back to my master, it won't need a large fire to
roast it!"

"Have patience," replied the sailor, "it isn't the game which will be wanting
on our return.”

"Have you not confidence in Captain Harding?"


"Yes."

"But you don't believe that he will make fire?"

"T shall believe it when the wood is blazing in the fireplace."

"It will blaze, since my master has said so."

"We shall see!"

Meanwhile, the sun had not reached the highest point in its course above the
horizon. The exploration, therefore, continued, and was usefully marked by a
discovery which Herbert made of a tree whose fruit was edible. This was the
stone-pine, which produces an excellent almond, very much esteemed in the
temperate regions of America and Europe. These almonds were in a perfect state
of maturity, and Herbert described them to his companions, who feasted on
them.

"Come," said Pencroft, "sea-weed by way of bread, raw mussels for meat,
and almonds for dessert, that's certainly a good dinner for those who have not a
single match in their pocket!"

"We mustn't complain," said Herbert.

"IT am not complaining, my boy," replied Pencroft, "only I repeat, that meat is
a little too much economized in this sort of meal."

"Top has found something!" cried Neb, who ran towards a thicket, in the
midst of which the dog had disappeared, barking. With Top's barking were
mingled curious gruntings.

The sailor and Herbert had followed Neb. If there was game there this was
not the time to discuss how it was to be cooked, but rather, how they were to get
hold of it.

The hunters had scarcely entered the bushes when they saw Top engaged in a
struggle with an animal which he was holding by the ear. This quadruped was a
sort of pig nearly two feet and a half long, of a blackish brown color, lighter
below, having hard scanty hair; its toes, then strongly fixed in the ground,
seemed to be united by a membrane. Herbert recognized in this animal the
capybara, that is to say, one of the largest members of the rodent order.

Meanwhile, the capybara did not struggle against the dog. It stupidly rolled
its eyes, deeply buried in a thick bed of fat. Perhaps it saw men for the first time.

However, Neb having tightened his grasp on his stick, was just going to fell
the pig, when the latter, tearing itself from Top's teeth, by which it was only held
by the tip of its ear, uttered a vigorous grunt, rushed upon Herbert, almost
overthrew him, and disappeared in the wood.

"The rascal!" cried Pencroft.

All three directly darted after Top, but at the moment when they joined him
the animal had disappeared under the waters of a large pond shaded by venerable


pines.

Neb, Herbert, and Pencroft stopped, motionless. Top plunged into the water,
but the capybara, hidden at the bottom of the pond, did not appear.

"Let us wait," said the boy, "for he will soon come to the surface to breathe."

"Won't he drown?" asked Neb.

"No," replied Herbert, "since he has webbed feet, and is almost an
amphibious animal. But watch him."

Top remained in the water. Pencroft and his two companions went to
different parts of the bank, so as to cut off the retreat of the capybara, which the
dog was looking for beneath the water.

Herbert was not mistaken. In a few minutes the animal appeared on the
surface of the water. Top was upon it in a bound, and kept it from plunging
again. An instant later the capybara, dragged to the bank, was killed by a blow
from Neb's stick.

"Hurrah!" cried Pencroft, who was always ready with this cry of triumph.

"Give me but a good fire, and this pig shall be gnawed to the bones!"

Pencroft hoisted the capybara on his shoulders, and judging by the height of
the sun that it was about two o'clock, he gave the signal to return.

Top's instinct was useful to the hunters, who, thanks to the intelligent animal,
were enabled to discover the road by which they had come. Half an hour later
they arrived at the river.

Pencroft soon made a raft of wood, as he had done before, though if there
was no fire it would be a useless task, and the raft following the current, they
returned towards the Chimneys.

But the sailor had not gone fifty paces when he stopped, and again uttering a
tremendous hurrah, pointed towards the angle of the cliff,--

"Herbert! Neb! Look!" he shouted.

Smoke was escaping and curling up among the rocks.


Chapter 10


In a few minutes the three hunters were before a crackling fire. The captain
and the reporter were there. Pencroft looked from one to the other, his capybara
in his hand, without saying a word.

"Well, yes, my brave fellow," cried the reporter.

"Fire, real fire, which will roast this splendid pig perfectly, and we will have
a feast presently!"

"But who lighted it?" asked Pencroft.

"The sun!"

Gideon Spilett was quite right in his reply. It was the sun which had
furnished the heat which so astonished Pencroft. The sailor could scarcely
believe his eyes, and he was so amazed that he did not think of questioning the
engineer.

"Had you a burning-glass, sir?" asked Herbert of Harding.

"No, my boy," replied he, "but I made one."

And he showed the apparatus which served for a burning-glass. It was
simply two glasses which he had taken from his own and the reporter's watches.
Having filled them with water and rendered their edges adhesive by means of a
little clay, he thus fabricated a regular burning-glass, which, concentrating the
solar rays on some very dry moss, soon caused it to blaze.

The sailor considered the apparatus; then he gazed at the engineer without
saying a word, only a look plainly expressed his opinion that if Cyrus Harding
was not a magician, he was certainly no ordinary man. At last speech returned to
him, and he cried,--

"Note that, Mr. Spilett, note that down on your paper!"

"Tt is noted," replied the reporter.

Then, Neb helping him, the seaman arranged the spit, and the capybara,
properly cleaned, was soon roasting like a suckling-pig before a clear, crackling
fire.

The Chimneys had again become more habitable, not only because the
passages were warmed by the fire, but because the partitions of wood and mud
had been re-established.

It was evident that the engineer and his companions had employed their day
well. Cyrus Harding had almost entirely recovered his strength, and had proved
it by climbing to the upper plateau. From this point his eye, accustomed to
estimate heights and distances, was fixed for a long time on the cone, the summit


of which he wished to reach the next day. The mountain, situated about six miles
to the northwest, appeared to him to measure 3,500 feet above the level of the
sea. Consequently the gaze of an observer posted on its summit would extend
over a radius of at least fifty miles. Therefore it was probable that Harding could
easily solve the question of "island or continent," to which he attached so much
importance.

They supped capitally. The flesh of the capybara was declared excellent. The
sargassum and the almonds of the stone-pine completed the repast, during which
the engineer spoke little. He was preoccupied with projects for the next day.

Once or twice Pencroft gave forth some ideas upon what it would be best to
do; but Cyrus Harding, who was evidently of a methodical mind, only shook his
head without uttering a word.

"To-morrow," he repeated, "we shall know what we have to depend upon,
and we will act accordingly."

The meal ended, fresh armfuls of wood were thrown on the fire, and the
inhabitants of the Chimneys, including the faithful Top, were soon buried in a
deep sleep.

No incident disturbed this peaceful night, and the next day, the 29th of
March, fresh and active they awoke, ready to undertake the excursion which
must determine their fate.

All was ready for the start. The remains of the capybara would be enough to
sustain Harding and his companions for at least twenty-four hours.

Besides, they hoped to find more food on the way. As the glasses had been
returned to the watches of the engineer and reporter, Pencroft burned a little
linen to serve as tinder. As to flint, that would not be wanting in these regions of
Plutonic origin. It was half-past seven in the morning when the explorers, armed
with sticks, left the Chimneys. Following Pencroft's advice, it appeared best to
take the road already traversed through the forest, and to return by another route.
It was also the most direct way to reach the mountain. They turned the south
angle and followed the left bank of the river, which was abandoned at the point
where it formed an elbow towards the southwest. The path, already trodden
under the evergreen trees, was found, and at nine o'clock Cyrus Harding and his
companions had reached the western border of the forest. The ground, till then,
very little undulated, boggy at first, dry and sandy afterwards, had a gentle slope,
which ascended from the shore towards the interior of the country. A few very
timid animals were seen under the forest-trees. Top quickly started them, but his
master soon called him back, for the time had not come to commence hunting;
that would be attended to later. The engineer was not a man who would allow
himself to be diverted from his fixed idea. It might even have been said that he


did not observe the country at all, either in its configuration or in its natural
productions, his great aim being to climb the mountain before him, and therefore
straight towards it he went. At ten o'clock a halt of a few minutes was made. On
leaving the forest, the mountain system of the country appeared before the
explorers. The mountain was composed of two cones; the first, truncated at a
height of about two thousand five hundred feet, was sustained by buttresses,
which appeared to branch out like the talons of an immense claw set on the
ground. Between these were narrow valleys, bristling with trees, the last clumps
of which rose to the top of the lowest cone. There appeared to be less vegetation
on that side of the mountain which was exposed to the northeast, and deep
fissures could be seen which, no doubt, were watercourses.

On the first cone rested a second, slightly rounded, and placed a little on one
side, like a great round hat cocked over the ear. A Scotchman would have said,
"His bonnet was a thocht ajee." It appeared formed of bare earth, here and there
pierced by reddish rocks.

They wished to reach the second cone, and proceeding along the ridge of the
spurs seemed to be the best way by which to gain it.

"We are on volcanic ground," Cyrus Harding had said, and his companions
following him began to ascend by degrees on the back of a spur, which, by a
winding and consequently more accessible path, joined the first plateau.

The ground had evidently been convulsed by subterranean force. Here and
there stray blocks, numerous debris of basalt and pumice-stone, were met with.
In isolated groups rose fir-trees, which, some hundred feet lower, at the bottom
of the narrow gorges, formed massive shades almost impenetrable to the sun's
rays.

During the first part of the ascent, Herbert remarked on the footprints which
indicated the recent passage of large animals.

"Perhaps these beasts will not let us pass by willingly," said Pencroft.

"Well," replied the reporter, who had already hunted the tiger in India, and
the lion in Africa, "we shall soon learn how successfully to encounter them. But
in the meantime we must be upon our guard!"

They ascended but slowly.

The distance, increased by detours and obstacles which could not be
surmounted directly, was long. Sometimes, too, the ground suddenly fell, and
they found themselves on the edge of a deep chasm which they had to go round.
Thus, in retracing their steps so as to find some practicable path, much time was
employed and fatigue undergone for nothing. At twelve o'clock, when the small
band of adventurers halted for breakfast at the foot of a large group of firs, near a
little stream which fell in cascades, they found themselves still half way from the


first plateau, which most probably they would not reach till nightfall. From this
point the view of the sea was much extended, but on the right the high
promontory prevented their seeing whether there was land beyond it. On the left,
the sight extended several miles to the north; but, on the northwest, at the point
occupied by the explorers, it was cut short by the ridge of a fantastically-shaped
spur, which formed a powerful support of the central cone.

At one o'clock the ascent was continued. They slanted more towards the
southwest and again entered among thick bushes. There under the shade of the
trees fluttered several couples of gallinaceae belonging to the pheasant species.
They were tragopans, ornamented by a pendant skin which hangs over their
throats, and by two small, round horns, planted behind the eyes. Among these
birds, which were about the size of a fowl, the female was uniformly brown,
while the male was gorgeous in his red plumage, decorated with white spots.
Gideon Spilett, with a stone cleverly and vigorously thrown, killed one of these
tragopans, on which Pencroft, made hungry by the fresh air, had cast greedy
eyes.

After leaving the region of bushes, the party, assisted by resting on each
other's shoulders, climbed for about a hundred feet up a steep acclivity and
reached a level place, with very few trees, where the soil appeared volcanic. It
was necessary to ascend by zigzags to make the slope more easy, for it was very
steep, and the footing being exceedingly precarious required the greatest caution.
Neb and Herbert took the lead, Pencroft the rear, the captain and the reporter
between them. The animals which frequented these heights--and there were
numerous traces of them--must necessarily belong to those races of sure foot and
supple spine, chamois or goat. Several were seen, but this was not the name
Pencroft gave them, for all of a sudden--"Sheep!" he shouted.

All stopped about fifty feet from half-a-dozen animals of a large size, with
strong horns bent back and flattened towards the point, with a woolly fleece,
hidden under long silky hair of a tawny color.

They were not ordinary sheep, but a species usually found in the
mountainous regions of the temperate zone, to which Herbert gave the name of
the musmon.

"Have they legs and chops?" asked the sailor.

"Yes," replied Herbert.

"Well, then, they are sheep!" said Pencroft.

The animals, motionless among the blocks of basalt, gazed with an
astonished eye, as if they saw human bipeds for the first time. Then their fears
suddenly aroused, they disappeared, bounding over the rocks.

"Good-bye, till we meet again," cried Pencroft, as he watched them, in such a


comical tone that Cyrus Harding, Gideon Spilett, Herbert, and Neb could not
help laughing.

The ascent was continued. Here and there were traces of lava. Sulphur
springs sometimes stopped their way, and they had to go round them. In some
places the sulphur had formed crystals among other substances, such as whitish
cinders made of an infinity of little feldspar crystals.

In approaching the first plateau formed by the truncating of the lower cone,
the difficulties of the ascent were very great. Towards four o'clock the extreme
zone of the trees had been passed. There only remained here and there a few
twisted, stunted pines, which must have had a hard life in resisting at this altitude
the high winds from the open sea. Happily for the engineer and his companions
the weather was beautiful, the atmosphere tranquil; for a high breeze at an
elevation of three thousand feet would have hindered their proceedings. The
purity of the sky at the zenith was felt through the transparent air. A perfect calm
reigned around them. They could not see the sun, then hid by the vast screen of
the upper cone, which masked the half-horizon of the west, and whose enormous
shadow stretching to the shore increased as the radiant luminary sank in its
diurnal course. Vapor--mist rather than clouds--began to appear in the east, and
assume all the prismatic colors under the influence of the solar rays.

Five hundred feet only separated the explorers from the plateau, which they
wished to reach so as to establish there an encampment for the night, but these
five hundred feet were increased to more than two miles by the zigzags which
they had to describe. The soil, as it were, slid under their feet.

The slope often presented such an angle that they slipped when the stones
worn by the air did not give a sufficient support. Evening came on by degrees,
and it was almost night when Cyrus Harding and his companions, much fatigued
by an ascent of seven hours, arrived at the plateau of the first cone. It was then
necessary to prepare an encampment, and to restore their strength by eating first
and sleeping afterwards. This second stage of the mountain rose on a base of
rocks, among which it would be easy to find a retreat. Fuel was not abundant.
However, a fire could be made by means of the moss and dry brushwood, which
covered certain parts of the plateau. While the sailor was preparing his hearth
with stones which he put to this use, Neb and Herbert occupied themselves with
getting a supply of fuel. They soon returned with a load of brushwood. The steel
was struck, the burnt linen caught the sparks of flint, and, under Neb's breath, a
crackling fire showed itself in a few minutes under the shelter of the rocks. Their
object in lighting a fire was only to enable them to withstand the cold
temperature of the night, as it was not employed in cooking the bird, which Neb
kept for the next day. The remains of the capybara and some dozens of the stone-


pine almonds formed their supper. It was not half-past six when all was finished.

Cyrus Harding then thought of exploring in the half-light the large circular
layer which supported the upper cone of the mountain. Before taking any rest, he
wished to know if it was possible to get round the base of the cone in the case of
its sides being too steep and its summit being inaccessible. This question
preoccupied him, for it was possible that from the way the hat inclined, that is to
say, towards the north, the plateau was not practicable. Also, if the summit of the
mountain could not be reached on one side, and if, on the other, they could not
get round the base of the cone, it would be impossible to survey the western part
of the country, and their object in making the ascent would in part be altogether
unattained.

The engineer, accordingly, regardless of fatigue, leaving Pencroft and Neb to
arrange the beds, and Gideon Spilett to note the incidents of the day, began to
follow the edge of the plateau, going towards the north. Herbert accompanied
him.

The night was beautiful and still, the darkness was not yet deep. Cyrus
Harding and the boy walked near each other, without speaking. In some places
the plateau opened before them, and they passed without hindrance. In others,
obstructed by rocks, there was only a narrow path, in which two persons could
not walk abreast. After a walk of twenty minutes, Cyrus Harding and Herbert
were obliged to stop. From this point the slope of the two cones became one. No
shoulder here separated the two parts of the mountain. The slope, being inclined
almost seventy degrees, the path became impracticable.

But if the engineer and the boy were obliged to give up thoughts of following
a circular direction, in return an opportunity was given for ascending the cone.

In fact, before them opened a deep hollow. It was the rugged mouth of the
crater, by which the eruptive liquid matter had escaped at the periods when the
volcano was still in activity. Hardened lava and crusted scoria formed a sort of
natural staircase of large steps, which would greatly facilitate the ascent to the
summit of the mountain.

Harding took all this in at a glance, and without hesitating, followed by the
lad, he entered the enormous chasm in the midst of an increasing obscurity.

There was still a height of a thousand feet to overcome. Would the interior
acclivities of the crater be practicable? It would soon be seen. The persevering
engineer resolved to continue his ascent until he was stopped. Happily these
acclivities wound up the interior of the volcano and favored their ascent.

As to the volcano itself, it could not be doubted that it was completely
extinct. No smoke escaped from its sides; not a flame could be seen in the dark
hollows; not a roar, not a mutter, no trembling even issued from this black well,


which perhaps reached far into the bowels of the earth. The atmosphere inside
the crater was filled with no sulphurous vapor. It was more than the sleep of a
volcano; it was its complete extinction. Cyrus Harding's attempt would succeed.

Little by little, Herbert and he climbing up the sides of the interior, saw the
crater widen above their heads. The radius of this circular portion of the sky,
framed by the edge of the cone, increased obviously. At each step, as it were,
that the explorers made, fresh stars entered the field of their vision. The
magnificent constellations of the southern sky shone resplendently. At the zenith
glittered the splendid Antares in the Scorpion, and not far was Alpha Centauri,
which is believed to be the nearest star to the terrestrial globe. Then, as the crater
widened, appeared Fomalhaut of the Fish, the Southern Triangle, and lastly,
nearly at the Antarctic Pole, the glittering Southern Cross, which replaces the
Polar Star of the Northern Hemisphere.

It was nearly eight o'clock when Cyrus Harding and Herbert set foot on the
highest ridge of the mountain at the summit of the cone.

It was then perfectly dark, and their gaze could not extend over a radius of
two miles. Did the sea surround this unknown land, or was it connected in the
west with some continent of the Pacific? It could not yet be made out. Towards
the west, a cloudy belt, clearly visible at the horizon, increased the gloom, and
the eye could not discover if the sky and water were blended together in the
same circular line.

But at one point of the horizon a vague light suddenly appeared, which
descended slowly in proportion as the cloud mounted to the zenith.

It was the slender crescent moon, already almost disappearing; but its light
was sufficient to show clearly the horizontal line, then detached from the cloud,
and the engineer could see its reflection trembling for an instant on a liquid
surface. Cyrus Harding seized the lad's hand, and in a grave voice,--

"An island!" said he, at the moment when the lunar crescent disappeared
beneath the waves.


Chapter 11


Half an hour later Cyrus Harding and Herbert had returned to the
encampment. The engineer merely told his companions that the land upon which
fate had thrown them was an island, and that the next day they would consult.
Then each settled himself as well as he could to sleep, and in that rocky hole, at
a height of two thousand five hundred feet above the level of the sea, through a
peaceful night, the islanders enjoyed profound repose.

The next day, the 30th of March, after a hasty breakfast, which consisted
solely of the roasted tragopan, the engineer wished to climb again to the summit
of the volcano, so as more attentively to survey the island upon which he and his
companions were imprisoned for life perhaps, should the island be situated at a
great distance from any land, or if it was out of the course of vessels which
visited the archipelagoes of the Pacific Ocean. This time his companions
followed him in the new exploration. They also wished to see the island, on the
productions of which they must depend for the supply of all their wants.

It was about seven o'clock in the morning when Cyrus Harding, Herbert,
Pencroft, Gideon Spilett, and Neb quitted the encampment. No one appeared to
be anxious about their situation. They had faith in themselves, doubtless, but it
must be observed that the basis of this faith was not the same with Harding as
with his companions. The engineer had confidence, because he felt capable of
extorting from this wild country everything necessary for the life of himself and
his companions; the latter feared nothing, just because Cyrus Harding was with
them. Pencroft especially, since the incident of the relighted fire, would not have
despaired for an instant, even if he was on a bare rock, if the engineer was with
him on the rock.

"Pshaw," said he, "we left Richmond without permission from the
authorities! It will be hard if we don't manage to get away some day or other
from a place where certainly no one will detain us!"

Cyrus Harding followed the same road as the evening before. They went
round the cone by the plateau which formed the shoulder, to the mouth of the
enormous chasm. The weather was magnificent. The sun rose in a pure sky and
flooded with his rays all the eastern side of the mountain.

The crater was reached. It was just what the engineer had made it out to be in
the dark; that is to say, a vast funnel which extended, widening, to a height of a
thousand feet above the plateau. Below the chasm, large thick streaks of lava
wound over the sides of the mountain, and thus marked the course of the


eruptive matter to the lower valleys which furrowed the northern part of the
island.

The interior of the crater, whose inclination did not exceed thirty five to forty
degrees, presented no difficulties nor obstacles to the ascent. Traces of very
ancient lava were noticed, which probably had overflowed the summit of the
cone, before this lateral chasm had opened a new way to it.

As to the volcanic chimney which established a communication between the
subterranean layers and the crater, its depth could not be calculated with the eye,
for it was lost in obscurity. But there was no doubt as to the complete extinction
of the volcano.

Before eight o'clock Harding and his companions were assembled at the
summit of the crater, on a conical mound which swelled the northern edge.

"The sea, the sea everywhere!" they cried, as if their lips could not restrain
the words which made islanders of them.

The sea, indeed, formed an immense circular sheet of water all around them!
Perhaps, on climbing again to the summit of the cone, Cyrus Harding had had a
hope of discovering some coast, some island shore, which he had not been able
to perceive in the dark the evening before. But nothing appeared on the farthest
verge of the horizon, that is to say over a radius of more than fifty miles. No land
in sight. Not a sail. Over all this immense space the ocean alone was visible--the
island occupied the center of a circumference which appeared to be infinite.

The engineer and his companions, mute and motionless, surveyed for some
minutes every point of the ocean, examining it to its most extreme limits. Even
Pencroft, who possessed a marvelous power of sight, saw nothing; and certainly
if there had been land at the horizon, if it appeared only as an indistinct vapor,
the sailor would undoubtedly have found it out, for nature had placed regular
telescopes under his eyebrows.

From the ocean their gaze returned to the island which they commanded
entirely, and the first question was put by Gideon Spilett in these terms:

"About what size is this island?"

Truly, it did not appear large in the midst of the immense ocean.

Cyrus Harding reflected a few minutes; he attentively observed the perimeter
of the island, taking into consideration the height at which he was placed; then,--

"My friends," said he, "I do not think I am mistaken in giving to the shore of
the island a circumference of more than a hundred miles."

"And consequently an area?"

"That is difficult to estimate," replied the engineer, "for it is so uneven."

If Cyrus Harding was not mistaken in his calculation, the island had almost
the extent of Malta or Zante, in the Mediterranean, but it was at the same time


much more irregular and less rich in capes, promontories, points, bays, or creeks.
Its strange form caught the eye, and when Gideon Spilett, on the engineer's
advice, had drawn the outline, they found that it resembled some fantastic
animal, a monstrous leviathan, which lay sleeping on the surface of the Pacific.

This was in fact the exact shape of the island, which it is of consequence to
know, and a tolerably correct map of it was immediately drawn by the reporter.

The east part of the shore, where the castaways had landed, formed a wide
bay, terminated by a sharp cape, which had been concealed by a high point from
Pencroft on his first exploration. At the northeast two other capes closed the bay,
and between them ran a narrow gulf, which looked like the half-open jaws of a
formidable dog-fish.

From the northeast to the southwest the coast was rounded, like the flattened
cranium of an animal, rising again, forming a sort of protuberance which did not
give any particular shape to this part of the island, of which the center was
occupied by the volcano.

From this point the shore ran pretty regularly north and south, broken at two-
thirds of its perimeter by a narrow creek, from which it ended in a long tail,
similar to the caudal appendage of a gigantic alligator.

This tail formed a regular peninsula, which stretched more than thirty miles
into the sea, reckoning from the cape southeast of the island, already mentioned;
it curled round, making an open roadstead, which marked out the lower shore of
this strangely-formed land.

At the narrowest part, that is to say between the Chimneys and the creek on
the western shore, which corresponded to it in latitude, the island only measured
ten miles; but its greatest length, from the jaws at the northeast to the extremity
of the tail of the southwest, was not less than thirty miles.

As to the interior of the island, its general aspect was this, very woody
throughout the southern part from the mountain to the shore, and arid and sandy
in the northern part. Between the volcano and the east coast Cyrus Harding and
his companions were surprised to see a lake, bordered with green trees, the
existence of which they had not suspected. Seen from this height, the lake
appeared to be on the same level as the ocean, but, on reflection, the engineer
explained to his companions that the altitude of this little sheet of water must be
about three hundred feet, because the plateau, which was its basin, was but a
prolongation of the coast.

"Is it a freshwater lake?" asked Pencroft.

"Certainly," replied the engineer, "for it must be fed by the water which
flows from the mountain."

"I see a little river which runs into it," said Herbert, pointing out a narrow


stream, which evidently took its source somewhere in the west.

"Yes," said Harding; "and since this stream feeds the lake, most probably on
the side near the sea there is an outlet by which the surplus water escapes. We
shall see that on our return."

This little winding watercourse and the river already mentioned constituted
the water-system, at least such as it was displayed to the eyes of the explorers.
However, it was possible that under the masses of trees which covered two-
thirds of the island, forming an immense forest, other rivers ran towards the sea.
It might even be inferred that such was the case, so rich did this region appear in
the most magnificent specimens of the flora of the temperate zones. There was
no indication of running water in the north, though perhaps there might be
stagnant water among the marshes in the northeast; but that was all, in addition
to the downs, sand, and aridity which contrasted so strongly with the luxuriant
vegetation of the rest of the island.

The volcano did not occupy the central part; it rose, on the contrary, in the
northwestern region, and seemed to mark the boundary of the two zones. At the
southwest, at the south, and the southeast, the first part of the spurs were hidden
under masses of verdure. At the north, on the contrary, one could follow their
ramifications, which died away on the sandy plains. It was on this side that, at
the time when the mountain was in a state of eruption, the discharge had worn
away a passage, and a large heap of lava had spread to the narrow jaw which
formed the northeastern gulf.

Cyrus Harding and his companions remained an hour at the top of the
mountain. The island was displayed under their eyes, like a plan in relief with
different tints, green for the forests, yellow for the sand, blue for the water. They
viewed it in its tout-ensemble, nothing remained concealed but the ground
hidden by verdure, the hollows of the valleys, and the interior of the volcanic
chasms.

One important question remained to be solved, and the answer would have a
great effect upon the future of the castaways.

Was the island inhabited?

It was the reporter who put this question, to which after the close
examination they had just made, the answer seemed to be in the negative.

Nowhere could the work of a human hand be perceived. Not a group of huts,
not a solitary cabin, not a fishery on the shore. No smoke curling in the air
betrayed the presence of man. It is true, a distance of nearly thirty miles
separated the observers from the extreme points, that is, of the tail which
extended to the southwest, and it would have been difficult, even to Pencroft's
eyes, to discover a habitation there. Neither could the curtain of verdure, which


covered three-quarters of the island, be raised to see if it did not shelter some
straggling village. But in general the islanders live on the shores of the narrow
spaces which emerge above the waters of the Pacific, and this shore appeared to
be an absolute desert.

Until a more complete exploration, it might be admitted that the island was
uninhabited. But was it frequented, at least occasionally, by the natives of
neighboring islands? It was difficult to reply to this question. No land appeared
within a radius of fifty miles. But fifty miles could be easily crossed, either by
Malay proas or by the large Polynesian canoes. Everything depended on the
position of the island, of its isolation in the Pacific, or of its proximity to
archipelagoes. Would Cyrus Harding be able to find out their latitude and
longitude without instruments? It would be difficult. Since he was in doubt, it
was best to take precautions against a possible descent of neighboring natives.

The exploration of the island was finished, its shape determined, its features
made out, its extent calculated, the water and mountain systems ascertained. The
disposition of the forests and plains had been marked in a general way on the
reporter's plan. They had now only to descend the mountain slopes again, and
explore the soil, in the triple point of view, of its mineral, vegetable, and animal
resources.

But before giving his companions the signal for departure, Cyrus Harding
said to them in a calm, grave voice,--

"Here, my friends, is the small corner of land upon which the hand of the
Almighty has thrown us. We are going to live here; a long time, perhaps.
Perhaps, too, unexpected help will arrive, if some ship passes by chance. I say by
chance, because this is an unimportant island; there is not even a port in which
ships could anchor, and it is to be feared that it is situated out of the route usually
followed, that is to say, too much to the south for the ships which frequent the
archipelagoes of the Pacific, and too much to the north for those which go to
Australia by doubling Cape Horn. I wish to hide nothing of our position from
you--"

"And you are right, my dear Cyrus," replied the reporter, with animation.
"You have to deal with men. They have confidence in you, and you can depend
upon them. Is it not so, my friends?"

"I will obey you in everything, captain," said Herbert, seizing the engineer's
hand.

"My master always, and everywhere!" cried Neb.

"As for me," said the sailor, "if I ever grumble at work, my name's not Jack
Pencroft, and if you like, captain, we will make a little America of this island!
We will build towns, we will establish railways, start telegraphs, and one fine


'


day, when it is quite changed, quite put in order and quite civilized, we will go
and offer it to the government of the Union. Only, I ask one thing."

"What is that?" said the reporter.

"It is, that we do not consider ourselves castaways, but colonists, who have
come here to settle." Harding could not help smiling, and the sailor's idea was
adopted. He then thanked his companions, and added, that he would rely on their
energy and on the aid of Heaven.

"Well, now let us set off to the Chimneys!" cried Pencroft.

"One minute, my friends," said the engineer. "It seems to me it would be a
good thing to give a name to this island, as well as to, the capes, promontories,
and watercourses, which we can see.

"Very good," said the reporter. "In the future, that will simplify the
instructions which we shall have to give and follow."

"Indeed," said the sailor, "already it is something to be able to say where one
is going, and where one has come from. At least, it looks like somewhere."

"The Chimneys, for example," said Herbert.

"Exactly!" replied Pencroft. "That name was the most convenient, and it
came to me quite of myself. Shall we keep the name of the Chimneys for our
first encampment, captain?"

"Yes, Pencroft, since you have so christened it."

"Good! as for the others, that will be easy," returned the sailor, who was in
high spirits. "Let us give them names, as the Robinsons did, whose story Herbert
has often read to me; Providence Bay, Whale Point, Cape Disappointment!"

"Or, rather, the names of Captain Harding,” said Herbert, "of Mr. Spilett, of
Neb!--"

"My name!" cried Neb, showing his sparkling white teeth.

"Why not?" replied Pencroft. "Port Neb, that would do very well! And Cape
Gideon--"

"I should prefer borrowing names from our country," said the reporter,
"which would remind us of America."

"Yes, for the principal ones," then said Cyrus Harding; "for those of the bays
and seas, I admit it willingly. We might give to that vast bay on the east the name
of Union Bay, for example; to that large hollow on the south, Washington Bay;
to the mountain upon which we are standing, that of Mount Franklin; to that lake
which is extended under our eyes, that of Lake Grant; nothing could be better,
my friends. These names will recall our country, and those of the great citizens
who have honored it; but for the rivers, gulfs, capes, and promontories, which
we perceive from the top of this mountain, rather let us choose names which will
recall their particular shape. They will impress themselves better on our memory,


and at the same time will be more practical. The shape of the island is so strange
that we shall not be troubled to imagine what it resembles. As to the streams
which we do not know as yet, in different parts of the forest which we shall
explore later, the creeks which afterwards will he discovered, we can christen
them as we find them. What do you think, my friends?"

The engineer's proposal was unanimously agreed to by his companions. The
island was spread out under their eyes like a map, and they had only to give
names to all its angles and points. Gideon Spilett would write them down, and
the geographical nomenclature of the island would be definitely adopted. First,
they named the two bays and the mountain, Union Bay, Washington Bay, and
Mount Franklin, as the engineer had suggested.

"Now," said the reporter, "to this peninsula at the southwest of the island, I
propose to give the name of Serpentine Peninsula, and that of Reptile-end to the
bent tail which terminates it, for it is just like a reptile's tail."

"Adopted," said the engineer.

"Now," said Herbert, pointing to the other extremity of the island, "let us call
this gulf which is so singularly like a pair of open jaws, Shark Gulf."

"Capital!" cried Pencroft, "and we can complete the resemblance by naming
the two parts of the jaws Mandible Cape."

"But there are two capes," observed the reporter.

"Well," replied Pencroft, "we can have North Mandible Cape and South
Mandible Cape."

"They are inscribed," said Spilett.

"There is only the point at the southeastern extremity of the island to be
named," said Pencroft.

"That is, the extremity of Union Bay?" asked Herbert.

"Claw Cape," cried Neb directly, who also wished to be godfather to some
part of his domain.

In truth, Neb had found an excellent name, for this cape was very like the
powerful claw of the fantastic animal which this singularly-shaped island
represented.

Pencroft was delighted at the turn things had taken, and their imaginations
soon gave to the river which furnished the settlers with drinking water and near
which the balloon had thrown them, the name of the Mercy, in true gratitude to
Providence. To the islet upon which the castaways had first landed, the name of
Safety Island; to the plateau which crowned the high granite precipice above the
Chimneys, and from whence the gaze could embrace the whole of the vast bay,
the name of Prospect Heights.

Lastly, all the masses of impenetrable wood which covered the Serpentine


Peninsula were named the forests of the Far West.

The nomenclature of the visible and known parts of the island was thus
finished, and later, they would complete it as they made fresh discoveries.

As to the points of the compass, the engineer had roughly fixed them by the
height and position of the sun, which placed Union Bay and Prospect Heights to
the east. But the next day, by taking the exact hour of the rising and setting of the
sun, and by marking its position between this rising and setting, he reckoned to
fix the north of the island exactly, for, in consequence of its situation in the
Southern Hemisphere, the sun, at the precise moment of its culmination, passed
in the north and not in the south, as, in its apparent movement, it seems to do, to
those places situated in the Northern Hemisphere.

Everything was finished, and the settlers had only to descend Mount Franklin
to return to the Chimneys, when Pencroft cried out,--

"Well! we are preciously stupid!"

"Why?" asked Gideon Spilett, who had closed his notebook and risen to
depart.

"Why! our island! we have forgotten to christen it!"

Herbert was going to propose to give it the engineer's name and all his
companions would have applauded him, when Cyrus Harding said simply,--

"Let us give it the name of a great citizen, my friend; of him who now
struggles to defend the unity of the American Republic! Let us call it Lincoln
Island!"

The engineer's proposal was replied to by three hurrahs.

And that evening, before sleeping, the new colonists talked of their absent
country; they spoke of the terrible war which stained it with blood; they could
not doubt that the South would soon be subdued, and that the cause of the North,
the cause of justice, would triumph, thanks to Grant, thanks to Lincoln!

Now this happened the 30th of March, 1865. They little knew that sixteen
days afterwards a frightful crime would be committed in Washington, and that
on Good Friday Abraham Lincoln would fall by the hand of a fanatic.


Chapter 12


They now began the descent of the mountain. Climbing down the crater, they
went round the cone and reached their encampment of the previous night.
Pencroft thought it must be breakfast-time, and the watches of the reporter and
engineer were therefore consulted to find out the hour.

That of Gideon Spilett had been preserved from the sea-water, as he had been
thrown at once on the sand out of reach of the waves. It was an instrument of
excellent quality, a perfect pocket chronometer, which the reporter had not
forgotten to wind up carefully every day.

As to the engineer's watch, it, of course, had stopped during the time which
he had passed on the downs.

The engineer now wound it up, and ascertaining by the height of the sun that
it must be about nine o'clock in the morning, he put his watch at that hour.

"No, my dear Spilett, wait. You have kept the Richmond time, have you
not?"

"Yes, Cyrus."

"Consequently, your watch is set by the meridian of that town, which is
almost that of Washington?"

"Undoubtedly."

"Very well, keep it thus. Content yourself with winding it up very, exactly,
but do not touch the hands. This may be of use to us.

"What will be the good of that?" thought the sailor.

They ate, and so heartily, that the store of game and almonds was totally
exhausted. But Pencroft was not at all uneasy, they would supply themselves on
the way. Top, whose share had been very much to his taste, would know how to
find some fresh game among the brushwood. Moreover, the sailor thought of
simply asking the engineer to manufacture some powder and one or two
fowling-pieces; he supposed there would be no difficulty in that.

On leaving the plateau, the captain proposed to his companions to return to
the Chimneys by a new way. He wished to reconnoiter Lake Grant, so
magnificently framed in trees. They therefore followed the crest of one of the
spurs, between which the creek that supplied the lake probably had its source. In
talking, the settlers already employed the names which they had just chosen,
which singularly facilitated the exchange of their ideas. Herbert and Pencroft--
the one young and the other very boyish--were enchanted, and while walking,
the sailor said,


"Hey, Herbert! how capital it sounds! It will be impossible to lose ourselves,
my boy, since, whether we follow the way to Lake Grant, or whether we join the
Mercy through the woods of the Far West, we shall be certain to arrive at
Prospect Heights, and, consequently, at Union Bay!"

It had been agreed, that without forming a compact band, the settlers should
not stray away from each other. It was very certain that the thick forests of the
island were inhabited by dangerous animals, and it was prudent to be on their
guard. In general, Pencroft, Herbert, and Neb walked first, preceded by Top, who
poked his nose into every bush. The reporter and the engineer went together,
Gideon Spilett ready to note every incident, the engineer silent for the most part,
and only stepping aside to pick up one thing or another, a mineral or vegetable
substance, which he put into his pocket, without making any remark.

"What can he be picking up?" muttered Pencroft. "I have looked in vain for
anything that's worth the trouble of stooping for."

Towards ten o'clock the little band descended the last declivities of Mount
Franklin. As yet the ground was scantily strewn with bushes and trees. They
were walking over yellowish calcinated earth, forming a plain of nearly a mile
long, which extended to the edge of the wood. Great blocks of that basalt, which,
according to Bischof, takes three hundred and fifty millions of years to cool,
strewed the plain, very confused in some places. However, there were here no
traces of lava, which was spread more particularly over the northern slopes.

Cyrus Harding expected to reach, without incident, the course of the creek,
which he supposed flowed under the trees at the border of the plain, when he
saw Herbert running hastily back, while Neb and the sailor were hiding behind
the rocks.

"What's the matter, my boy?" asked Spilett.

"Smoke," replied Herbert. "We have seen smoke among the rocks, a hundred
paces from us."

"Men in this place?" cried the reporter.

"We must avoid showing ourselves before knowing with whom we have to
deal," replied Cyrus Harding. "I trust that there are no natives on this island; I
dread them more than anything else. Where is Top?"

"Top is on before."

"And he doesn't bark?"

"No."

"That is strange. However, we must try to call him back."

In a few moments, the engineer, Gideon Spilett, and Herbert had rejoined
their two companions, and like them, they kept out of sight behind the heaps of
basalt.


From thence they clearly saw smoke of a yellowish color rising in the air.

Top was recalled by a slight whistle from his master, and the latter, signing to
his companions to wait for him, glided away among the rocks. The colonists,
motionless, anxiously awaited the result of this exploration, when a shout from
the engineer made them hasten forward. They soon joined him, and were at once
struck with a disagreeable odor which impregnated the atmosphere.

The odor, easily recognized, was enough for the engineer to guess what the
smoke was which at first, not without cause, had startled him.

"This fue," said he, "or rather, this smoke is produced by nature alone. There
is a sulphur spring there, which will cure all our sore throats."

"Captain!" cried Pencroft. "What a pity that I haven't got a cold!"


The settlers then directed their steps towards the place from which the smoke
escaped. They there saw a sulphur spring which flowed abundantly between the
rocks, and its waters discharged a strong sulphuric acid odor, after having
absorbed the oxygen of the air.

Cyrus Harding, dipping in his hand, felt the water oily to the touch. He tasted
it and found it rather sweet. As to its temperature, that he estimated at ninety-five
degrees Fahrenheit. Herbert having asked on what he based this calculation,--

"Its quite simple, my boy," said he, "for, in plunging my hand into the water,
I felt no sensation either of heat or cold. Therefore it has the same temperature as
the human body, which is about ninety-five degrees."

The sulphur spring not being of any actual use to the settlers, they proceeded
towards the thick border of the forest, which began some hundred paces off.

There, as they had conjectured, the waters of the stream flowed clear and
limpid between high banks of red earth, the color of which betrayed the presence
of oxide of iron. From this color, the name of Red Creek was immediately given
to the watercourse.

It was only a large stream, deep and clear, formed of the mountain water,
which, half river, half torrent, here rippling peacefully over the sand, there
falling against the rocks or dashing down in a cascade, ran towards the lake, over
a distance of a mile and a half, its breadth varying from thirty to forty feet. Its
waters were sweet, and it was supposed that those of the lake were so also. A
fortunate circumstance, in the event of their finding on its borders a more
suitable dwelling than the Chimneys.

As to the trees, which some hundred feet downwards shaded the banks of the
creek, they belonged, for the most part, to the species which abound in the
temperate zone of America and Tasmania, and no longer to those coniferae
observed in that portion of the island already explored to some miles from
Prospect Heights. At this time of the year, the commencement of the month of
April, which represents the month of October, in this hemisphere, that is, the
beginning of autumn, they were still in full leaf. They consisted principally of
casuarinas and eucalypti, some of which next year would yield a sweet manna,
similar to the manna of the East. Clumps of Australian cedars rose on the sloping
banks, which were also covered with the high grass called "tussac" in New
Holland; but the cocoanut, so abundant in the archipelagoes of the Pacific,
seemed to be wanting in the island, the latitude, doubtless, being too low.

"What a pity!" said Herbert, "such a useful tree, and which has such beautiful
nuts!"

As to the birds, they swarmed among the scanty branches of the eucalypti
and casuarinas, which did not hinder the display of their wings. Black, white, or


gray cockatoos, paroquets, with plumage of all colors, kingfishers of a sparkling
green and crowned with red, blue lories, and various other birds appeared on all
sides, as through a prism, fluttering about and producing a deafening clamor.
Suddenly, a strange concert of discordant voices resounded in the midst of a
thicket. The settlers heard successively the song of birds, the cry of quadrupeds,
and a sort of clacking which they might have believed to have escaped from the
lips of a native. Neb and Herbert rushed towards the bush, forgetting even the
most elementary principles of prudence. Happily, they found there, neither a
formidable wild beast nor a dangerous native, but merely half a dozen mocking
and singing birds, known as mountain pheasants. A few skillful blows from a
stick soon put an end to their concert, and procured excellent food for the
evening's dinner.

Herbert also discovered some magnificent pigeons with bronzed wings, some
superbly crested, others draped in green, like their congeners at Port-Macquarie;
but it was impossible to reach them, or the crows and magpies which flew away
in flocks.

A charge of small shot would have made great slaughter among these birds,
but the hunters were still limited to sticks and stones, and these primitive
weapons proved very insufficient.

Their insufficiency was still more clearly shown when a troop of quadrupeds,
jumping, bounding, making leaps of thirty feet, regular flying mammiferae, fled
over the thickets, so quickly and at such a height, that one would have thought
that they passed from one tree to another like squirrels.

"Kangaroos!" cried Herbert.

"Are they good to eat?" asked Pencroft.

"Stewed," replied the reporter, "their flesh is equal to the best venison!--"

Gideon Spilett had not finished this exciting sentence when the sailor,
followed by Neb and Herbert, darted on the kangaroos tracks. Cyrus Harding
called them back in vain. But it was in vain too for the hunters to pursue such
agile game, which went bounding away like balls. After a chase of five minutes,
they lost their breath, and at the same time all sight of the creatures, which
disappeared in the wood. Top was not more successful than his masters.

"Captain," said Pencroft, when the engineer and the reporter had rejoined
them, "Captain, you see quite well we can't get on unless we make a few guns.
Will that be possible?"

"Perhaps," replied the engineer, "but we will begin by first manufacturing
some bows and arrows, and I don't doubt that you will become as clever in the
use of them as the Australian hunters."

"Bows and arrows!" said Pencroft scornfully. "That's all very well for


children!"

"Don't be proud, friend Pencroft," replied the reporter. "Bows and arrows
were sufficient for centuries to stain the earth with blood. Powder is but a thing
of yesterday, and war is as old as the human race--unhappily."

"Faith, that's true, Mr. Spilett," replied the sailor, "and I always speak too
quickly. You must excuse me!"

Meanwhile, Herbert constant to his favorite science, Natural History,
reverted to the kangaroos, saying,--

"Besides, we had to deal just now with the species which is most difficult to
catch. They were giants with long gray fur; but if I am not mistaken, there exist
black and red kangaroos, rock kangaroos, and rat kangaroos, which are more
easy to get hold of. It is reckoned that there are about a dozen species."

"Herbert," replied the sailor sententiously, "there is only one species of
kangaroos to me, that is 'kangaroo on the spit,’ and it's just the one we haven't got
this evening!"

They could not help laughing at Master Pencroft's new classification. The
honest sailor did not hide his regret at being reduced for dinner to the singing
pheasants, but fortune once more showed itself obliging to him.

In fact, Top, who felt that his interest was concerned went and ferreted
everywhere with an instinct doubled by a ferocious appetite. It was even
probable that if some piece of game did fall into his clutches, none would be left
for the hunters, if Top was hunting on his own account; but Neb watched him
and he did well.

Towards three o'clock the dog disappeared in the brushwood and gruntings
showed that he was engaged in a struggle with some animal. Neb rushed after
him, and soon saw Top eagerly devouring a quadruped, which ten seconds later
would have been past recognizing in Top's stomach. But fortunately the dog had
fallen upon a brood, and besides the victim he was devouring, two other rodents-
-the animals in question belonged to that order--lay strangled on the turf.

Neb reappeared triumphantly holding one of the rodents in each hand. Their
size exceeded that of a rabbit, their hair was yellow, mingled with green spots,
and they had the merest rudiments of tails.

The citizens of the Union were at no loss for the right name of these rodents.
They were maras, a sort of agouti, a little larger than their congeners of tropical
countries, regular American rabbits, with long ears, jaws armed on each side
with five molars, which distinguish the agouti.

"Hurrah!" cried Pencroft, "the roast has arrived! and now we can go home."

The walk, interrupted for an instant, was resumed. The limpid waters of the
Red Creek flowed under an arch of casuannas, banksias, and gigantic gum-trees.


Superb lilacs rose to a height of twenty feet. Other arborescent species, unknown
to the young naturalist, bent over the stream, which could be heard murmuring
beneath the bowers of verdure.

Meanwhile the stream grew much wider, and Cyrus Harding supposed that
they would soon reach its mouth. In fact, on emerging from beneath a thick
clump of beautiful trees, it suddenly appeared before their eyes.

The explorers had arrived on the western shore of Lake Grant. The place was
well worth looking at. This extent of water, of a circumference of nearly seven
miles and an area of two hundred and fifty acres, reposed in a border of
diversified trees. Towards the east, through a curtain of verdure, picturesquely
raised in some places, sparkled an horizon of sea. The lake was curved at the
north, which contrasted with the sharp outline of its lower part. Numerous
aquatic birds frequented the shores of this little Ontario, in which the thousand
isles of its American namesake were represented by a rock which emerged from
its surface, some hundred feet from the southern shore. There lived in harmony
several couples of kingfishers perched on a stone, grave, motionless, watching
for fish, then darting down, they plunged in with a sharp cry, and reappeared
with their prey in their beaks. On the shores and on the islets, strutted wild
ducks, pelicans, water-hens, red-beaks, philedons, furnished with a tongue like a
brush, and one or two specimens of the splendid menura, the tail of which
expands gracefully like a lyre.

As to the water of the lake, it was sweet, limpid, rather dark, and from
certain bubblings, and the concentric circles which crossed each other on the
surface, it could not be doubted that it abounded in fish.

"This lake is really beautiful!" said Gideon Spilett. "We could live on its
borders!"

"We will live there!" replied Harding.

The settlers, wishing to return to the Chimneys by the shortest way,
descended towards the angle formed on the south by the junction of the lake's
bank. It was not without difficulty that they broke a path through the thickets and
brushwood which had never been put aside by the hand of men, and they thus
went towards the shore, so as to arrive at the north of Prospect Heights. Two
miles were cleared in this direction, and then, after they had passed the last
curtain of trees, appeared the plateau, carpeted with thick turf, and beyond that
the infinite sea.

To return to the Chimneys, it was enough to cross the plateau obliquely for
the space of a mile, and then to descend to the elbow formed by the first detour
of the Mercy. But the engineer desired to know how and where the overplus of
the water from the lake escaped, and the exploration was prolonged under the


trees for a mile and a half towards the north. It was most probable that an
overfall existed somewhere, and doubtless through a cleft in the granite. This
lake was only, in short, an immense center basin, which was filled by degrees by
the creek, and its waters must necessarily pass to the sea by some fall. If it was
so, the engineer thought that it might perhaps be possible to utilize this fall and
borrow its power, actually lost without profit to any one. They continued then to
follow the shores of Lake Grant by climbing the plateau; but, after having gone a
mile in this direction, Cyrus Harding had not been able to discover the overfall,
which, however, must exist somewhere.

It was then half-past four. In order to prepare for dinner it was necessary that
the settlers should return to their dwelling. The little band retraced their steps,
therefore, and by the left bank of the Mercy, Cyrus Harding and his companions
arrived at the Chimneys.

The fire was lighted, and Neb and Pencroft, on whom the functions of cooks
naturally devolved, to the one in his quality of Negro, to the other in that of
sailor, quickly prepared some broiled agouti, to which they did great justice.

The repast at length terminated; at the moment when each one was about to
give himself up to sleep, Cyrus Harding drew from his pocket little specimens of
different sorts of minerals, and just said,--

"My friends, this is iron mineral, this a pyrite, this is clay, this is lime, and
this is coal. Nature gives us these things. It is our business to make a right use of
them. To-morrow we will commence operations."


Chapter 13


"Well, captain, where are we going to begin?” asked Pencroft next morning
of the engineer.

"At the beginning," replied Cyrus Harding.

And in fact, the settlers were compelled to begin "at the very beginning."
They did not possess even the tools necessary for making tools, and they were
not even in the condition of nature, who, "having time, husbands her strength."
They had no time, since they had to provide for the immediate wants of their
existence, and though, profiting by acquired experience, they had nothing to
invent, still they had everything to make; their iron and their steel were as yet
only in the state of minerals, their earthenware in the state of clay, their linen and
their clothes in the state of textile material.

It must be said, however, that the settlers were "men" in the complete and
higher sense of the word. The engineer Harding could not have been seconded
by more intelligent companions, nor with more devotion and zeal. He had tried
them. He knew their abilities.

Gideon Spilett, a talented reporter, having learned everything so as to be able
to speak of everything, would contribute largely with his head and hands to the
colonization of the island. He would not draw back from any task: a determined
sportsman, he would make a business of what till then had only been a pleasure
to him.

Herbert, a gallant boy, already remarkably well informed in the natural
sciences, would render greater service to the common cause.

Neb was devotion personified. Clever, intelligent, indefatigable, robust, with
iron health, he knew a little about the work of the forge, and could not fail to be
very useful in the colony.

As to Pencroft, he had sailed over every sea, a carpenter in the dockyards in
Brooklyn, assistant tailor in the vessels of the state, gardener, cultivator, during
his holidays, etc., and like all seamen, fit for anything, he knew how to do
everything.

It would have been difficult to unite five men, better fitted to struggle against
fate, more certain to triumph over it.

"At the beginning," Cyrus Harding had said. Now this beginning of which
the engineer spoke was the construction of an apparatus which would serve to
transform the natural substances. The part which heat plays in these
transformations is known. Now fuel, wood or coal, was ready for immediate use,


an oven must be built to use it.

"What is this oven for?" asked Pencroft.

"To make the pottery which we have need of," replied Harding.

"And of what shall we make the oven?"

"With bricks."

"And the bricks?"

"With clay. Let us start, my friends. To save trouble, we will establish our
manufactory at the place of production. Neb will bring provisions, and there will
be no lack of fire to cook the food."

"No," replied the reporter; "but if there is a lack of food for want of
instruments for the chase?"

"Ah, if we only had a knife!" cried the sailor.

"Well?" asked Cyrus Harding.

"Well! I would soon make a bow and arrows, and then there could be plenty
of game in the larder!"

"Yes, a knife, a sharp blade." said the engineer, as if he was speaking to
himself.

At this moment his eyes fell upon Top, who was running about on the shore.
Suddenly Harding's face became animated.

"Top, here,” said he.

The dog came at his master's call. The latter took Top's head between his
hands, and unfastening the collar which the animal wore round his neck, he
broke it in two, saying,--

"There are two knives, Pencroft!"

Two hurrahs from the sailor was the reply. Top's collar was made of a thin
piece of tempered steel. They had only to sharpen it on a piece of sandstone,
then to raise the edge on a finer stone. Now sandstone was abundant on the
beach, and two hours after the stock of tools in the colony consisted of two sharp
blades, which were easily fixed in solid handles.

The production of these their first tools was hailed as a triumph. It was
indeed a valuable result of their labor, and a very opportune one. They set out.

Cyrus Harding proposed that they should return to the western shore of the
lake, where the day before he had noticed the clayey ground of which he
possessed a specimen. They therefore followed the bank of the Mercy, traversed
Prospect Heights, and alter a walk of five miles or more they reached a glade,
situated two hundred feet from Lake Grant.

On the way Herbert had discovered a tree, the branches of which the Indians
of South America employ for making their bows. It was the crejimba, of the
palm family, which does not bear edible fruit. Long straight branches were cut,


the leaves stripped off; it was shaped, stronger in the middle, more slender at the
extremities, and nothing remained to be done but to find a plant fit to make the
bow-string. This was the "hibiscus heterophyllus," which furnishes fibers of such
remarkable tenacity that they have been compared to the tendons of animals.
Pencroft thus obtained bows of tolerable strength, for which he only wanted
arrows. These were easily made with straight stiff branches, without knots, but
the points with which they must be armed, that is to say, a substance to serve in
lieu of iron, could not be met with so easily. But Pencroft said, that having done
his part of the work, chance would do the rest.

The settlers arrived on the ground which had been discovered the day before.
Being composed of the sort of clay which is used for making bricks and tiles, it
was very useful for the work in question. There was no great difficulty in it. It
was enough to scour the clay with sand, then to mold the bricks and bake them
by the heat of a wood fire.

Generally bricks are formed in molds, but the engineer contented himself
with making them by hand. All that day and the day following were employed in
this work. The clay, soaked in water, was mixed by the feet and hands of the
manipulators, and then divided into pieces of equal size. A practiced workman
can make, without a machine, about ten thousand bricks in twelve hours; but in
their two days work the five brickmakers on Lincoln Island had not made more
than three thousand, which were ranged near each other, until the time when
their complete desiccation would permit them to be used in building the oven,
that is to say, in three or four days.

It was on the 2nd of April that Harding had employed himself in fixing the
orientation of the island, or, in other words, the precise spot where the sun rose.
The day before he had noted exactly the hour when the sun disappeared beneath
the horizon, making allowance for the refraction. This morning he noted, no less
exactly, the hour at which it reappeared. Between this setting and rising twelve
hours, twenty-four minutes passed. Then, six hours, twelve minutes after its
rising, the sun on this day would exactly pass the meridian and the point of the
sky which it occupied at this moment would be the north. At the said hour, Cyrus
marked this point, and putting in a line with the sun two trees which would serve
him for marks, he thus obtained an invariable meridian for his ulterior
operations.

The settlers employed the two days before the oven was built in collecting
fuel. Branches were cut all round the glade, and they picked up all the fallen
wood under the trees. They were also able to hunt with greater success, since
Pencroft now possessed some dozen arrows armed with sharp points. It was Top
who had famished these points, by bringing in a porcupine, rather inferior eating,


but of great value, thanks to the quills with which it bristled. These quills were
fixed firmly at the ends of the arrows, the flight of which was made more certain
by some cockatoos' feathers. The reporter and Herbert soon became very skilful
archers. Game of all sorts in consequence abounded at the Chimneys, capybaras,
pigeons, agouties, grouse, etc. The greater part of these animals were killed in
the part of the forest on the left bank of the Mercy, to which they gave the name
of Jacamar Wood, in remembrance of the bird which Pencroft and Herbert had
pursued when on their first exploration.

This game was eaten fresh, but they preserved some capybara hams, by
smoking them above a fire of green wood, after having perfumed them with
sweet-smelling leaves. However, this food, although very strengthening, was
always roast upon roast, and the party would have been delighted to hear some
soup bubbling on the hearth, but they must wait till a pot could be made, and,
consequently, till the oven was built.

During these excursions, which were not extended far from the brick-field,
the hunters could discern the recent passage of animals of a large size, armed
with powerful claws, but they could not recognize the species. Cyrus Harding
advised them to be very careful, as the forest probably enclosed many dangerous
beasts.

And he did right. Indeed, Gideon Spilett and Herbert one day saw an animal
which resembled a jaguar. Happily the creature did not attack them, or they
might not have escaped without a severe wound. As soon as he could get a
regular weapon, that is to say, one of the guns which Pencroft begged for,
Gideon Spilett resolved to make desperate war against the ferocious beasts, and
exterminate them from the island.

The Chimneys during these few days was not made more comfortable, for
the engineer hoped to discover, or build if necessary, a more convenient
dwelling. They contented themselves with spreading moss and dry leaves on the
sand of the passages, and on these primitive couches the tired workers slept
soundly.

They also reckoned the days they had passed on Lincoln Island, and from
that time kept a regular account. The 5th of April, which was Wednesday, was
twelve days from the time when the wind threw the castaways on this shore.

On the 6th of April, at daybreak, the engineer and his companions were
collected in the glade, at the place where they were going to perform the
operation of baking the bricks. Naturally this had to be in the open air, and not in
a kiln, or rather, the agglomeration of bricks made an enormous kiln, which
would bake itself. The fuel, made of well-prepared fagots, was laid on the
ground and surrounded with several rows of dried bricks, which soon formed an


enormous cube, to the exterior of which they contrived air-holes. The work
lasted all day, and it was not till the evening that they set fire to the fagots. No
one slept that night, all watching carefully to keep up the fire.

The operation lasted forty-eight hours, and succeeded perfectly. It then
became necessary to leave the smoking mass to cool, and during this time Neb
and Pencroft, guided by Cyrus Harding, brought, on a hurdle made of interlaced
branches, loads of carbonate of lime and common stones, which were very
abundant, to the north of the lake. These stones, when decomposed by heat,
made a very strong quicklime, greatly increased by slacking, at least as pure as if
it had been produced by the calcination of chalk or marble. Mixed with sand the
lime made excellent mortar.

The result of these different works was, that, on the 9th of April, the engineer
had at his disposal a quantity of prepared lime and some thousands of bricks.

Without losing an instant, therefore, they began the construction of a kiln to
bake the pottery, which was indispensable for their domestic use. They
succeeded without much difficulty. Five days after, the kiln was supplied with
coal, which the engineer had discovered lying open to the sky towards the mouth
of the Red Creek, and the first smoke escaped from a chimney twenty feet high.
The glade was transformed into a manufactory, and Pencroft was not far wrong
in believing that from this kiln would issue all the products of modern industry.

In the meantime what the settlers first manufactured was a common pottery
in which to cook their food. The chief material was clay, to which Harding added
a little lime and quartz. This paste made regular "pipe-clay," with which they
manufactured bowls, cups molded on stones of a proper size, great jars and pots
to hold water, etc. The shape of these objects was clumsy and defective, but after
they had been baked in a high temperature, the kitchen of the Chimneys was
provided with a number of utensils, as precious to the settlers as the most
beautifully enameled china. We must mention here that Pencroft, desirous to
know if the clay thus prepared was worthy of its name of pipe-clay, made some
large pipes, which he thought charming, but for which, alas! he had no tobacco,
and that was a great privation to Pencroft. "But tobacco will come, like
everything else!" he repeated, in a burst of absolute confidence.

This work lasted till the 15th of April, and the time was well employed. The
settlers, having become potters, made nothing but pottery. When it suited Cyrus
Harding to change them into smiths, they would become smiths. But the next
day being Sunday, and also Easter Sunday, all agreed to sanctify the day by rest.
These Americans were religious men, scrupulous observers of the precepts of the
Bible, and their situation could not but develop sentiments of confidence towards
the Author of all things.


On the evening of the 15th of April they returned to the Chimneys, carrying
with them the pottery, the furnace being extinguished until they could put it to a
new use. Their return was marked by a fortunate incident; the engineer
discovered a substance which replaced tinder. It is known that a spongy, velvety
flesh is procured from a certain mushroom of the genus polyporous. Properly
prepared, it is extremely inflammable, especially when it has been previously
saturated with gunpowder, or boiled in a solution of nitrate or chlorate of potash.
But, till then, they had not found any of these polypores or even any of the
morels which could replace them. On this day, the engineer, seeing a plant
belonging to the wormwood genus, the principal species of which are absinthe,
balm-mint, tarragon, etc., gathered several tufts, and, presenting them to the
sailor, said,--

"Here, Pencroft, this will please you."

Pencroft looked attentively at the plant, covered with long silky hair, the
leaves being clothed with soft down.

"What's that, captain?” asked Pencroft. "Is it tobacco?"

"No," replied Harding, "it is wormwood; Chinese wormwood to the learned,
but to us it will be tinder."

When the wormwood was properly dried it provided them with a very
inflammable substance, especially afterwards when the engineer had
impregnated it with nitrate of potash, of which the island possessed several beds,
and which is in truth saltpeter.

The colonists had a good supper that evening. Neb prepared some agouti
soup, a smoked capybara ham, to which was added the boiled tubercules of the
"caladium macrorhizum," an herbaceous plant of the arum family. They had an
excellent taste, and were very nutritious, being something similar to the
substance which is sold in England under the name of "Portland sago"; they were
also a good substitute for bread, which the settlers in Lincoln Island did not yet
possess.

When supper was finished, before sleeping, Harding and his companions
went to take the air on the beach. It was eight o'clock in the evening; the night
was magnificent. The moon, which had been full five days before, had not yet
risen, but the horizon was already silvered by those soft, pale shades which
might be called the dawn of the moon. At the southern zenith glittered the
circumpolar constellations, and above all the Southern Cross, which some days
before the engineer had greeted on the summit of Mount Franklin.

Cyrus Harding gazed for some time at this splendid constellation, which has
at its summit and at its base two stars of the first magnitude, at its left arm a star
of the second, and at its right arm a star of the third magnitude.


Then, after some minutes thought--

"Herbert," he asked of the lad, "is not this the 15th of April?"

"Yes, captain," replied Herbert.

"Well, if I am not mistaken, to-morrow will be one of the four days in the
year in which the real time is identical with average time; that is to say, my boy,
that to-morrow, to within some seconds, the sun will pass the meridian just at
midday by the clocks. If the weather is fine I think that I shall obtain the
longitude of the island with an approximation of some degrees."

"Without instruments, without sextant?" asked Gideon Spilett.

"Yes," replied the engineer. "Also, since the night is clear, I will try, this very
evening, to obtain our latitude by calculating the height of the Southern Cross,
that is, from the southern pole above the horizon. You understand, my friends,
that before undertaking the work of installation in earnest it is not enough to
have found out that this land is an island; we must, as nearly as possible, know at
what distance it is situated, either from the American continent or Australia, or
from the principal archipelagoes of the Pacific."

"In fact," said the reporter, "instead of building a house it would be more
important to build a boat, if by chance we are not more than a hundred miles
from an inhabited coast."

"That is why," returned Harding, "I am going to try this evening to calculate
the latitude of Lincoln Island, and to-morrow, at midday, I will try to calculate
the longitude."

If the engineer had possessed a sextant, an apparatus with which the angular
distance of objects can be measured with great precision, there would have been
no difficulty in the operation. This evening by the height of the pole, the next
day by the passing of the sun at the meridian, he would obtain the position of the
island. But as they had not one he would have to supply the deficiency.

Harding then entered the Chimneys. By the light of the fire he cut two little
flat rulers, which he joined together at one end so as to form a pair of compasses,
whose legs could separate or come together. The fastening was fixed with a
strong acacia thorn which was found in the wood pile. This instrument finished,
the engineer returned to the beach, but as it was necessary to take the height of
the pole from above a clear horizon, that is, a sea horizon, and as Claw Cape hid
the southern horizon, he was obliged to look for a more suitable station. The best
would evidently have been the shore exposed directly to the south; but the
Mercy would have to be crossed, and that was a difficulty. Harding resolved, in
consequence, to make his observation from Prospect Heights, taking into
consideration its height above the level of the sea--a height which he intended to
calculate next day by a simple process of elementary geometry.


The settlers, therefore, went to the plateau, ascending the left bank of the
Mercy, and placed themselves on the edge which looked northwest and
southeast, that is, above the curiously-shaped rocks which bordered the river.

This part of the plateau commanded the heights of the left bank, which
sloped away to the extremity of Claw Cape, and to the southern side of the
island. No obstacle intercepted their gaze, which swept the horizon in a semi-
circle from the cape to Reptile End. To the south the horizon, lighted by the first
rays of the moon, was very clearly defined against the sky.

At this moment the Southern Cross presented itself to the observer in an
inverted position, the star Alpha marking its base, which is nearer to the southern
pole.

This constellation is not situated as near to the antarctic pole as the Polar Star
is to the arctic pole. The star Alpha is about twenty-seven degrees from it, but
Cyrus Harding knew this and made allowance for it in his calculation. He took
care also to observe the moment when it passed the meridian below the pole,
which would simplify the operation.

Cyrus Harding pointed one leg of the compasses to the horizon, the other to
Alpha, and the space between the two legs gave him the angular distance which
separated Alpha from the horizon. In order to fix the angle obtained, he fastened
with thorns the two pieces of wood on a third placed transversely, so that their
separation should be properly maintained.

That done, there was only the angle to calculate by bringing back the
observation to the level of the sea, taking into consideration the depression of the
horizon, which would necessitate measuring the height of the cliff. The value of
this angle would give the height of Alpha, and consequently that of the pole
above the horizon, that is to say, the latitude of the island, since the latitude of a
point of the globe is always equal to the height of the pole above the horizon of
this point.

The calculations were left for the next day, and at ten o'clock every one was
sleeping soundly.


Chapter 14


The next day, the 16th of April, and Easter Sunday, the settlers issued from
the Chimneys at daybreak, and proceeded to wash their linen. The engineer
intended to manufacture soap as soon as he could procure the necessary
materials--soda or potash, fat or oil. The important question of renewing their
wardrobe would be treated of in the proper time and place. At any rate their
clothes would last at least six months longer, for they were strong, and could
resist the wear of manual labor. But all would depend on the situation of the
island with regard to inhabited land. This would be settled to-day if the weather
permitted.

The sun rising above a clear horizon, announced a magnificent day, one of
those beautiful autumn days which are like the last farewells of the warm season.

It was now necessary to complete the observations of the evening before by
measuring the height of the cliff above the level of the sea.

"Shall you not need an instrument similar to the one which you used
yesterday?" said Herbert to the engineer.

"No, my boy," replied the latter, "we are going to proceed differently, but in
as precise a way."

Herbert, wishing to learn everything he could, followed the engineer to the
beach. Pencroft, Neb, and the reporter remained behind and occupied themselves
in different ways.

Cyrus Harding had provided himself with a straight stick, twelve feet long,
which he had measured as exactly as possible by comparing it with his own
height, which he knew to a hair. Herbert carried a plumb-line which Harding had
given him, that is to say, a simple stone fastened to the end of a flexible fiber.
Having reached a spot about twenty feet from the edge of the beach, and nearly
five hundred feet from the cliff, which rose perpendicularly, Harding thrust the
pole two feet into the sand, and wedging it up carefully, he managed, by means
of the plumb-line, to erect it perpendicularly with the plane of the horizon.

That done, he retired the necessary distance, when, lying on the sand, his eye
glanced at the same time at the top of the pole and the crest of the cliff. He
carefully marked the place with a little stick.

Then addressing Herbert--"Do you know the first principles of geometry?"
he asked.

"Slightly, captain,” replied Herbert, who did not wish to put himself forward.

"You remember what are the properties of two similar triangles?"


"Yes," replied Herbert; "their homologous sides are proportional."

"Well, my boy, I have just constructed two similar right-angled triangles; the
first, the smallest, has for its sides the perpendicular pole, the distance which
separates the little stick from the foot of the pole and my visual ray for
hypothenuse; the second has for its sides the perpendicular cliff, the height of
which we wish to measure, the distance which separates the little stick from the
bottom of the cliff, and my visual ray also forms its hypothenuse, which proves
to be prolongation of that of the first triangle."

"Ah, captain, I understand!" cried Herbert. "As the distance from the stick to
the pole is to the distance from the stick to the base of the cliff, so is the height
of the pole to the height of the cliff."

"Just so, Herbert," replied the engineer; "and when we have measured the
two first distances, knowing the height of the pole, we shall only have a sum in
proportion to do, which will give us the height of the cliff, and will save us the
trouble of measuring it directly."

The two horizontal distances were found out by means of the pole, whose
length above the sand was exactly ten feet.

The first distance was fifteen feet between the stick and the place where the
pole was thrust into the sand.

The second distance between the stick and the bottom of the cliff was five
hundred feet.

These measurements finished, Cyrus Harding and the lad returned to the
Chimneys.

The engineer then took a flat stone which he had brought back from one of
his previous excursions, a sort of slate, on which it was easy to trace figures with
a sharp shell. He then proved the following proportions:--

15:500::10:x

500 x 10 = 5000

5000 / 15 = 333.3

From which it was proved that the granite cliff measured 333 feet in height.

Cyrus Harding then took the instrument which he had made the evening
before, the space between its two legs giving the angular distance between the
star Alpha and the horizon. He measured, very exactly, the opening of this angle
on a circumference which he divided into 360 equal parts. Now, this angle by
adding to it the twenty-seven degrees which separated Alpha from the antarctic
pole, and by reducing to the level of the sea the height of the cliff on which the
observation had been made, was found to be fifty-three degrees. These fifty-
three degrees being subtracted from ninety degrees--the distance from the pole to
the equator--there remained thirty-seven degrees. Cyrus Harding concluded,


therefore, that Lincoln Island was situated on the thirty-seventh degree of the
southern latitude, or taking into consideration through the imperfection of the
performance, an error of five degrees, that it must be situated between the thirty-
fifth and the fortieth parallel.

There was only the longitude to be obtained, and the position of the island
would be determined, The engineer hoped to attempt this the same day, at twelve
o'clock, at which moment the sun would pass the meridian.

It was decided that Sunday should be spent in a walk, or rather an exploring
expedition, to that side of the island between the north of the lake and Shark
Gulf, and if there was time they would push their discoveries to the northern side
of Cape South Mandible. They would breakfast on the downs, and not return till
evening.

At half-past eight the little band was following the edge of the channel. On
the other side, on Safety Islet, numerous birds were gravely strutting. They were
divers, easily recognized by their cry, which much resembles the braying of a
donkey. Pencroft only considered them in an eatable point of view, and learnt
with some satisfaction that their flesh, though blackish, is not bad food.

Great amphibious creatures could also be seen crawling on the sand; seals,
doubtless, who appeared to have chosen the islet for a place of refuge. It was
impossible to think of those animals in an alimentary point of view, for their oily
flesh is detestable; however, Cyrus Harding observed them attentively, and
without making known his idea, he announced to his companions that very soon
they would pay a visit to the islet. The beach was strewn with innumerable
shells, some of which would have rejoiced the heart of a conchologist; there
were, among others, the phasianella, the terebratual, etc. But what would be of
more use, was the discovery, by Neb, at low tide, of a large oysterbed among the
rocks, nearly five miles from the Chimneys.

"Neb will not have lost his day," cried Pencroft, looking at the spacious
oysterbed.

"It is really a fortunate discovery," said the reporter, "and as it is said that
each oyster produces yearly from fifty to sixty thousand eggs, we shall have an
inexhaustible supply there."

"Only I believe that the oyster is not very nourishing," said Herbert.

"No," replied Harding. "The oyster contains very little nitrogen, and if a man
lived exclusively on them, he would have to eat not less than fifteen to sixteen
dozen a day."

"Capital!" replied Pencroft. "We might swallow dozens and dozens without
exhausting the bed. Shall we take some for breakfast?"

And without waiting for a reply to this proposal, knowing that it would be


approved of, the sailor and Neb detached a quantity of the molluscs. They put
them in a sort of net of hibiscus fiber, which Neb had manufactured, and which
already contained food; they then continued to climb the coast between the
downs and the sea.

From time to time Harding consulted his watch, so as to be prepared in time
for the solar observation, which had to be made exactly at midday.

All that part of the island was very barren as far as the point which closed
Union Bay, and which had received the name of Cape South Mandible. Nothing
could be seen there but sand and shells, mingled with debris of lava. A few sea-
birds frequented this desolate coast, gulls, great albatrosses, as well as wild duck,
for which Pencroft had a great fancy. He tried to knock some over with an arrow,
but without result, for they seldom perched, and he could not hit them on the
wing.

This led the sailor to repeat to the engineer,--

"You see, captain, so long as we have not one or two fowling-pieces, we
shall never get anything!"

"Doubtless, Pencroft," replied the reporter, "but it depends on you. Procure
us some iron for the barrels, steel for the hammers, saltpeter. coal and sulphur for
powder, mercury and nitric acid for the fulminate, and lead for the shot, and the
captain will make us first-rate guns."

"Oh!" replied the engineer, "we might, no doubt, find all these substances on
the island, but a gun is a delicate instrument, and needs very particular tools.
However, we shall see later!"

"Why," cried Pencroft, "were we obliged to throw overboard all the weapons
we had with us in the car, all our implements, even our pocket-knives?"

"But if we had not thrown them away, Pencroft, the balloon would have
thrown us to the bottom of the sea!" said Herbert.

"What you say is true, my boy," replied the sailor.

Then passing to another idea,--"Think," said he, "how astounded Jonathan
Forster and his companions must have been when, next morning, they found the
place empty, and the machine flown away!"

"IT am utterly indifferent about knowing what they may have thought," said
the reporter.

"Tt was all my idea, that!" said Pencroft, with a satisfied air.

"A splendid idea, Pencroft!" replied Gideon Spilett, laughing, "and which has
placed us where we are."

"T would rather be here than in the hands of the Southerners," cried the sailor,
"especially since the captain has been kind enough to come and join us again."

"So would I, truly!" replied the reporter. "Besides, what do we want?


Nothing."

"If that is not--everything!" replied Pencroft, laughing and shrugging his
shoulders. "But, some day or other, we shall find means of going away!"

"Sooner, perhaps, than you imagine, my friends," remarked the engineer, "if
Lincoln Island is but a medium distance from an inhabited island, or from a
continent. We shall know in an hour. I have not a map of the Pacific, but my
memory has preserved a very clear recollection of its southern part. The latitude
which I obtained yesterday placed New Zealand to the west of Lincoln Island,
and the coast of Chile to the east. But between these two countries, there is a
distance of at least six thousand miles. It has, therefore, to be determined what
point in this great space the island occupies, and this the longitude will give us
presently, with a sufficient approximation, I hope."

"Is not the archipelago of the Pomoutous the nearest point to us in latitude?"
asked Herbert.

"Yes," replied the engineer, "but the distance which separates us from it is
more than twelve hundred miles."

"And that way?" asked Neb, who followed the conversation with extreme
interest, pointing to the south.

"That way, nothing," replied Pencroft.

"Nothing, indeed," added the engineer.

"Well, Cyrus," asked the reporter, "if Lincoln Island is not more than two or
three thousand miles from New Zealand or Chile?"

"Well," replied the engineer, "instead of building a house we will build a
boat, and Master Pencroft shall be put in command--"

"Well then," cried the sailor, "I am quite ready to be captain--as soon as you
can make a craft that's able to keep at sea!"

"We shall do it, if it is necessary," replied Cyrus Harding.

But while these men, who really hesitated at nothing, were talking, the hour
approached at which the observation was to be made. What Cyrus Harding was
to do to ascertain the passage of the sun at the meridian of the island, without an
instrument of any sort, Herbert could not guess.

The observers were then about six miles from the Chimneys, not far from
that part of the downs in which the engineer had been found after his enigmatical
preservation. They halted at this place and prepared for breakfast, for it was half-
past eleven. Herbert went for some fresh water from a stream which ran near,
and brought it back in a jug, which Neb had provided.

During these preparations Harding arranged everything for his astronomical
observation. He chose a clear place on the shore, which the ebbing tide had left
perfectly level. This bed of fine sand was as smooth as ice, not a grain out of


place. It was of little importance whether it was horizontal or not, and it did not
matter much whether the stick six feet high, which was planted there, rose
perpendicularly. On the contrary, the engineer inclined it towards the south, that
is to say, in the direction of the coast opposite to the sun, for it must not be
forgotten that the settlers in Lincoln Island, as the island was situated in the
Southern Hemisphere, saw the radiant planet describe its diurnal arc above the
northern, and not above the southern horizon.

Herbert now understood how the engineer was going to proceed to ascertain
the culmination of the sun, that is to say its passing the meridian of the island or,
in other words, determine due south. It was by means of the shadow cast on the
sand by the stick, a way which, for want of an instrument, would give him a
suitable approach to the result which he wished to obtain.

In fact, the moment when this shadow would reach its minimum of length
would be exactly twelve o'clock, and it would be enough to watch the extremity
of the shadow, so as to ascertain the instant when, alter having successively
diminished, it began to lengthen. By inclining his stick to the side opposite to the
sun, Cyrus Harding made the shadow longer, and consequently its modifications
would be more easily ascertained. In fact, the longer the needle of a dial is, the
more easily can the movement of its point be followed. The shadow of the stick
was nothing but the needle of a dial. The moment had come, and Cyrus Harding
knelt on the sand, and with little wooden pegs, which he stuck into the sand, he
began to mark the successive diminutions of the stick's shadow. His companions,
bending over him, watched the operation with extreme interest. The reporter
held his chronometer in his hand, ready to tell the hour which it marked when
the shadow would be at its shortest. Moreover, as Cyrus Harding was working
on the 16th of April, the day on which the true and the average time are
identical, the hour given by Gideon Spilett would be the true hour then at
Washington, which would simplify the calculation. Meanwhile as the sun slowly
advanced, the shadow slowly diminished, and when it appeared to Cyrus
Harding that it was beginning to increase, he asked, "What o'clock is it?"

"One minute past five," replied Gideon Spilett directly. They had now only
to calculate the operation. Nothing could be easier. It could be seen that there
existed, in round numbers, a difference of five hours between the meridian of
Washington and that of Lincoln Island, that is to say, it was midday in Lincoln
Island when it was already five o'clock in the evening in Washington. Now the
sun, in its apparent movement round the earth, traverses one degree in four
minutes, or fifteen degrees an hour. Fifteen degrees multiplied by five hours give
seventy-five degrees.

Then, since Washington is 77deg 3' 11" as much as to say seventy-seven


degrees counted from the meridian of Greenwich which the Americans take for
their starting-point for longitudes concurrently with the English--it followed that
the island must be situated seventy-seven and seventy-five degrees west of the
meridian of Greenwich, that is to say, on the hundred and fifty-second degree of
west longitude.

Cyrus Harding announced this result to his companions, and taking into
consideration errors of observation, as he had done for the latitude, he believed
he could positively affirm that the position of Lincoln Island was between the
thirty-fifth and the thirty-seventh parallel, and between the hundred and fiftieth
and the hundred and fifty-fifth meridian to the west of the meridian of
Greenwich.

The possible fault which he attributed to errors in the observation was, it may
be seen, of five degrees on both sides, which, at sixty miles to a degree, would
give an error of three hundred miles in latitude and longitude for the exact
position.

But this error would not influence the determination which it was necessary
to take. It was very evident that Lincoln Island was at such a distance from every
country or island that it would be too hazardous to attempt to reach one in a frail
boat.

In fact, this calculation placed it at least twelve hundred miles from Tahiti
and the islands of the archipelago of the Pomoutous, more than eighteen hundred
miles from New Zealand, and more than four thousand five hundred miles from
the American coast!

And when Cyrus Harding consulted his memory, he could not remember in
any way that such an island occupied, in that part of the Pacific, the situation
assigned to Lincoln Island.


Chapter 15


The next day, the 17th of April, the sailor's first words were addressed to
Gideon Spilett.

"Well, sir," he asked, "what shall we do to-day?"

"What the captain pleases,” replied the reporter.

Till then the engineer's companions had been brickmakers and potters, now
they were to become metallurgists.

The day before, after breakfast, they had explored as far as the point of
Mandible Cape, seven miles distant from the Chimneys. There, the long series of
downs ended, and the soil had a volcanic appearance. There were no longer high
cliffs as at Prospect Heights, but a strange and capricious border which
surrounded the narrow gulf between the two capes, formed of mineral matter,
thrown up by the volcano. Arrived at this point the settlers retraced their steps,
and at nightfall entered the Chimneys; but they did not sleep before the question
of knowing whether they could think of leaving Lincoln Island or not was
definitely settled.

The twelve hundred miles which separated the island from the Pomoutous
Island was a considerable distance. A boat could not cross it, especially at the
approach of the bad season. Pencroft had expressly declared this. Now, to
construct a simple boat even with the necessary tools, was a difficult work, and
the colonists not having tools they must begin by making hammers, axes, adzes,
Saws, augers, planes, etc., which would take some time. It was decided,
therefore, that they would winter at Lincoln Island, and that they would look for
a more comfortable dwelling than the Chimneys, in which to pass the winter
months.

Before anything else could be done it was necessary to make the iron ore, of
which the engineer had observed some traces in the northwest part of the island,
fit for use by converting it either into iron or into steel.

Metals are not generally found in the ground in a pure state. For the most
part they are combined with oxygen or sulphur. Such was the case with the two
specimens which Cyrus Harding had brought back, one of magnetic iron, not
carbonated, the other a pyrite, also called sulphuret of iron. It was, therefore the
first, the oxide of iron, which they must reduce with coal, that is to say, get rid of
the oxygen, to obtain it in a pure state. This reduction is made by subjecting the
ore with coal to a high temperature, either by the rapid and easy Catalan method,
which has the advantage of transforming the ore into iron in a single operation,


or by the blast furnace, which first smelts the ore, then changes it into iron, by
carrying away the three to four per cent. of coal, which is combined with it.

Now Cyrus Harding wanted iron, and he wished to obtain it as soon as
possible. The ore which he had picked up was in itself very pure and rich. It was
the oxydulous iron, which is found in confused masses of a deep gray color; it
gives a black dust, crystallized in the form of the regular octahedron. Native
lodestones consist of this ore, and iron of the first quality is made in Europe from
that with which Sweden and Norway are so abundantly supplied. Not far from
this vein was the vein of coal already made use of by the settlers. The ingredients
for the manufacture being close together would greatly facilitate the treatment of
the ore. This is the cause of the wealth of the mines in Great Britain, where the
coal aids the manufacture of the metal extracted from the same soil at the same
time as itself.

"Then, captain,” said Pencroft, "we are going to work iron ore?"

"Yes, my friend," replied the engineer, "and for that--something which will
please you--we must begin by having a seal hunt on the islet."

"A seal hunt!" cried the sailor, turning towards Gideon Spilett. "Are seals
needed to make iron?"

"Since Cyrus has said so!" replied the reporter.

But the engineer had already left the Chimneys, and Pencroft prepared for
the seal hunt, without having received any other explanation.

Cyrus Harding, Herbert, Gideon Spilett, Neb, and the sailor were soon
collected on the shore, at a place where the channel left a ford passable at low
tide. The hunters could therefore traverse it without getting wet higher than the
knee.

Harding then put his foot on the islet for the first, and his companions for the
second time.

On their landing some hundreds of penguins looked fearlessly at them. The
hunters, armed with sticks, could have killed them easily, but they were not
guilty of such useless massacre, as it was important not to frighten the seals, who
were lying on the sand several cable lengths off. They also respected certain
innocent-looking birds, whose wings were reduced to the state of stumps, spread
out like fins, ornamented with feathers of a scaly appearance. The settlers,
therefore, prudently advanced towards the north point, walking over ground
riddled with little holes, which formed nests for the sea-birds. Towards the
extremity of the islet appeared great black heads floating just above the water,
having exactly the appearance of rocks in motion.

These were the seals which were to be captured. It was necessary, however,
first to allow them to land, for with their close, short hair, and their fusiform


conformation, being excellent swimmers, it is difficult to catch them in the sea,
while on land their short, webbed feet prevent their having more than a slow,
waddling movement.

Pencroft knew the habits of these creatures, and he advised waiting till they
were stretched on the sand, when the sun, before long, would send them to sleep.
They must then manage to cut off their retreat and knock them on the head.

The hunters, having concealed themselves behind the rocks, waited silently.

An hour passed before the seals came to play on the sand. They could count
half a dozen. Pencroft and Herbert then went round the point of the islet, so as to
take them in the rear, and cut off their retreat. During this time Cyrus Harding,
Spilett, and Neb, crawling behind the rocks, glided towards the future scene of
combat.

All at once the tall figure of the sailor appeared. Pencroft shouted. The
engineer and his two companions threw themselves between the sea and the
seals. Two of the animals soon lay dead on the sand, but the rest regained the sea
in safety.

"Here are the seals required, captain!" said the sailor, advancing towards the
engineer.

"Capital," replied Harding. "We will make bellows of them!"

"Bellows!" cried Pencroft. "Well! these are lucky seals!"

It was, in fact, a blowing-machine, necessary for the treatment of the ore that
the engineer wished to manufacture with the skins of the amphibious creatures.
They were of a medium size, for their length did not exceed six feet. They
resembled a dog about the head.

As it was useless to burden themselves with the weight of both the animals,
Neb and Pencroft resolved to skin them on the spot, while Cyrus Harding and
the reporter continued to explore the islet.

The sailor and the Negro cleverly performed the operation, and three hours
afterwards Cyrus Harding had at his disposal two seals' skins, which he intended
to use in this state, without subjecting them to any tanning process.

The settlers waited till the tide was again low, and crossing the channel they
entered the Chimneys.

The skins had then to be stretched on a frame of wood and sewn by means of
fibers so as to preserve the air without allowing too much to escape. Cyrus
Harding had nothing but the two steel blades from Top's collar, and yet he was so
clever, and his companions aided him with so much intelligence, that three days
afterwards the little colony's stock of tools was augmented by a blowing-
machine, destined to inject the air into the midst of the ore when it should be
subjected to heat--an indispensable condition to the success of the operation.


On the morming of the 20th of April began the "metallic period,” as the
reporter called it in his notes. The engineer had decided, as has been said, to
operate near the veins both of coal and ore. Now, according to his observations,
these veins were situated at the foot of the northeast spurs of Mount Franklin,
that is to say, a distance of six miles from their home. It was impossible,
therefore, to return every day to the Chimneys, and it was agreed that the little
colony should camp under a hut of branches, so that the important operation
could be followed night and day.

This settled, they set out in the morning. Neb and Pencroft dragged the
bellows on a hurdle; also a quantity of vegetables and animals, which they
besides could renew on the way.

The road led through Jacamar Wood, which they traversed obliquely from
southeast to northwest, and in the thickest part. It was necessary to beat a path,
which would in the future form the most direct road to Prospect Heights and
Mount Franklin. The trees, belonging to the species already discovered, were
magnificent. Herbert found some new ones, among others some which Pencroft
called "sham leeks"; for, in spite of their size, they were of the same liliaceous
family as the onion, chive, shallot, or asparagus. These trees produce ligneous
roots which, when cooked, are excellent; from them, by fermentation, a very
agreeable liquor is made. They therefore made a good store of the roots.

The journey through the wood was long; it lasted the whole day, and so
allowed plenty of time for examining the flora and fauna. Top, who took special
charge of the fauna, ran through the grass and brushwood, putting up all sorts of
game. Herbert and Gideon Spilett killed two kangaroos with bows and arrows,
and also an animal which strongly resembled both a hedgehog and an ant-eater.
It was like the first because it rolled itself into a ball, and bristled with spines,
and the second because it had sharp claws, a long slender snout which
terminated in a bird's beak, and an extendible tongue, covered with little thorns
which served to hold the insects.

"And when it is in the pot," asked Pencroft naturally, "what will it be like?"

"An excellent piece of beef," replied Herbert.

"We will not ask more from it," replied the sailor.

During this excursion they saw several wild boars, which however, did not
offer to attack the little band, and it appeared as if they would not meet with any
dangerous beasts; when, in a thick part of the wood, the reporter thought he saw,
some paces from him, among the lower branches of a tree, an animal which he
took for a bear, and which he very tranquilly began to draw. Happily for Gideon
Spilett, the animal in question did not belong to the redoubtable family of the
plantigrades. It was only a koala, better known under the name of the sloth,


being about the size of a large dog, and having stiff hair of a dirty color, the paws
armed with strong claws, which enabled it to climb trees and feed on the leaves.
Having identified the animal, which they did not disturb, Gideon Spilett erased
"bear" from the title of his sketch, putting koala in its place, and the journey was
resumed.

At five o'clock in the evening, Cyrus Harding gave the signal to halt. They
were now outside the forest, at the beginning of the powerful spurs which
supported Mount Franklin towards the west. At a distance of some hundred feet
flowed the Red Creek, and consequently plenty of fresh water was within their
reach.

The camp was soon organized. In less than an hour, on the edge of the forest,
among the trees, a hut of branches interlaced with creepers, and pasted over with
clay, offered a tolerable shelter. Their geological researches were put off till the
next day. Supper was prepared, a good fire blazed before the hut, the roast
turned, and at eight o'clock, while one of the settlers watched to keep up the fire,
in case any wild beasts should prowl in the neighborhood, the others slept
soundly.

The next day, the 21st of April, Cyrus Harding accompanied by Herbert,
went to look for the soil of ancient formation, on which he had already
discovered a specimen of ore. They found the vein above ground, near the
source of the creek, at the foot of one of the northeastern spurs. This ore, very
rich in iron, enclosed in its fusible veinstone, was perfectly suited to the mode of
reduction which the engineer intended to employ; that is, the Catalan method,
but simplified, as it is used in Corsica. In fact, the Catalan method, properly so
called, requires the construction of kilns and crucibles, in which the ore and the
coal, placed in alternate layers, are transformed and reduced, But Cyrus Harding
intended to economize these constructions, and wished simply to form, with the
ore and the coal, a cubic mass, to the center of which he would direct the wind
from his bellows. Doubtless, it was the proceeding employed by Tubalcain, and
the first metallurgists of the inhabited world. Now that which had succeeded
with the grandson of Adam, and which still yielded good results in countries
which in ore and fuel, could not but succeed with the settlers in Lincoln Island.

The coal, as well as the ore, was collected without trouble on the surface of
the ground. They first broke the ore into little pieces, and cleansed them with the
hand from the impurities which soiled their surface. Then coal and ore were
arranged in heaps and in successive layers, as the charcoal-burner does with the
wood which he wishes to carbonize. In this way, under the influence of the air
projected by the blowing-machine, the coal would be transformed into carbonic
acid, then into oxide of carbon, its use being to reduce the oxide of iron, that is to


say, to rid it of the oxygen.

Thus the engineer proceeded. The bellows of sealskin, furnished at its
extremity with a nozzle of clay, which had been previously fabricated in the
pottery kiln, was established near the heap of ore. Using the mechanism which
consisted of a frame, cords of fiber and counterpoise, he threw into the mass an
abundance of air, which by raising the temperature also concurred with the
chemical transformation to produce in time pure iron.

The operation was difficult. All the patience, all the ingenuity of the settlers
was needed; but at last it succeeded, and the result was a lump of iron, reduced
to a spongy state, which it was necessary to shingle and fagot, that is to say, to
forge so as to expel from it the liquefied veinstone. These amateur smiths had, of
course, no hammer; but they were in no worse a situation than the first
metallurgist, and therefore did what, no doubt, he had to do.

A handle was fixed to the first lump, and was used as a hammer to forge the
second on a granite anvil, and thus they obtained a coarse but useful metal. At
length, after many trials and much fatigue, on the 25th of April several bars of
iron were forged, and transformed into tools, crowbars, pincers, pickaxes,
spades, etc., which Pencroft and Neb declared to be real jewels. But the metal
was not yet in its most serviceable state, that is, of steel. Now steel is a
combination of iron and coal, which is extracted, either from the liquid ore, by
taking from it the excess of coal, or from the iron by adding to it the coal which
was wanting. The first, obtained by the decarburation of the metal, gives natural
or puddled steel; the second, produced by the carburation of the iron, gives steel
of cementation.

It was the last which Cyrus Harding intended to forge, as he possessed iron
in a pure state. He succeeded by heating the metal with powdered coal in a
crucible which had previously been manufactured from clay suitable for the
purpose.

He then worked this steel, which is malleable both when hot or cold, with the
hammer. Neb and Pencroft, cleverly directed, made hatchets, which, heated red-
hot, and plunged suddenly into cold water, acquired an excellent temper.

Other instruments, of course roughly fashioned, were also manufactured;
blades for planes, axes, hatchets, pieces of steel to be transformed into saws,
chisels; then iron for spades, pickaxes, hammers, nails, etc. At last, on the 5th of
May, the metallic period ended, the smiths returned to the Chimneys, and new
work would soon authorize them to take a fresh title.


Chapter 16


It was the 6th of May, a day which corresponds to the 6th of November in
the countries of the Northern Hemisphere. The sky had been obscured for some
days, and it was of importance to make preparations for the winter. However, the
temperature was not as yet much lower, and a centigrade thermometer,
transported to Lincoln Island, would still have marked an average of ten to
twelve degrees above zero. This was not surprising, since Lincoln Island,
probably situated between the thirty-fifth and fortieth parallel, would be subject,
in the Southern Hemisphere, to the same climate as Sicily or Greece in the
Northern Hemisphere. But as Greece and Sicily have severe cold, producing
snow and ice, so doubtless would Lincoln Island in the severest part of the
winter and it was advisable to provide against it.

In any case if cold did not yet threaten them, the rainy season would begin,
and on this lonely island, exposed to all the fury of the elements, in mid-ocean,
bad weather would be frequent, and probably terrible. The question of a more
comfortable dwelling than the Chimneys must therefore be seriously considered
and promptly resolved on.

Pencroft, naturally, had some predilection for the retreat which he had
discovered, but he well understood that another must be found. The Chimneys
had been already visited by the sea, under circumstances which are known, and
it would not do to be exposed again to a similar accident.

"Besides," added Cyrus Harding, who this day was talking of these things
with his companions, "we have some precautions to take."

"Why? The island is not inhabited," said the reporter.

"That is probable," replied the engineer, "although we have not yet explored
the interior; but if no human beings are found, I fear that dangerous animals may
abound. It is necessary to guard against a possible attack, so that we shall not be
obliged to watch every night, or to keep up a fire. And then, my friends, we must
foresee everything. We are here in a part of the Pacific often frequented by
Malay pirates--"

"What!" said Herbert, "at such a distance from land?"

"Yes, my boy," replied the engineer. "These pirates are bold sailors as well as
formidable enemies, and we must take measures accordingly."

"Well," replied Pencroft, "we will fortify ourselves against savages with two
legs as well as against savages with four. But, captain, will it not be best to
explore every part of the island before undertaking anything else?"


"That would be best," added Gideon Spilett.

"Who knows if we might not find on the opposite side one of the caverns
which we have searched for in vain here?"

"That is true," replied the engineer, "but you forget, my friends, that it will be
necessary to establish ourselves in the neighborhood of a watercourse, and that,
from the summit of Mount Franklin, we could not see towards the west, either
stream or river. Here, on the contrary, we are placed between the Mercy and
Lake Grant, an advantage which must not be neglected. And, besides, this side,
looking towards the east, is not exposed as the other is to the trade-winds, which
in this hemisphere blow from the northwest."

"Then, captain," replied the sailor, "let us build a house on the edge of the
lake. Neither bricks nor tools are wanting now. After having been brickmakers,
potters, smelters, and smiths, we shall surely know how to be masons!"

"Yes, my friend; but before coming to any decision we must consider the
matter thoroughly. A natural dwelling would spare us much work, and would be
a surer retreat, for it would be as well defended against enemies from the interior
as those from outside."

"That is true, Cyrus," replied the reporter, "but we have already examined all
that mass of granite, and there is not a hole, not a cranny!"

"No, not one!" added Pencroft. "Ah, if we were able to dig out a dwelling in
that cliff, at a good height, so as to be out of the reach of harm, that would be
capital! I can see that on the front which looks seaward, five or six rooms--"

"With windows to light them!" said Herbert, laughing.

"And a Staircase to climb up to them!" added Neb.

"You are laughing," cried the sailor, "and why? What is there impossible in
what I propose? Haven't we got pickaxes and spades? Won't Captain Harding be
able to make powder to blow up the mine? Isn't it true, captain, that you will
make powder the very day we want it?"

Cyrus Harding listened to the enthusiastic Pencroft developing his fanciful
projects. To attack this mass of granite, even by a mine, was Herculean work,
and it was really vexing that nature could not help them at their need. But the
engineer did not reply to the sailor except by proposing to examine the cliff more
attentively, from the mouth of the river to the angle which terminated it on the
north.

They went out, therefore, and the exploration was made with extreme care,
over an extent of nearly two miles. But in no place in the bare, straight cliff,
could any cavity be found. The nests of the rock pigeons which fluttered at its
summit were only, in reality, holes bored at the very top, and on the irregular
edge of the granite.


It was a provoking circumstance, and as to attacking this cliff, either with
pickaxe or with powder, so as to effect a sufficient excavation, it was not to be
thought of. It so happened that, on all this part of the shore, Pencroft had
discovered the only habitable shelter, that is to say, the Chimneys, which now
had to be abandoned.

The exploration ended, the colonists found themselves at the north angle of
the cliff, where it terminated in long slopes which died away on the shore. From
this place, to its extreme limit in the west, it only formed a sort of declivity, a
thick mass of stones, earth, and sand, bound together by plants, bushes, and grass
inclined at an angle of only forty-five degrees. Clumps of trees grew on these
slopes, which were also carpeted with thick grass. But the vegetation did not
extend far, and a long, sandy plain, which began at the foot of these slopes,
reached to the beach.

Cyrus Harding thought, not without reason, that the overplus of the lake must
overflow on this side. The excess of water furnished by the Red Creek must also
escape by some channel or other. Now the engineer had not yet found this
channel on any part of the shore already explored, that is to say, from the mouth
of the stream on the west of Prospect Heights.

The engineer now proposed to his companions to climb the slope, and to
return to the Chimneys by the heights, while exploring the northern and eastern
shores of the lake. The proposal was accepted, and in a few minutes Herbert and
Neb were on the upper plateau. Cyrus Harding, Gideon Spilett, and Pencroft
followed with more sedate steps.

The beautiful sheet of water glittered through the trees under the rays of the
sun. In this direction the country was charming. The eye feasted on the groups of
trees. Some old trunks, bent with age, showed black against the verdant grass
which covered the ground. Crowds of brilliant cockatoos screamed among the
branches, moving prisms, hopping from one bough to another.

The settlers instead of going directly to the north bank of the lake, made a
circuit round the edge of the plateau, so as to join the mouth of the creek on its
left bank. It was a detour of more than a mile and a half. Walking was easy, for
the trees widely spread, left a considerable space between them. The fertile zone
evidently stopped at this point, and vegetation would be less vigorous in the part
between the course of the Creek and the Mercy.

Cyrus Harding and his companions walked over this new ground with great
care. Bows, arrows, and sticks with sharp iron points were their only weapons.
However, no wild beast showed itself, and it was probable that these animals
frequented rather the thick forests in the south; but the settlers had the
disagreeable surprise of seeing Top stop before a snake of great size, measuring


from fourteen to fifteen feet in length. Neb killed it by a blow from his stick.
Cyrus Harding examined the reptile, and declared it not venomous, for it
belonged to that species of diamond serpents which the natives of New South
Wales rear. But it was possible that others existed whose bite was mortal such as
the deaf vipers with forked tails, which rise up under the feet, or those winged
snakes, furnished with two ears, which enable them to proceed with great
rapidity. Top, the first moment of surprise over, began a reptile chase with such
eagemess, that they feared for his safety. His master called him back directly.

The mouth of the Red Creek, at the place where it entered into the lake, was
soon reached. The explorers recognized on the opposite shore the point which
they had visited on their descent from Mount Franklin. Cyrus Harding
ascertained that the flow of water into it from the creek was considerable. Nature
must therefore have provided some place for the escape of the overplus. This
doubtless formed a fall, which, if it could be discovered, would be of great use.

The colonists, walking apart, but not straying far from each other, began to
skirt the edge of the lake, which was very steep. The water appeared to be full of
fish, and Pencroft resolved to make some fishing-rods, so as to try and catch
some.

The northeast point was first to be doubled. It might have been supposed that
the discharge of water was at this place, for the extremity of the lake was almost
on a level with the edge of the plateau. But no signs of this were discovered, and
the colonists continued to explore the bank, which, after a slight bend, descended
parallel to the shore.

On this side the banks were less woody, but clumps of trees, here and there,
added to the picturesqueness of the country. Lake Grant was viewed from thence
in all its extent, and no breath disturbed the surface of its waters. Top, in beating
the bushes, put up flocks of birds of different kinds, which Gideon Spilett and
Herbert saluted with arrows. One was hit by the lad, and fell into some marshy
grass. Top rushed forward, and brought a beautiful swimming bird, of a slate
color, short beak, very developed frontal plate, and wings edged with white. It
was a "coot," the size of a large partridge, belonging to the group of
macrodactyls which form the transition between the order of wading birds and
that of palmipeds. Sorry game, in truth, and its flavor is far from pleasant. But
Top was not so particular in these things as his masters, and it was agreed that
the coot should be for his supper.

The settlers were now following the eastern bank of the lake, and they would
not be long in reaching the part which they already knew. The engineer was
much surprised at not seeing any indication of the discharge of water. The
reporter and the sailor talked with him, and he could not conceal his


astonishment.

At this moment Top, who had been very quiet till then, gave signs of
agitation. The intelligent animal went backwards and forwards on the shore,
stopped suddenly, and looked at the water, one paw raised, as if he was pointing
at some invisible game; then he barked furiously, and was suddenly silent.

Neither Cyrus Harding nor his companions had at first paid any attention to
Top's behavior; but the dog's barking soon became so frequent that the engineer
noticed it.

"What is there, Top?" he asked.

The dog bounded towards his master, seeming to be very uneasy, and then
rushed again towards the bank. Then, all at once, he plunged into the lake.

"Here, Top!" cried Cyrus Harding, who did not like his dog to venture into
the treacherous water.

"What's happening down there?" asked Pencroft, examining the surface of
the lake.

"Top smells some amphibious creature," replied Herbert.

"An alligator, perhaps," said the reporter.

"I do not think so," replied Harding. "Alligators are only met with in regions
less elevated in latitude."

Meanwhile Top had returned at his master's call, and had regained the shore:
but he could not stay quiet; he plunged in among the tall grass, and guided by
instinct, he appeared to follow some invisible being which was slipping along
under the surface of the water. However the water was calm; not a ripple
disturbed its surface. Several times the settlers stopped on the bank, and
observed it attentively. Nothing appeared. There was some mystery there.

The engineer was puzzled.

"Let us pursue this exploration to the end," said he.

Half an hour after they had all arrived at the southeast angle of the lake, on
Prospect Heights. At this point the examination of the banks of the lake was
considered finished, and yet the engineer had not been able to discover how and
where the waters were discharged. "There is no doubt this overflow exists," he
repeated, "and since it is not visible it must go through the granite cliff at the
west!"

"But what importance do you attach to knowing that, my dear Cyrus?" asked
Gideon Spilett.

"Considerable importance," replied the engineer; "for if it flows through the
cliff there is probably some cavity, which it would be easy to render habitable
after turning away the water."

"But is it not possible, captain, that the water flows away at the bottom of the


lake," said Herbert, "and that it reaches the sea by some subterranean passage?"

"That might be," replied the engineer, "and should it be so we shall be
obliged to build our house ourselves, since nature has not done it for us."

The colonists were about to begin to traverse the plateau to return to the
Chimneys, when Top gave new signs of agitation. He barked with fury, and
before his master could restrain him, he had plunged a second time into the lake.

All ran towards the bank. The dog was already more than twenty feet off,
and Cyrus was calling him back, when an enormous head emerged from the
water, which did not appear to be deep in that place.

Herbert recognized directly the species of amphibian to which the tapering
head, with large eyes, and adorned with long silky mustaches, belonged.

"A lamantin!" he cried.

It was not a lamantin, but one of that species of the order of cetaceans, which
bear the name of the "dugong," for its nostrils were open at the upper part of its
snout. The enormous animal rushed on the dog, who tried to escape by returning
towards the shore. His master could do nothing to save him, and before Gideon
Spilett or Herbert thought of bending their bows, Top, seized by the dugong, had
disappeared beneath the water.

Neb, his iron-tipped spear in his hand, wished to go to Top's help, and attack
the dangerous animal in its own element.

"No, Neb," said the engineer, restraining his courageous servant.

Meanwhile, a struggle was going on beneath the water, an inexplicable
struggle, for in his situation Top could not possibly resist; and judging by the
bubbling of the surface it must be also a terrible struggle, and could not but
terminate in the death of the dog! But suddenly, in the middle of a foaming
circle, Top reappeared. Thrown in the air by some unknown power, he rose ten
feet above the surface of the lake, fell again into the midst of the agitated waters,
and then soon gained the shore, without any severe wounds, miraculously saved.

Cyrus Harding and his companions could not understand it. What was not
less inexplicable was that the struggle still appeared to be going on. Doubtless,
the dugong, attacked by some powerful animal, after having released the dog,
was fighting on its own account. But it did not last long. The water became red
with blood, and the body of the dugong, emerging from the sheet of scarlet
which spread around, soon stranded on a little beach at the south angle of the
lake. The colonists ran towards it. The dugong was dead. It was an enormous
animal, fifteen or sixteen feet long, and must have weighed from three to four
thousand pounds. At its neck was a wound, which appeared to have been
produced by a sharp blade.

What could the amphibious creature have been, who, by this terrible blow


had destroyed the formidable dugong? No one could tell, and much interested in
this incident, Harding and his companions returned to the Chimneys.


Chapter 17


The next day, the 7th of May, Harding and Gideon Spilett, leaving Neb to
prepare breakfast, climbed Prospect Heights, while Herbert and Pencroft
ascended by the river, to renew their store of wood.

The engineer and the reporter soon reached the little beach on which the
dugong had been stranded. Already flocks of birds had attacked the mass of
flesh, and had to be driven away with stones, for Cyrus wished to keep the fat for
the use of the colony. As to the animal's flesh it would furnish excellent food, for
in the islands of the Malay Archipelago and elsewhere, it is especially reserved
for the table of the native princes. But that was Neb's affair.

At this moment Cyrus Harding had other thoughts. He was much interested
in the incident of the day before. He wished to penetrate the mystery of that
submarine combat, and to ascertain what monster could have given the dugong
so strange a wound. He remained at the edge of the lake, looking, observing; but
nothing appeared under the tranquil waters, which sparkled in the first rays of
the rising sun.

At the beach, on which lay the body of the dugong, the water was tolerably
shallow, but from this point the bottom of the lake sloped gradually, and it was
probable that the depth was considerable in the center. The lake might be
considered as a large center basin, which was filled by the water from the Red
Creek.

"Well, Cyrus," said the reporter, "there seems to be nothing suspicious in this
water."

"No, my dear Spilett," replied the engineer, "and I really do not know how to
account for the incident of yesterday."

"I acknowledge," returned Spilett, "that the wound given this creature is, at
least, very strange, and I cannot explain either how Top was so vigorously cast
up out of the water. One could have thought that a powerful arm hurled him up,
and that the same arm with a dagger killed the dugong!"

"Yes," replied the engineer, who had become thoughtful; "there is something
there that I cannot understand. But do you better understand either, my dear
Spilett, in what way I was saved myself--how I was drawn from the waves, and
carried to the downs? No! Is it not true? Now, I feel sure that there is some
mystery there, which, doubtless, we shall discover some day. Let us observe, but
do not dwell on these singular incidents before our companions. Let us keep our
remarks to ourselves, and continue our work."


It will be remembered that the engineer had not as yet been able to discover
the place where the surplus water escaped, but he knew it must exist somewhere.
He was much surprised to see a strong current at this place. By throwing in some
bits of wood he found that it set towards the southern angle. He followed the
current, and arrived at the south point of the lake.

There was there a sort of depression in the water, as if it was suddenly lost in
some fissure in the ground.

Harding listened; placing his ear to the level of the lake, he very distinctly
heard the noise of a subterranean fall.

"There," said he, rising, "is the discharge of the water; there, doubtless, by a
passage in the granite cliff, it joins the sea, through cavities which we can use to
our profit. Well, I can find it!"

The engineer cut a long branch, stripped it of its leaves, and plunging it into
the angle between the two banks, he found that there was a large hole one foot
only beneath the surface of the water. This hole was the opening so long looked
for in vain, and the force of the current was such that the branch was torn from
the engineer's hands and disappeared.

"There is no doubt about it now," repeated Harding. "There is the outlet, and
I will lay it open to view!"

"How?" asked Gideon Spilett.

"By lowering the level of the water of the lake three feet." "And how will
you lower the level?"

"By opening another outlet larger than this."

"At what place, Cyrus?"

"At the part of the bank nearest the coast."

"But it is a mass of granite!" observed Spilett.

"Well," replied Cyrus Harding, "I will blow up the granite, and the water
escaping, will subside, so as to lay bare this opening--"

"And make a waterfall, by falling on to the beach," added the reporter.

"A fall that we shall make use of!" replied Cyrus. "Come, come!"

The engineer hurried away his companion, whose confidence in Harding was
such that he did not doubt the enterprise would succeed. And yet, how was this
granite wall to be opened without powder, and with imperfect instruments? Was
not this work upon which the engineer was so bent above their strength?

When Harding and the reporter entered the Chimneys, they found Herbert
and Pencroft unloading their raft of wood.

"The woodmen have just finished, captain." said the sailor, laughing, "and
when you want masons--"

"Masons,--no, but chemists," replied the engineer.


"Yes," added the reporter, "we are going to blow up the island--"

"Blow up the island?" cried Pencroft.

"Part of it, at least," replied Spilett.

"Listen to me, my friends," said the engineer. And he made known to them
the result of his observations.

According to him, a cavity, more or less considerable, must exist in the mass
of granite which supported Prospect Heights, and he intended to penetrate into it.
To do this, the opening through which the water rushed must first be cleared, and
the level lowered by making a larger outlet. Therefore an explosive substance
must be manufactured, which would make a deep trench in some other part of
the shore. This was what Harding was going to attempt with the minerals which
nature placed at his disposal.

It is useless to say with what enthusiasm all, especially Pencroft, received
this project. To employ great means, open the granite, create a cascade, that
suited the sailor. And he would just as soon be a chemist as a mason or
bootmaker, since the engineer wanted chemicals. He would be all that they liked,
"even a professor of dancing and deportment," said he to Neb, if that was ever
necessary.

Neb and Pencroft were first of all told to extract the grease from the dugong,
and to keep the flesh, which was destined for food. Such perfect confidence had
they in the engineer, that they set out directly, without even asking a question. A
few minutes after them, Cyrus Harding, Herbert, and Gideon Spilett, dragging
the hurdle, went towards the vein of coals, where those shistose pyrites abound
which are met with in the most recent transition soil, and of which Harding had
already found a specimen. All the day being employed in carrying a quantity of
these stones to the Chimneys, by evening they had several tons.

The next day, the 8th of May, the engineer began his manipulations. These
shistose pyrites being composed principally of coal, flint, alumina, and sulphuret
of iron--the latter in excess--it was necessary to separate the sulphuret of iron,
and transform it into sulphate as rapidly as possible. The sulphate obtained, the
sulphuric acid could then be extracted.

This was the object to be attained. Sulphuric acid is one of the agents the
most frequently employed, and the manufacturing importance of a nation can be
measured by the consumption which is made of it. This acid would later be of
great use to the settlers, in the manufacturing of candles, tanning skins, etc., but
this time the engineer reserved it for another use.

Cyrus Harding chose, behind the Chimneys, a site where the ground was
perfectly level. On this ground he placed a layer of branches and chopped wood,
on which were piled some pieces of shistose pyrites, buttressed one against the


other, the whole being covered with a thin layer of pyrites, previously reduced to
the size of a nut.

This done, they set fire to the wood, the heat was communicated to the shist,
which soon kindled, since it contains coal and sulphur. Then new layers of
bruised pyrites were arranged so as to form an immense heap, the exterior of
which was covered with earth and grass, several air-holes being left, as if it was
a stack of wood which was to be carbonized to make charcoal.

They then left the transformation to complete itself, and it would not take
less than ten or twelve days for the sulphuret of iron to be changed to sulphate of
iron and the alumina into sulphate of alumina, two equally soluble substances,
the others, flint, burnt coal, and cinders, not being so.

While this chemical work was going on, Cyrus Harding proceeded with other
operations, which were pursued with more than zeal,--it was eagerness.

Neb and Pencroft had taken away the fat from the dugong, and placed it in
large earthen pots. It was then necessary to separate the glycerine from the fat by
saponifying it. Now, to obtain this result, it had to be treated either with soda or
lime. In fact, one or other of these substances, after having attacked the fat,
would form a soap by separating the glycerine, and it was just this glycerine
which the engineer wished to obtain. There was no want of lime, only treatment
by lime would give calcareous soap, insoluble, and consequently useless, while
treatment by soda would furnish, on the contrary, a soluble soap, which could be
put to domestic use. Now, a practical man, like Cyrus Harding, would rather try
to obtain soda. Was this difficult? No; for marine plants abounded on the shore,
glass-wort, ficoides, and all those fucaceae which form wrack. A large quantity
of these plants was collected, first dried, then burnt in holes in the open air. The
combustion of these plants was kept up for several days, and the result was a
compact gray mass, which has been long known under the name of "natural
soda."

This obtained, the engineer treated the fat with soda, which gave both a
soluble soap and that neutral substance, glycerine.

But this was not all. Cyrus Harding still needed, in view of his future
preparation, another substance, nitrate of potash, which is better known under
the name of salt niter, or of saltpeter.

Cyrus Harding could have manufactured this substance by treating the
carbonate of potash, which would be easily extracted from the cinders of the
vegetables, by azotic acid. But this acid was wanting, and he would have been in
some difficulty, if nature had not happily furnished the saltpeter, without giving
them any other trouble than that of picking it up. Herbert found a vein of it at the
foot of Mount Franklin, and they had nothing to do but purify this salt.


These different works lasted a week. They were finished before the
transformation of the sulphuret into sulphate of iron had been accomplished.
During the following days the settlers had time to construct a furnace of bricks
of a particular arrangement, to serve for the distillation of the sulphate or iron
when it had been obtained. All this was finished about the 18th of May, nearly at
the time when the chemical transformation terminated. Gideon Spilett, Herbert,
Neb, and Pencroft, skillfully directed by the engineer, had become most clever
workmen. Before all masters, necessity is the one most listened to, and who
teaches the best.

When the heap of pyrites had been entirely reduced by fire, the result of the
operation, consisting of sulphate of iron, sulphate of alumina, flint, remains of
coal, and cinders was placed in a basinful of water. They stirred this mixture, let
it settle, then decanted it, and obtained a clear liquid containing in solution
sulphate of iron and sulphate of alumina, the other matters remaining solid, since
they are insoluble. Lastly, this liquid being partly evaporated, crystals of sulphate
of iron were deposited, and the not evaporated liquid, which contained the
sulphate of alumina, was thrown away.

Cyrus Harding had now at his disposal a large quantity of these sulphate of
iron crystals, from which the sulphuric acid had to be extracted. The making of
sulphuric acid is a very expensive manufacture. Considerable works are
necessary--a special set of tools, an apparatus of platina, leaden chambers,
unassailable by the acid, and in which the transformation is performed, etc. The
engineer had none of these at his disposal, but he knew that, in Bohemia
especially, sulphuric acid is manufactured by very simple means, which have
also the advantage of producing it to a superior degree of concentration. It is thus
that the acid known under the name of Nordhausen acid is made.

To obtain sulphuric acid, Cyrus Harding had only one operation to make, to
calcine the sulphate of iron crystals in a closed vase, so that the sulphuric acid
should distil in vapor, which vapor, by condensation, would produce the acid.

The crystals were placed in pots, and the heat from the furnace would distil
the sulphuric acid. The operation was successfully completed, and on the 20th of
May, twelve days after commencing it, the engineer was the possessor of the
agent which later he hoped to use in so many different ways.

Now, why did he wish for this agent? Simply to produce azotic acid; and that
was easy, since saltpeter, attacked by sulphuric acid, gives azotic, or nitric, acid
by distillation.

But, after all, how was he going to employ this azotic acid? His companions
were still ignorant of this, for he had not informed them of the result at which he
aimed.


However, the engineer had nearly accomplished his purpose, and by a last
operation he would procure the substance which had given so much trouble.

Taking some azotic acid, he mixed it with glycerine, which had been
previously concentrated by evaporation, subjected to the water-bath, and he
obtained, without even employing a refrigerant mixture, several pints of an oily
yellow mixture.

This last operation Cyrus Harding had made alone, in a retired place, at a
distance from the Chimneys, for he feared the danger of an explosion, and when
he showed a bottle of this liquid to his friends, he contented himself with
saying,--

"Here is nitro-glycerine!"

It was really this terrible production, of which the explosive power is perhaps
tenfold that of ordinary powder, and which has already caused so many
accidents. However, since a way has been found to transform it into dynamite,
that is to say, to mix with it some solid substance, clay or sugar, porous enough
to hold it, the dangerous liquid has been used with some security. But dynamite
was not yet known at the time when the settlers worked on Lincoln Island.

"And is it that liquid that is going to blow up our rocks?" said Pencroft
incredulously.

"Yes, my friend," replied the engineer, "and this nitro-glycerine will produce
so much the more effect, as the granite is extremely hard, and will oppose a
greater resistance to the explosion."

"And when shall we see this, captain?"

"To-morrow, aS soon as we have dug a hole for the mine, replied the
engineer."

The next day, the 21st of May, at daybreak, the miners went to the point
which formed the eastern shore of Lake Grant, and was only five hundred feet
from the coast. At this place, the plateau inclined downwards from the waters,
which were only restrained by their granite case. Therefore, if this case was
broken, the water would escape by the opening and form a stream, which,
flowing over the inclined surface of the plateau, would rush on to the beach.
Consequently, the level of the lake would be greatly lowered, and the opening
where the water escaped would be exposed, which was their final aim.

Under the engineer's directions, Pencroft, armed with a pickaxe, which he
handled skillfully and vigorously, attacked the granite. The hole was made on the
point of the shore, slanting, so that it should meet a much lower level than that of
the water of the lake. In this way the explosive force, by scattering the rock,
would open a large place for the water to rush out.

The work took some time, for the engineer, wishing to produce a great effect,


intended to devote not less than seven quarts of nitro-glycerine to the operation.
But Pencroft, relieved by Neb, did so well, that towards four o'clock in the
evening, the mine was finished.

Now the question of setting fire to the explosive substance was raised.
Generally, nitro-glycerine is ignited by caps of fulminate, which in bursting
cause the explosion. A shock is therefore needed to produce the explosion, for,
simply lighted, this substance would burn without exploding.

Cyrus Harding could certainly have fabricated a percussion cap. In default of
fulminate, he could easily obtain a substance similar to guncotton, since he had
azotic acid at his disposal. This substance, pressed in a cartridge, and introduced
among the nitro-glycerine, would burst by means of a fuse, and cause the
explosion.

But Cyrus Harding knew that nitro-glycerine would explode by a shock. He
resolved to employ this means, and try another way, if this did not succeed.

In fact, the blow of a hammer on a few drops of nitro-glycerine, spread out
on a hard surface, was enough to create an explosion. But the operator could not
be there to give the blow, without becoming a victim to the operation. Harding,
therefore, thought of suspending a mass of iron, weighing several pounds, by
means of a fiber, to an upright just above the mine. Another long fiber,
previously impregnated with sulphur, was attached to the middle of the first, by
one end, while the other lay on the ground several feet distant from the mine.
The second fiber being set on fire, it would burn till it reached the first. This
catching fire in its turn, would break, and the mass of iron would fall on the
nitro-glycerine. This apparatus being then arranged, the engineer, after having
sent his companions to a distance, filled the hole, so that the nitro-glycerine was
on a level with the opening; then he threw a few drops of it on the surface of the
rock, above which the mass of iron was already suspended.

This done, Harding lit the end of the sulphured fiber, and leaving the place,
he returned with his companions to the Chimneys.

The fiber was intended to burn five and twenty minutes, and, in fact, five and
twenty minutes afterwards a most tremendous explosion was heard. The island
appeared to tremble to its very foundation. Stones were projected in the air as if
by the eruption of a volcano. The shock produced by the displacing of the air
was such, that the rocks of the Chimneys shook. The settlers, although they were
more than two miles from the mine, were thrown on the ground.

They rose, climbed the plateau, and ran towards the place where the bank of
the lake must have been shattered by the explosion.

A cheer escaped them! A large rent was seen in the granite! A rapid stream of
water rushed foaming across the plateau and dashed down a height of three


hundred feet on to the beach!


Chapter 18


Cyrus Harding's project had succeeded, but, according to his usual habit he
showed no satisfaction; with closed lips and a fixed look, he remained
motionless. Herbert was in ecstasies, Neb bounded with joy, Pencroft nodded his
great head, murmuring these words,--

"Come, our engineer gets on capitally!"

The nitro-glycerine had indeed acted powerfully. The opening which it had
made was so large that the volume of water which escaped through this new
outlet was at least treble that which before passed through the old one. The result
was, that a short time after the operation the level of the lake would be lowered
two feet, or more.

The settlers went to the Chimneys to take some pickaxes, iron-tipped spears,
string made of fibers, flint and steel; they then returned to the plateau, Top
accompanying them.

On the way the sailor could not help saying to the engineer,--

"Don't you think, captain, that by means of that charming liquid you have
made, one could blow up the whole of our island?"

"Without any doubt, the island, continents, and the world itself," replied the
engineer. "It is only a question of quantity."

"Then could you not use this nitro-glycerine for loading firearms?" asked the
sailor.

"No, Pencroft; for it is too explosive a substance. But it would be easy to
make some guncotton, or even ordinary powder, as we have azotic acid,
saltpeter, sulphur, and coal. Unhappily, it is the guns which we have not got.

"Oh, captain," replied the sailor, "with a little determination--"

Pencroft had erased the word "impossible" from the dictionary of Lincoln
Island.

The settlers, having arrived at Prospect Heights, went immediately towards
that point of the lake near which was the old opening now uncovered. This outlet
had now become practicable, since the water no longer rushed through it, and it
would doubtless be easy to explore the interior.

In a few minutes the settlers had reached the lower point of the lake, and a
glance showed them that the object had been attained.

In fact, in the side of the lake, and now above the surface of the water,
appeared the long-looked-for opening. A narrow ridge, left bare by the retreat of
the water, allowed them to approach it. This orifice was nearly twenty feet in


width, but scarcely two in height. It was like the mouth of a drain at the edge of
the pavement, and therefore did not offer an easy passage to the settlers; but Neb
and Pencroft, taking their pickaxes, soon made it of a suitable height.

The engineer then approached, and found that the sides of the opening, in its
upper part at least, had not a slope of more than from thirty to thirty-five
degrees. It was therefore practicable, and, provided that the declivity did not
increase, it would be easy to descend even to the level of the sea. If then, as was
probable, some vast cavity existed in the interior of the granite, it might,
perhaps, be of great use.

"Well, captain, what are we stopping for?" asked the sailor, impatient to enter
the narrow passage. "You see Top has got before us!"

"Very well,” replied the engineer. "But we must see our way. Neb, go and cut
some resinous branches."

Neb and Herbert ran to the edge of the lake, shaded with pines and other
green trees, and soon returned with some branches, which they made into
torches. The torches were lighted with flint and steel, and Cyrus Harding
leading, the settlers ventured into the dark passage, which the overplus of the
lake had formerly filled.

Contrary to what might have been supposed, the diameter of the passage
increased as the explorers proceeded, so that they very soon were able to stand
upright. The granite, worn by the water for an infinite time, was very slippery,
and falls were to be dreaded. But the settlers were all attached to each other by a
cord, as is frequently done in ascending mountains. Happily some projections of
the granite, forming regular steps, made the descent less perilous. Drops, still
hanging from the rocks, shone here and there under the light of the torches, and
the explorers guessed that the sides were clothed with innumerable stalactites.
The engineer examined this black granite. There was not a stratum, not a break
in it. The mass was compact, and of an extremely close grain. The passage dated,
then, from the very origin of the island. It was not the water which little by little
had hollowed it. Pluto and not Neptune had bored it with his own hand, and on
the wall traces of an eruptive work could be distinguished, which all the washing
of the water had not been able totally to efface.

The settlers descended very slowly. They could not but feel a certain awe, in
this venturing into these unknown depths, for the first time visited by human
beings. They did not speak, but they thought; and the thought came to more than
one, that some polypus or other gigantic cephalopod might inhabit the interior
cavities, which were in communication with the sea. However, Top kept at the
head of the little band, and they could rely on the sagacity of the dog, who would
not fail to give the alarm if there was any need for it.


After having descended about a hundred feet, following a winding road,
Harding who was walking on before, stopped, and his companions came up with
him. The place where they had halted was wider, so as to form a cavern of
moderate dimensions. Drops of water fell from the vault, but that did not prove
that they oozed through the rock. They were simply the last traces left by the
torrent which had so long thundered through this cavity, and the air there was
pure though slightly damp, but producing no mephitic exhalation.

"Well, my dear Cyrus," said Gideon Spilett, "here is a very secure retreat,
well hid in the depths of the rock, but it is, however, uninhabitable."

"Why uninhabitable?" asked the sailor.

"Because it is too small and too dark."

"Couldn't we enlarge it, hollow it out, make openings to let in light and air?"
replied Pencroft, who now thought nothing impossible.

"Let us go on with our exploration," said Cyrus Harding. "Perhaps lower
down, nature will have spared us this labor."

"We have only gone a third of the way," observed Herbert.

"Nearly a third," replied Harding, "for we have descended a hundred feet
from the opening, and it is not impossible that a hundred feet farther down--"

"Where is Top?" asked Neb, interrupting his master.

They searched the cavern, but the dog was not there.

"Most likely he has gone on," said Pencroft.

"Let us join him," replied Harding.

The descent was continued. The engineer carefully observed all the
deviations of the passage, and notwithstanding so many detours, he could easily
have given an account of its general direction, which went towards the sea.

The settlers had gone some fifty feet farther, when their attention was
attracted by distant sounds which came up from the depths. They stopped and
listened. These sounds, carried through the passage as through an acoustic tube,
came clearly to the ear.

"That is Top barking!" cried Herbert.

"Yes," replied Pencroft, "and our brave dog is barking furiously!"

"We have our iron-tipped spears," said Cyrus Harding. "Keep on your guard,
and forward!"

"It is becoming more and more interesting," murmured Gideon Spilett in the
sailor's ear, who nodded. Harding and his companions rushed to the help of their
dog. Top's barking became more and more perceptible, and it seemed strangely
fierce. Was he engaged in a struggle with some animal whose retreat he had
disturbed? Without thinking of the danger to which they might be exposed, the
explorers were now impelled by an irresistible curiosity, and in a few minutes,


sixteen feet lower they rejoined Top.

There the passage ended in a vast and magnificent cavern.

Top was running backwards and forwards, barking furiously. Pencroft and
Neb, waving their torches, threw the light into every crevice; and at the same
time, Harding, Gideon Spilett, and Herbert, their spears raised, were ready for
any emergency which might arise. The enormous cavern was empty. The settlers
explored it in every direction. There was nothing there, not an animal, not a
human being; and yet Top continued to bark. Neither caresses nor threats could
make him be silent.

"There must be a place somewhere, by which the waters of the lake reached
the sea," said the engineer.

"Of course," replied Pencroft, "and we must take care not to tumble into a
hole."

"Go, Top, go!" cried Harding.

The dog, excited by his master's words, ran towards the extremity of the
cavern, and there redoubled his barking.

They followed him, and by the light of the torches, perceived the mouth of a
regular well in the granite. It was by this that the water escaped; and this time it
was not an oblique and practicable passage, but a perpendicular well, into which
it was impossible to venture.

The torches were held over the opening: nothing could be seen. Harding took
a lighted branch, and threw it into the abyss. The blazing resin, whose
illuminating power increased still more by the rapidity of its fall, lighted up the
interior of the well, but yet nothing appeared. The flame then went out with a
slight hiss, which showed that it had reached the water, that is to say, the level of
the sea.

The engineer, calculating the time employed in its fall, was able to calculate
the depth of the well, which was found to be about ninety feet.

The floor of the cavern must thus be situated ninety feet above the level of
the sea.

"Here is our dwelling," said Cyrus Harding.

"But it was occupied by some creature," replied Gideon Spilett, whose
curiosity was not yet satisfied.

"Well, the creature, amphibious or otherwise, has made off through this
opening," replied the engineer, "and has left the place for us."

"Never mind," added the sailor, "I should like very much to be Top just for a
quarter of an hour, for he doesn't bark for nothing!"

Cyrus Harding looked at his dog, and those of his companions who were
near him might have heard him murmur these words,--


"Yes, I believe that Top knows more than we do about a great many things."

However, the wishes of the settlers were for the most part satisfied. Chance,
aided by the marvelous sagacity of their leader, had done them great service.
They had now at their disposal a vast cavern, the size of which could not be
properly calculated by the feeble light of their torches, but it would certainly be
easy to divide it into rooms, by means of brick partitions, or to use it, if not as a
house, at least as a spacious apartment. The water which had left it could not
return. The place was free.

Two difficulties remained; firstly, the possibility of lighting this excavation
in the midst of solid rock; secondly, the necessity of rendering the means of
access more easy. It was useless to think of lighting it from above, because of the
enormous thickness of the granite which composed the ceiling; but perhaps the
outer wall next the sea might be pierced. Cyrus Harding, during the descent, had
roughly calculated its obliqueness, and consequently the length of the passage,
and was therefore led to believe that the outer wall could not be very thick. If
light was thus obtained, so would a means of access, for it would be as easy to
pierce a door as windows, and to establish an exterior ladder.

Harding made known his ideas to his companions.

"Then, captain, let us set to work!" replied Pencroft. "I have my pickaxe, and
I shall soon make my way through this wall. Where shall I strike?"

"Here," replied the engineer, showing the sturdy sailor a considerable recess
in the side, which would much diminish the thickness.

Pencroft attacked the granite, and for half an hour, by the light of the torches,
he made the splinters fly around him. Neb relieved him, then Spilett took Neb's
place.

This work had lasted two hours, and they began to fear that at this spot the
wall would not yield to the pickaxe, when at a last blow given by Gideon Spilett,
the instrument, passing through the rock, fell outside.

"Hurrah! hurrah!" cried Pencroft.

The wall only measured there three feet in thickness.

Harding applied his eye to the aperture, which overlooked the ground from a
height of eighty feet. Before him was extended the sea-coast, the islet, and
beyond the open sea.

Floods of light entered by this hole, inundating the splendid cavern and
producing a magic effect! On its left side it did not measure more than thirty feet
in height and breadth, but on the right it was enormous, and its vaulted roof rose
to a height of more than eighty feet.

In some places granite pillars, irregularly disposed, supported the vaulted
roof, as those in the nave of a cathedral, here forming lateral piers, there


elliptical arches, adorned with pointed moldings, losing themselves in dark bays,
amid the fantastic arches of which glimpses could be caught in the shade,
covered with a profusion of projections formed like so many pendants. This
cavern was a picturesque mixture of all the styles of Byzantine, Roman, or
Gothic architecture ever produced by the hand of man. And yet this was only the
work of nature. She alone had hollowed this fairy Aihambra in a mass of granite.

The settlers were overwhelmed with admiration. Where they had only
expected to find a narrow cavity, they had found a sort of marvelous palace, and
Neb had taken off his hat, as if he had been transported into a temple!

Cries of admiration issued from every mouth. Hurrahs resounded, and the
echo was repeated again and again till it died away in the dark naves.

"Ah, my friends!" exclaimed Cyrus Harding, "when we have lighted the
interior of this place, and have arranged our rooms and storehouses in the left
part, we shall still have this splendid cavern, which we will make our study and
our museum!"

"And we will call it?--" asked Herbert.

"Granite House," replied Harding; a name which his companions again
saluted with a cheer.

The torches were now almost consumed, and as they were obliged to return
by the passage to reach the summit of the plateau, it was decided to put off the
work necessary for the arrangement of their new dwelling till the next day.

Before departing, Cyrus Harding leaned once more over the dark well, which
descended perpendicularly to the level of the sea. He listened attentively. No
noise was heard, not even that of the water, which the undulations of the surge
must sometimes agitate in its depths. A flaming branch was again thrown in. The
sides of the well were lighted up for an instant, but as at the first time, nothing
suspicious was seen.

If some marine monster had been surprised unawares by the retreat of the
water, he would by this time have regained the sea by the subterranean passage,
before the new opening had been offered to him.

Meanwhile, the engineer was standing motionless, his eyes fixed on the gulf,
without uttering a word.

The sailor approached him, and touching his arm, "Captain!" said he.

"What do you want, my friend?" asked the engineer, as if he had returned
from the land of dreams.

"The torches will soon go out."

"Forward!" replied Cyrus Harding.

The little band left the cavern and began to ascend through the dark passage.
Top closed the rear, still growling every now and then. The ascent was painful


enough. The settlers rested a few minutes in the upper grotto, which made a sort
of landing-place halfway up the long granite staircase. Then they began to climb
again.

Soon fresher air was felt. The drops of water, dried by evaporation, no longer
sparkled on the walls. The flaring torches began to grow dim. The one which
Neb carried went out, and if they did not wish to find their way in the dark, they
must hasten.

This was done, and a little before four o'clock, at the moment when the
sailor's torch went out in its turn, Cyrus Harding and his companions passed out
of the passage.


Chapter 19


The next day, the 22nd of May, the arrangement of their new dwelling was
commenced. In fact, the settlers longed to exchange the insufficient shelter of the
Chimneys for this large and healthy retreat, in the midst of solid rock, and
sheltered from the water both of the sea and sky. Their former dwelling was not,
however, to be entirely abandoned, for the engineer intended to make a
manufactory of it for important works. Cyrus Harding's first care was to find out
the position of the front of Granite House from the outside. He went to the
beach, and as the pickaxe when it escaped from the hands of the reporter must
have fallen perpendicularly to the foot of the cliff, the finding it would be
sufficient to show the place where the hole had been pierced in the granite.

The pickaxe was easily found, and the hole could be seen in a perpendicular
line above the spot where it was stuck in the sand. Some rock pigeons were
already flying in and out of the narrow opening; they evidently thought that
Granite House had been discovered on purpose for them. It was the engineer's
intention to divide the right portion of the cavern into several rooms, preceded
by an entrance passage, and to light it by means of five windows and a door,
pierced in the front. Pencroft was much pleased with the five windows, but he
could not understand the use of the door, since the passage offered a natural
staircase, through which it would always be easy to enter Granite House.

"My friend," replied Harding, "if it is easy for us to reach our dwelling by
this passage, it will be equally easy for others besides us. I mean, on the contrary,
to block up that opening, to seal it hermetically, and, if it is necessary, to
completely hide the entrance by making a dam, and thus causing the water of the
lake to rise."

"And how shall we get in?" asked the sailor.

"By an outside ladder," replied Cyrus Harding, "a rope ladder, which, once
drawn up, will render access to our dwelling impossible."

"But why so many precautions?" asked Pencroft. "As yet we have seen no
dangerous animals. As to our island being inhabited by natives, I don't believe
it!"

"Are you quite sure of that, Pencroft?" asked the engineer, looking at the
sailor.

"Of course we shall not be quite sure, till we have explored it in every
direction," replied Pencroft.

"Yes," said Harding, "for we know only a small portion of it as yet. But at


any rate, if we have no enemies in the interior, they may come from the exterior,
for parts of the Pacific are very dangerous. We must be provided against every
contingency."

Cyrus Harding spoke wisely; and without making any further objection,
Pencroft prepared to execute his orders.

The front of Granite House was then to be lighted by five windows and a
door, besides a large bay window and some smaller oval ones, which would
admit plenty of light to enter into the marvelous nave which was to be their chief
room. This facade, situated at a height of eighty feet above the ground, was
exposed to the east, and the rising sun saluted it with its first rays. It was found
to be just at that part of the cliff which was between the projection at the mouth
of the Mercy and a perpendicular line traced above the heap of rocks which
formed the Chimneys. Thus the winds from the northeast would only strike it
obliquely, for it was protected by the projection. Besides, until the window-
frames were made, the engineer meant to close the openings with thick shutters,
which would prevent either wind or rain from entering, and which could be
concealed in need.

The first work was to make the openings. This would have taken too long
with the pickaxe alone, and it is known that Harding was an ingenious man. He
had still a quantity of nitro-glycerine at his disposal, and he employed it usefully.
By means of this explosive substance the rock was broken open at the very
places chosen by the engineer. Then, with the pickaxe and spade, the windows
and doors were properly shaped, the jagged edges were smoothed off, and a few
days alter the beginning of the work, Granite House was abundantly lighted by
the rising sun, whose rays penetrated into its most secret recesses. Following the
plan proposed by Cyrus Harding, the space was to be divided into five
compartments looking out on the sea; to the right, an entry with a door, which
would meet the ladder; then a kitchen, thirty feet long; a dining-room, measuring
forty feet; a sleeping-room, of equal size; and lastly, a "Visitor's room,"
petitioned for by Pencroft, and which was next to the great hall. These rooms, or
rather this suite of rooms, would not occupy all the depth of the cave. There
would be also a corridor and a storehouse, in which their tools, provisions, and
stores would be kept. All the productions of the island, the flora as well as the
fauna, were to be there in the best possible state of preservation, and completely
sheltered from the damp. There was no want of space, so that each object could
be methodically arranged. Besides, the colonists had still at their disposal the
little grotto above the great cavern, which was like the garret of the new
dwelling.

This plan settled, it had only to be put into execution. The miners became


brickmakers again, then the bricks were brought to the foot of Granite House.
Till then, Harding and his companions had only entered the cavern by the long
passage. This mode of communication obliged them first to climb Prospect
Heights, making a detour by the river's bank, and then to descend two hundred
feet through the passage, having to climb as far when they wished to return to
the plateau. This was a great loss of time, and was also very fatiguing. Cyrus
Harding, therefore, resolved to proceed without any further delay to the
fabrication of a strong rope ladder, which, once raised, would render Granite
House completely inaccessible.

This ladder was manufactured with extreme care, and its uprights, formed of
the twisted fibers of a species of cane, had the strength of a thick cable. As to the
rounds, they were made of a sort of red cedar, with light, strong branches; and
this apparatus was wrought by the masterly hand of Pencroft.

Other ropes were made with vegetable fibers, and a sort of crane with a
tackle was fixed at the door. In this way bricks could easily be raised into
Granite House. The transport of the materials being thus simplified, the
arrangement of the interior could begin immediately. There was no want of lime,
and some thousands of bricks were there ready to be used. The framework of the
partitions was soon raised, very roughly at first, and in a short time, the cave was
divided into rooms and storehouses, according to the plan agreed upon.

These different works progressed rapidly under the direction of the engineer,
who himself handled the hammer and the trowel. No labor came amiss to Cyrus
Harding, who thus set an example to his intelligent and zealous companions.
They worked with confidence, even gaily, Pencroft always having some joke to
crack, sometimes carpenter, sometimes rope-maker, sometimes mason, while he
communicated his good humor to all the members of their little world. His faith
in the engineer was complete; nothing could disturb it. He believed him capable
of undertaking anything and succeeding in everything. The question of boots and
clothes--assuredly a serious question,--that of light during the winter months,
utilizing the fertile parts of the island, transforming the wild flora into cultivated
flora, it all appeared easy to him; Cyrus Harding helping, everything would be
done in time. He dreamed of canals facilitating the transport of the riches of the
ground; workings of quarries and mines; machines for every industrial
manufacture; railroads; yes, railroads! of which a network would certainly one
day cover Lincoln Island.

The engineer let Pencroft talk. He did not put down the aspirations of this
brave heart. He knew how communicable confidence is; he even smiled to hear
him speak, and said nothing of the uneasiness for the future which he felt. In
fact, in that part of the Pacific, out of the course of vessels, it was to be feared


that no help would ever come to them. It was on themselves, on themselves
alone, that the settlers must depend, for the distance of Lincoln Island from all
other land was such, that to hazard themselves in a boat, of a necessarily inferior
construction, would be a serious and perilous thing.

"But," as the sailor said, "they quite took the wind out of the sails of the
Robinsons, for whom everything was done by a miracle."

In fact, they were energetic; an energetic man will succeed where an indolent
one would vegetate and inevitably perish.

Herbert distinguished himself in these works. He was intelligent and active;
understanding quickly, he performed well; and Cyrus Harding became more and
more attached to the boy. Herbert had a lively and reverent love for the engineer.
Pencroft saw the close sympathy which existed between the two, but he was not
in the least jealous. Neb was Neb: he was what he would be always, courage,
zeal, devotion, self-denial personified. He had the same faith in his master that
Pencroft had, but he showed it less vehemently. When the sailor was
enthusiastic, Neb always looked as if he would say, "Nothing could be more
natural." Pencroft and he were great friends.

As to Gideon Spilett, he took part in the common work, and was not less
skilful in it than his companions, which always rather astonished the sailor. A
"journalist," clever, not only in understanding, but in performing everything.

The ladder was finally fixed on the 28th of May. There were not less than a
hundred rounds in this perpendicular height of eighty feet. Harding had been
able, fortunately, to divide it in two parts, profiting by an overhanging of the cliff
which made a projection forty feet above the ground. This projection, carefully
leveled by the pickaxe, made a sort of platform, to which they fixed the first
ladder, of which the oscillation was thus diminished one-half, and a rope
permitted it to be raised to the level of Granite House. As to the second ladder, it
was secured both at its lower part, which rested on the projection, and at its
upper end, which was fastened to the door. In short the ascent had been made
much easier. Besides, Cyrus Harding hoped later to establish an hydraulic
apparatus, which would avoid all fatigue and loss of time, for the inhabitants of
Granite House.

The settlers soon became habituated to the use of this ladder. They were light
and active, and Pencroft, as a sailor, accustomed to run up the masts and shrouds,
was able to give them lessons. But it was also necessary to give them to Top.
The poor dog, with his four paws, was not formed for this sort of exercise. But
Pencroft was such a zealous master, that Top ended by properly performing his
ascents, and soon mounted the ladder as readily as his brethren in the circus. It
need not be said that the sailor was proud of his pupil. However, more than once


Pencroft hoisted him on his back, which Top never complained of.

It must be mentioned here, that during these works, which were actively
conducted, for the bad season was approaching, the alimentary question was not
neglected. Every day, the reporter and Herbert, who had been voted purveyors to
the colony, devoted some hours to the chase. As yet, they only hunted in Jacamar
Wood, on the left of the river, because, for want of a bridge or boat, the Mercy
had not yet been crossed. All the immense woods, to which the name of the
Forests of the Far West had been given, were not explored. They reserved this
important excursion for the first fine days of the next spring. But Jacamar Wood
was full of game; kangaroos and boars abounded, and the hunters iron-tipped
spears and bows and arrows did wonders. Besides, Herbert discovered towards
the southwest point of the lagoon a natural warren, a slightly damp meadow,
covered with willows and aromatic herbs which scented the air, such as thyme,
basil, savory, all the sweet-scented species of the labiated plants, which the
rabbits appeared to be particularly fond of.

On the reporter observing that since the table was spread for the rabbits, it
was strange that the rabbits themselves should be wanting, the two sportsmen
carefully explored the warren. At any rate, it produced an abundance of useful
plants, and a naturalist would have had a good opportunity of studying many
specimens of the vegetable kingdom. Herbert gathered several shoots of the
basil, rosemary, balm, betony, etc., which possess different medicinal properties,
some pectoral, astringent, febrifuge, others anti-spasmodic, or anti-rheumatic.
When, afterwards, Pencroft asked the use of this collection of herbs,--

"For medicine," replied the lad, "to treat us when we are ill."

"Why should we be ill, since there are no doctors in the island?" asked
Pencroft quite seriously.

There was no reply to be made to that, but the lad went on with his collection
all the same, and it was well received at Granite House. Besides these medicinal
herbs, he added a plant known in North America as "Oswego tea," which made
an excellent beverage.

At last, by searching thoroughly, the hunters arrived at the real site of the
warren. There the ground was perforated like a sieve.

"Here are the burrows!" cried Herbert.

"Yes," replied the reporter, "so I see."

"But are they inhabited?"

"That is the question."

This was soon answered. Almost immediately, hundreds of little animals,
similar to rabbits, fled in every direction, with such rapidity that even Top could
not overtake them. Hunters and dog ran in vain; these rodents escaped them


easily. But the reporter resolved not to leave the place, until he had captured at
least half-a-dozen of the quadrupeds. He wished to stock their larder first, and
domesticate those which they might take later. It would not have been difficult to
do this, with a few snares stretched at the openings of the burrows. But at this
moment they had neither snares, nor anything to make them of. They must,
therefore, be satisfied with visiting each hole, and rummaging in it with a stick,
hoping by dint of patience to do what could not be done in any other way.

At last, after half an hour, four rodents were taken in their holes. They were
similar to their European brethren, and are commonly known by the name of
American rabbits.

This produce of the chase was brought back to Granite House, and figured at
the evening repast. The tenants of the warren were not at all to be despised, for
they were delicious. It was a valuable resource of the colony, and it appeared to
be inexhaustible.

On the 31st of May the partitions were finished. The rooms had now only to
be furnished, and this would be work for the long winter days. A chimney was
established in the first room, which served as a kitchen. The pipe destined to
conduct the smoke outside gave some trouble to these amateur bricklayers. It
appeared simplest to Harding to make it of brick clay; as creating an outlet for it
to the upper plateau was not to be thought of, a hole was pierced in the granite
above the window of the kitchen, and the pipe met it like that of an iron stove.
Perhaps the winds which blew directly against the facade would make the
chimney smoke, but these winds were rare, and besides, Master Neb, the cook,
was not so very particular about that.

When these interior arrangements were finished, the engineer occupied
himself in blocking up the outlet by the lake, so as to prevent any access by that
way. Masses of rock were rolled to the entrance and strongly cemented together.
Cyrus Harding did not yet realize his plan of drowning this opening under the
waters of the lake, by restoring them to their former level by means of a dam. He
contented himself with hiding the obstruction with grass and shrubs, which were
planted in the interstices of the rocks, and which next spring would sprout
thickly. However, he used the waterfall so as to lead a small stream of fresh
water to the new dwelling. A little trench, made below their level, produced this
result; and this derivation from a pure and inexhaustible source yielded twenty-
five or thirty gallons a day. There would never be any want of water at Granite
House. At last all was finished, and it was time, for the bad season was near.
Thick shutters closed the windows of the facade, until the engineer had time to
make glass.

Gideon Spilett had very artistically arranged on the rocky projections around


the windows plants of different kinds, as well as long streaming grass, so that the
openings were picturesquely framed in green, which had a pleasing effect.

The inhabitants of this solid, healthy, and secure dwelling, could not but be
charmed with their work. The view from the windows extended over a boundless
horizon, which was closed by the two Mandible Capes on the north, and Claw
Cape on the south. All Union Bay was spread before them. Yes, our brave
settlers had reason to be satisfied, and Pencroft was lavish in his praise of what
he humorously called, "his apartments on the fifth floor above the ground!"


Chapter 20


The winter season set in with the month of June, which corresponds with the
month of December in the Northern Hemisphere. It began with showers and
squalls, which succeeded each other without intermission. The tenants of Granite
House could appreciate the advantages of a dwelling which sheltered them from
the inclement weather. The Chimneys would have been quite insufficient to
protect them against the rigor of winter, and it was to be feared that the high
tides would make another irruption. Cyrus Harding had taken precautions
against this contingency, so as to preserve as much as possible the forge and
furnace which were established there.

During the whole of the month of June the time was employed in different
occupations, which excluded neither hunting nor fishing, the larder being,
therefore, abundantly supplied. Pencroft, so soon as he had leisure, proposed to
set some traps, from which he expected great results. He soon made some snares
with creepers, by the aid of which the warren henceforth every day furnished its
quota of rodents. Neb employed nearly all his time in salting or smoking meat,
which insured their always having plenty of provisions. The question of clothes
was now seriously discussed, the settlers having no other garments than those
they wore when the balloon threw them on the island. These clothes were warm
and good; they had taken great care of them as well as of their linen, and they
were perfectly whole, but they would soon need to be replaced. Moreover, if the
winter was severe, the settlers would suffer greatly from cold.

On this subject the ingenuity of Harding was at fault. They must provide for
their most pressing wants, settle their dwelling, and lay in a store of food; thus
the cold might come upon them before the question of clothes had been settled.
They must therefore make up their minds to pass this first winter without
additional clothing. When the fine season came round again, they would
regularly hunt those musmons which had been seen on the expedition to Mount
Franklin, and the wool once collected, the engineer would know how to make it
into strong warm stuff.... How? He would consider.

"Well, we are free to roast ourselves at Granite House!" said Pencroft. "There
are heaps of fuel, and no reason for sparing it."

"Besides," added Gideon Spilett, "Lincoln Island is not situated under a very
high latitude, and probably the winters here are not severe. Did you not say,
Cyrus, that this thirty-fifth parallel corresponded to that of Spain in the other
hemisphere?"


"Doubtless," replied the engineer, "but some winters in Spain are very cold!
No want of snow and ice; and perhaps Lincoln Island is just as rigourously tried.
However, it is an island, and as such, I hope that the temperature will be more
moderate."

"Why, captain?” asked Herbert.

"Because the sea, my boy, may be considered as an immense reservoir, in
which is stored the heat of the summer. When winter comes, it restores this heat,
which insures for the regions near the ocean a medium temperature, less high in
summer, but less low in winter."

"We shall prove that," replied Pencroft. "But I don't want to bother myself
about whether it will be cold or not. One thing is certain, that is that the days are
already short, and the evenings long. Suppose we talk about the question of
light."

"Nothing is easier," replied Harding.

"To talk about?" asked the sailor.

"To settle."

"And when shall we begin?"

"To-morrow, by having a seal hunt."

"To make candles?"

"Yes."

Such was the engineer's project; and it was quite feasible, since he had lime
and sulphuric acid, while the amphibians of the islet would furnish the fat
necessary for the manufacture.

They were now at the 4th of June. It was Whit Sunday and they agreed to
observe this feast. All work was suspended, and prayers were offered to Heaven.
But these prayers were now thanksgivings. The settlers in Lincoln Island were
no longer the miserable castaways thrown on the islet. They asked for nothing
more--they gave thanks. The next day, the 5th of June, in rather uncertain
weather, they set out for the islet. They had to profit by the low tide to cross the
Channel, and it was agreed that they would construct, for this purpose, as well as
they could, a boat which would render communication so much easier, and
would also permit them to ascend the Mercy, at the time of their grand
exploration of the southwest of the island, which was put off till the first fine
days.

The seals were numerous, and the hunters, armed with their iron-tipped
spears, easily killed half-a-dozen. Neb and Pencroft skinned them, and only
brought back to Granite House their fat and skin, this skin being intended for the
manufacture of boots.

The result of the hunt was this: nearly three hundred pounds of fat, all to be


employed in the fabrication of candles.

The operation was extremely simple, and if it did not yield absolutely perfect
results, they were at least very useful. Cyrus Harding would only have had at his
disposal sulphuric acid, but by heating this acid with the neutral fatty bodies he
could separate the glycerine; then from this new combination, he easily
separated the olein, the margarin, and the stearin, by employing boiling water.
But to simplify the operation, he preferred to saponify the fat by means of lime.
By this he obtained a calcareous soap, easy to decompose by sulphuric acid,
which precipitated the lime into the state of sulphate, and liberated the fatty
acids.

From these three acids-oleic, margaric, and stearic-the first, being liquid, was
driven out by a sufficient pressure. As to the two others, they formed the very
substance of which the candles were to be molded.

This operation did not last more than four and twenty hours. The wicks, after
several trials, were made of vegetable fibers, and dipped in the liquefied
substance, they formed regular stearic candles, molded by the hand, which only
wanted whiteness and polish. They would not doubtless have the advantages of
the wicks which are impregnated with boracic acid, and which vitrify as they
bum and are entirely consumed, but Cyrus Harding having manufactured a
beautiful pair of snuffers, these candles would be greatly appreciated during the
long evenings in Granite House.

During this month there was no want of work in the interior of their new
dwelling. The joiners had plenty to do. They improved their tools, which were
very rough, and added others also.

Scissors were made among other things, and the settlers were at last able to
cut their hair, and also to shave, or at least trim their beards. Herbert had none,
Neb but little, but their companions were bristling in a way which justified the
making of the said scissors.

The manufacture of a hand-saw cost infinite trouble, but at last an instrument
was obtained which, when vigorously handled, could divide the ligneous fibers
of the wood. They then made tables, seats, cupboards, to furnish the principal
rooms, and bedsteads, of which all the bedding consisted of grass mattresses.
The kitchen, with its shelves, on which rested the cooking utensils, its brick
stove, looked very well, and Neb worked away there as earnestly as if he was in
a chemist's laboratory.

But the joiners had soon to be replaced by carpenters. In fact, the waterfall
created by the explosion rendered the construction of two bridges necessary, one
on Prospect Heights, the other on the shore. Now the plateau and the shore were
transversely divided by a watercourse, which had to be crossed to reach the


northern part of the island. To avoid it the colonists had been obliged to make a
considerable detour, by climbing up to the source of the Red Creek. The simplest
thing was to establish on the plateau, and on the shore, two bridges from twenty
to five and twenty feet in length. All the carpenter's work that was needed was to
clear some trees of their branches: this was a business of some days. Directly the
bridges were established, Neb and Pencroft profited by them to go to the
oysterbed which had been discovered near the downs. They dragged with them a
sort of rough cart, which replaced the former inconvenient hurdle, and brought
back some thousands of oysters, which soon increased among the rocks and
formed a bed at the mouth of the Mercy. These molluscs were of excellent
quality, and the colonists consumed some daily.

It has been seen that Lincoln Island, although its inhabitants had as yet only
explored a small portion of it, already contributed to almost all their wants. It
was probable that if they hunted into its most secret recesses, in all the wooded
part between the Mercy and Reptile Point, they would find new treasures.

The settlers in Lincoln Island had still one privation. There was no want of
meat, nor of vegetable products; those ligneous roots which they had found,
when subjected to fermentation, gave them an acid drink, which was preferable
to cold water; they also made sugar, without canes or beet-roots, by collecting
the liquor which distils from the "acer saceharinum," a son of maple-tree, which
flourishes in all the temperate zones, and of which the island possessed a great
number; they made a very agreeable tea by employing the herbs brought from
the warren; lastly, they had an abundance of salt, the only mineral which is used
in food... but bread was wanting.

Perhaps in time the settlers could replace this want by some equivalent, it
was possible that they might find the sago or the breadfruit tree among the
forests of the south, but they had not as yet met with these precious trees.
However, Providence came directly to their aid, in an infinitesimal proportion it
is true, but Cyrus Harding, with all his intelligence, all his ingenuity, would
never have been able to produce that which, by the greatest chance, Herbert one
day found in the lining of his waistcoat, which he was occupied in setting to
rights.

On this day, as it was raining in torrents, the settlers were assembled in the
great hall in Granite House, when the lad cried out all at once,--

"Look here, captain--A grain of corn!"

And he showed his companions a grain--a single grain--which from a hole in
his pocket had got into the lining of his waistcoat.

The presence of this grain was explained by the fact that Herbert, when at
Richmond, used to feed some pigeons, of which Pencroft had made him a


present.

"A grain of corn?" said the engineer quickly.

"Yes, captain; but one, only one!"

"Well, my boy," said Pencroft, laughing, "we're getting on capitally, upon my
word! What shall we make with one grain of corn?"

"We will make bread of it," replied Cyrus Harding.

"Bread, cakes, tarts!" replied the sailor. "Come, the bread that this grain of
com will make won't choke us very soon!"

Herbert, not attaching much importance to his discovery, was going to throw
away the grain in question; but Harding took it, examined it, found that it was in
good condition, and looking the sailor full in the face--"Pencroft," he asked
quietly, "do you know how many ears one grain of corn can produce?"

"One, I suppose!" replied the sailor, surprised at the question.

"Ten, Pencroft! And do you know how many grains one ear bears?"

"No, upon my word."

"About eighty!" said Cyrus Harding. "Then, if we plant this grain, at the first
crop we shall reap eight hundred grains which at the second will produce six
hundred and forty thousand; at the third, five hundred and twelve millions; at the
fourth, more than four hundred thousands of millions! There is the proportion."

Harding's companions listened without answering. These numbers astonished
them. They were exact, however.

"Yes, my friends," continued the engineer, "such are the arithmetical
progressions of prolific nature; and yet what is this multiplication of the grain of
com, of which the ear only bears eight hundred grains, compared to the poppy-
plant, which bears thirty-two thousand seeds; to the tobacco-plant, which
produces three hundred and sixty thousand? In a few years, without the
numerous causes of destruction, which arrests their fecundity, these plants would
overrun the earth."

But the engineer had not finished his lecture.

"And now, Pencroft," he continued, "do you know how many bushels four
hundred thousand millions of grains would make?"

"No," replied the sailor; "but what I do know is, that I am nothing better than
a fool!"

"Well, they would make more than three millions, at a hundred and thirty
thousand a bushel, Pencroft."

"Three millions!" cried Pencroft.

"Three millions."

"In four years?"

"In four years," replied Cyrus Harding, "and even in two years, if, as I hope,


in this latitude we can obtain two crops a year."

At that, according to his usual custom, Pencroft could not reply otherwise
than by a tremendous hurrah.

"So, Herbert," added the engineer, "you have made a discovery of great
importance to us. Everything, my friends, everything can serve us in the
condition in which we are. Do not forget that, I beg of you."

"No, captain, no, we shan't forget it," replied Pencroft; "and if ever I find one
of those tobacco-seeds, which multiply by three hundred and sixty thousand, I
assure you I won't throw it away! And now, what must we do?"

"We must plant this grain," replied Herbert.

"Yes," added Gideon Spilett, "and with every possible care, for it bears in
itself our future harvests."

"Provided it grows!" cried the sailor.

"It will grow," replied Cyrus Harding.

This was the 20th of June. The time was then propitious for sowing this
single precious grain of corn. It was first proposed to plant it in a pot, but upon
reflection it was decided to leave it to nature, and confide it to the earth. This
was done that very day, and it is needless to add, that every precaution was taken
that the experiment might succeed.

The weather having cleared, the settlers climbed the height above Granite
House. There, on the plateau, they chose a spot, well sheltered from the wind,
and exposed to all the heat of the midday sun. The place was cleared, carefully
weeded, and searched for insects and worms; then a bed of good earth, improved
with a little lime, was made; it was surrounded by a railing; and the grain was
buried in the damp earth.

Did it not seem as if the settlers were laying the first stone of some edifice? It
recalled to Pencroft the day on which he lighted his only match, and all the
anxiety of the operation. But this time the thing was more serious. In fact, the
castaways would have been always able to procure fire, in some mode or other,
but no human power could supply another grain of corn, if unfortunately this
should be lost!


Chapter 21


From this time Pencroft did not let a single day pass without going to visit
what he gravely called his "corn-field." And woe to the insects which dared to
venture there! No mercy was shown them.

Towards the end of the month of June, after incessant rain, the weather
became decidedly colder, and on the 29th a Fahrenheit thermometer would
certainly have announced only twenty degrees above zero, that is considerably
below the freezing-point. The next day, the 30th of June, the day which
corresponds to the 31st of December in the northern year, was a Friday. Neb
remarked that the year finished on a bad day, but Pencroft replied that naturally
the next would begin on a good one, which was better.

At any rate it commenced by very severe cold. Ice accumulated at the mouth
of the Mercy, and it was not long before the whole expanse of the lake was
frozen.

The settlers had frequently been obliged to renew their store of wood.
Pencroft also had wisely not waited till the river was frozen, but had brought
enormous rafts of wood to their destination. The current was an indefatigable
moving power, and it was employed in conveying the floating wood to the
moment when the frost enchained it. To the fuel which was so abundantly
supplied by the forest, they added several cartloads of coal, which had to be
brought from the foot of the spurs of Mount Franklin. The powerful heat of the
coal was greatly appreciated in the low temperature, which on the 4th of July fell
to eight degrees of Fahrenheit, that is, thirteen degrees below zero. A second
fireplace had been established in the dining-room, where they all worked
together at their different avocations. During this period of cold, Cyrus Harding
had great cause to congratulate himself on having brought to Granite House the
little stream of water from Lake Grant. Taken below the frozen surface, and
conducted through the passage, it preserved its fluidity, and arrived at an interior
reservoir which had been hollowed out at the back part of the storeroom, while
the overflow ran through the well to the sea.

About this time, the weather being extremely dry, the colonists, clothed as
warmly as possible, resolved to devote a day to the exploration of that part of the
island between the Mercy and Claw Cape. It was a wide extent of marshy land,
and they would probably find good sport, for water-birds ought to swarm there.

They reckoned that it would be about eight or nine miles to go there, and as
much to return, so that the whole of the day would be occupied. As an unknown


part of the island was about to be explored, the whole colony took part in the
expedition. Accordingly, on the 5th of July, at six o'clock in the morning, when
day had scarcely broken, Cyrus Harding, Gideon Spilett, Herbert, Neb, and
Pencroft, armed with spears, snares, bows and arrows, and provided with
provisions, left Granite House, preceded by Top, who bounded before them.

Their shortest way was to cross the Mercy on the ice, which then covered it.

"But," as the engineer justly observed, "that could not take the place of a
regular bridge!" So, the construction of a regular bridge was noted in the list of
future works.

It was the first time that the settlers had set foot on the right bank of the
Mercy, and ventured into the midst of those gigantic and superb coniferae now
sprinkled over with snow.

But they had not gone half a mile when from a thicket a whole family of
quadrupeds, who had made a home there, disturbed by Top, rushed forth into the
open country.

"Ah! I should say those are foxes!" cried Herbert, when he saw the troop
rapidly decamping.

They were foxes, but of a very large size, who uttered a sort of barking, at
which Top seemed to be very much astonished, for he stopped short in the chase,
and gave the swift animals time to disappear.

The dog had reason to be surprised, as he did not know Natural History. But,
by their barking, these foxes, with reddish-gray hair, black tails terminating in a
white tuft, had betrayed their origin. So Herbert was able, without hesitating, to
give them their real name of "Arctic foxes." They are frequently met with in
Chile, in the Falkland Islands, and in all parts of America traversed by the
thirtieth and fortieth parallels. Herbert much regretted that Top had not been able
to catch one of these carnivora.

"Are they good to eat?" asked Pencroft, who only regarded the
representatives of the fauna in the island from one special point of view.

"No," replied Herbert; "but zoologists have not yet found out if the eye of
these foxes is diurnal or nocturnal, or whether it is correct to class them in the
genus dog, properly so called."

Harding could not help smiling on hearing the lad's reflection, which showed
a thoughtful mind. As to the sailor, from the moment when he found that the
foxes were not classed in the genus eatable, they were nothing to him. However,
when a poultry-yard was established at Granite House, he observed that it would
be best to take some precautions against a probable visit from these four-legged
plunderers, and no one disputed this.

After having turned the point, the settlers saw a long beach washed by the


open sea. It was then eight o'clock in the morning. The sky was very clear, as it
often is after prolonged cold; but warmed by their walk, neither Harding nor his
companions felt the sharpness of the atmosphere too severely. Besides there was
no wind, which made it much more bearable. A brilliant sun, but without any
calorific action, was just issuing from the ocean. The sea was as tranquil and
blue as that of a Mediterranean gulf, when the sky is clear. Claw Cape, bent in
the form of a yataghan, tapered away nearly four miles to the southeast. To the
left the edge of the marsh was abruptly ended by a little point. Certainly, in this
part of Union Bay, which nothing sheltered from the open sea, not even a
sandbank, ships beaten by the east winds would have found no shelter. They
perceived by the tranquillity of the sea, in which no shallows troubled the
waters, by its uniform color, which was stained by no yellow shades, by the
absence of even a reef, that the coast was steep and that the ocean there covered
a deep abyss. Behind in the west, but at a distance of four miles, rose the first
trees of the forests of the Far West. They might have believed themselves to be
on the desolate coast of some island in the Antarctic regions which the ice had
invaded. The colonists halted at this place for breakfast. A fire of brushwood and
dried seaweed was lighted, and Neb prepared the breakfast of cold meat, to
which he added some cups of Oswego tea.

While eating they looked around them. This part of Lincoln Island was very
sterile, and contrasted with all the western part. The reporter was thus led to
observe that if chance had thrown them at first on the shore, they would have
had but a deplorable idea of their future domain.

"I believe that we should not have been able to reach it," replied the engineer,
"for the sea is deep, and there is not a rock on which we could have taken refuge.
Before Granite House, at least, there were sandbanks, an islet, which multiplied
our chances of safety. Here, nothing but the depths!"

"It is singular enough," remarked Spilett, "that this comparatively small
island should present such varied ground. This diversity of aspect, logically only
belongs to continents of a certain extent. One would really say, that the western
part of Lincoln Island, so rich and so fertile, is washed by the warm waters of the
Gulf of Mexico, and that its shores to the north and the southeast extend over a
sort of Arctic sea."

"You are right, my dear Spilett," replied Cyrus Harding, "I have also
observed this. I think the form and also the nature of this island strange. It is a
summary of all the aspects which a continent presents, and I should not be
surprised if it was a continent formerly."

"What! a continent in the middle of the Pacific?" cried Pencroft.

"Why not?" replied Cyrus Harding. "Why should not Australia, New Ireland,


Australasia, united to the archipelagoes of the Pacific, have once formed a sixth
part of the world, as important as Europe or Asia, as Africa or the two
Americas? To my mind, it is quite possible that all these islands, emerging from
this vast ocean, are but the summits of a continent, now submerged, but which
was above the waters at a prehistoric period."

"As the Atlantis was formerly," replied Herbert.

"Yes, my boy... if, however, it existed."

"And would Lincoln Island have been a part of that continent?" asked
Pencroft.

"It is probable," replied Cyrus Harding, "and that would sufficiently, explain
the variety of productions which are seen on its surface."

"And the great number of animals which still inhabit it," added Herbert.

"Yes, my boy," replied the engineer, "and you furnish me with an argument
to support my theory. It is certain, after what we have seen, that animals are
numerous in this island, and what is more strange, that the species are extremely
varied. There is a reason for that, and to me it is that Lincoln Island may have
formerly been a part of some vast continent which had gradually sunk below the
Pacific."

"Then, some fine day," said Pencroft, who did not appear to be entirely
convinced, "the rest of this ancient continent may disappear in its turn, and there
will be nothing between America and Asia."

"Yes," replied Harding, "there will be new continents which millions and
millions of animalculae are building at this moment."

"And what are these masons?" asked Pencroft.

"Coral insects," replied Cyrus Harding. "By constant work they made the
island of Clermont-Tonnerre, and numerous other coral islands in the Pacific
Ocean. Forty-seven millions of these insects are needed to weigh a grain, and
yet, with the sea-salt they absorb, the solid elements of water which they
assimilate, these animalculae produce limestone, and this limestone forms
enormous submarine erections, of which the hardness and solidity equal granite.
Formerly, at the first periods of creation, nature employing fire, heaved up the
land, but now she entrusts to these microscopic creatures the task of replacing
this agent, of which the dynamic power in the interior of the globe has evidently
diminished--which is proved by the number of volcanoes on the surface of the
earth, now actually extinct. And I believe that centuries succeeding to centuries,
and insects to insects, this Pacific may one day be changed into a vast continent,
which new generations will inhabit and civilize in their turn."

"That will take a long time," said Pencroft.

"Nature has time for it,” replied the engineer.


"But what would be the use of new continents?" asked Herbert. "It appears to
me that the present extent of habitable countries is sufficient for humanity. Yet
nature does nothing uselessly."

"Nothing uselessly, certainly," replied the engineer, "but this is how the
necessity of new continents for the future, and exactly on the tropical zone
occupied by the coral islands, may be explained. At least to me this explanation
appears plausible."

"We are listening, captain," said Herbert.

"This is my idea: philosophers generally admit that some day our globe will
end, or rather that animal and vegetable life will no longer be possible, because
of the intense cold to which it will be subjected. What they are not agreed upon,
is the cause of this cold. Some think that it will arise from the falling of the
temperature, which the sun will experience alter millions of years; others, from
the gradual extinction of the fires in the interior of our globe, which have a
greater influence on it than is generally supposed. I hold to this last hypothesis,
grounding it on the fact that the moon is really a cold star, which is no longer
habitable, although the sun continues to throw on its surface the same amount of
heat. If, then, the moon has become cold, it is because the interior fires to which,
as do all the stars of the stellar world, it owes its origin, are completely extinct.
Lastly, whatever may be the cause, our globe will become cold some day, but
this cold will only operate gradually. What will happen, then? The temperate
zones, at a more or less distant period, will not be more habitable than the polar
regions now are. Then the population of men, as well as the animals, will flow
towards the latitudes which are more directly under the solar influence. An
immense emigration will take place. Europe, Central Asia, North America, will
gradually be abandoned, as well as Australasia and the lower parts of South
America. The vegetation will follow the human emigration. The flora will retreat
towards the Equator at the same time as the fauna. The central parts of South
America and Africa will be the continents chiefly inhabited. The Laplanders and
the Samoides will find the climate of the polar regions on the shores of the
Mediterranean. Who can say, that at this period, the equatorial regions will not
be too small, to contain and nourish terrestrial humanity? Now, may not
provident nature, so as to give refuge to all the vegetable and animal emigration,
be at present laying the foundation of a new continent under the Equator, and
may she not have entrusted these insects with the construction of it? I have often
thought of all these things, my friends, and I seriously believe that the aspect of
our globe will some day be completely changed; that by the raising of new
continents the sea will cover the old, and that, in future ages, a Columbus will go
to discover the islands of Chimborazo, of the Himalayas, or of Mont Blanc,


remains of a submerged America, Asia, and Europe. Then these new continents
will become, in their turn, uninhabitable; heat will die away, as does the heat
from a body when the soul has left it; and life will disappear from the globe, if
not for ever, at least for a period. Perhaps then, our spheroid will rest--will be left
to death--to revive some day under superior conditions! But all that, my friends,
is the secret of the Author of all things; and beginning by the work of the insects,
I have perhaps let myself be carried too far, in investigating the secrets of the
future.

"My dear Cyrus," replied Spilett, "these theories are prophecies to me, and
they will be accomplished some day."

"That is the secret of God," said the engineer.

"All that is well and good," then said Pencroft, who had listened with all his
might, "but will you tell me, captain, if Lincoln Island has been made by your
insects?"

"No," replied Harding; "it is of a purely volcanic origin."

"Then it will disappear some day?"

"That is probable."

"I hope we won't be here then."

"No, don't be uneasy, Pencroft; we shall not be here then, as we have no wish
to die here, and hope to get away some time."

"In the meantime," replied Gideon Spilett, "let us establish ourselves here as
if forever. There is no use in doing things by halves."

This ended the conversation. Breakfast was finished, the exploration was
continued, and the settlers arrived at the border of the marshy region. It was a
marsh of which the extent, to the rounded coast which terminated the island at
the southeast, was about twenty square miles. The soil was formed of clayey
flint-earth, mingled with vegetable matter, such as the remains of rushes, reeds,
grass, etc. Here and there beds of grass, thick as a carpet, covered it. In many
places icy pools sparkled in the sun. Neither rain nor any river, increased by a
sudden swelling, could supply these ponds. They therefore naturally concluded
that the marsh was fed by the infiltrations of the soil and it was really so. It was
also to be feared that during the heat miasmas would arise, which might produce
fevers.

Above the aquatic plants, on the surface of the stagnant water, fluttered
numbers of birds. Wild duck, teal, snipe lived there in flocks, and those fearless
birds allowed themselves to be easily approached.

One shot from a gun would certainly have brought down some dozen of the
birds, they were so close together. The explorers were, however, obliged to
content themselves with bows and arrows. The result was less, but the silent


arrow had the advantage of not frightening the birds, while the noise of firearms
would have dispersed them to all parts of the marsh. The hunters were satisfied,
for this time, with a dozen ducks, which had white bodies with a band of
cinnamon, a green head, wings black, white, and red, and flattened beak. Herbert
called them tadorns. Top helped in the capture of these birds, whose name was
given to this marshy part of the island. The settlers had here an abundant reserve
of aquatic game. At some future time they meant to explore it more carefully,
and it was probable that some of the birds there might be domesticated, or at
least brought to the shores of the lake, so that they would be more within their
reach.

About five o'clock in the evening Cyrus Harding and his companions
retraced their steps to their dwelling by traversing Tadorn's Fens, and crossed the
Mercy on the ice-bridge.

At eight in the evening they all entered Granite House.


Chapter 22


This intense cold lasted till the 15th of August, without, however, passing the
degree of Fahrenheit already mentioned. When the atmosphere was calm, the
low temperature was easily borne, but when the wind blew, the poor settlers,
insufficiently clothed, felt it severely. Pencroft regretted that Lincoln Island was
not the home of a few families of bears rather than of so many foxes and seals.

"Bears," said he, "are generally very well dressed, and I ask no more than to
borrow for the winter the warm cloaks which they have on their backs."

"But," replied Neb, laughing, "perhaps the bears would not consent to give
you their cloaks, Pencroft. These beasts are not St. Martins."

"We would make them do it, Neb, we would make them," replied Pencroft,
in quite an authoritative tone.

But these formidable carnivora did not exist in the island, or at any rate they
had not yet shown themselves.

In the meanwhile, Herbert, Pencroft, and the reporter occupied themselves
with making traps on Prospect Heights and at the border of the forest.

According to the sailor, any animal, whatever it was, would be a lawful
prize, and the rodents or carnivora which might get into the new snares would be
well received at Granite House.

The traps were besides extremely simple; being pits dug in the ground, a
platform of branches and grass above, which concealed the opening, and at the
bottom some bait, the scent of which would attract animals. It must be
mentioned also, that they had not been dug at random, but at certain places
where numerous footprints showed that quadrupeds frequented the ground. They
were visited every day, and at three different times, during the first days,
specimens of those Antarctic foxes which they had already seen on the right
bank of the Mercy were found in them.

"Why, there are nothing but foxes in this country!" cried Pencroft, when for
the third time he drew one of the animals out of the pit. Looking at it in great
disgust, he added, "beasts which are good for nothing!"

"Yes," said Gideon Spilett, "they are good for something!"

"And what is that?"

"To make bait to attract other creatures!"

The reporter was right, and the traps were henceforward baited with the
foxes carcasses.

The sailor had also made snares from the long tough fibers of a certain plant,


and they were even more successful than the traps. Rarely a day passed without
some rabbits from the warren being caught. It was always rabbit, but Neb knew
how to vary his sauces and the settlers did not think of complaining.

However, once or twice in the second week of August, the traps supplied the
hunters with other animals more useful than foxes, namely, several of those
small wild boars which had already been seen to the north of the lake. Pencroft
had no need to ask if these beasts were eatable. He could see that by their
resemblance to the pig of America and Europe.

"But these are not pigs," said Herbert to him, "I warn you of that, Pencroft."

"My boy," replied the sailor, bending over the trap and drawing out one of
these representatives of the family of sus by the little appendage which served it
as a tail. "Let me believe that these are pigs."

"Why?"

"Because that pleases me!"

"Are you very fond of pig then, Pencroft?"

"I am very fond of pig," replied the sailor, "particularly of its feet, and if it
had eight instead of four, I should like it twice as much!"

As to the animals in question, they were peccaries belonging to one of the
four species which are included in the family, and they were also of the species
of Tajacu, recognizable by their deep color and the absence of those long teeth
with which the mouths of their congeners are armed. These peccaries generally
live in herds, and it was probable that they abounded in the woody parts of the
island.

At any rate, they were eatable from head to foot, and Pencroft did not ask
more from them.

Towards the 15th of August, the state of the atmosphere was suddenly
moderated by the wind shifting to the northwest. The temperature rose some
degrees, and the accumulated vapor in the air was not long in resolving into
snow. All the island was covered with a sheet of white, and showed itself to its
inhabitants under a new aspect. The snow fell abundantly for several days, and it
soon reached a thickness of two feet.

The wind also blew with great violence, and at the height of Granite House
the sea could be heard thundering against the reefs. In some places, the wind,
eddying round the corners, formed the snow into tall whirling columns,
resembling those waterspouts which turn round on their base, and which vessels
attack with a shot from a gun. However, the storm, coming from the northwest,
blew across the island, and the position of Granite House preserved it from a
direct attack.

But in the midst of this snow-storm, as terrible as if it had been produced in


some polar country, neither Cyrus Harding nor his companions could,
notwithstanding their wish for it, venture forth, and they remained shut up for
five days, from the 20th to the 25th of August. They could hear the tempest
raging in Jacamar Wood, which would surely suffer from it. Many of the trees
would no doubt be torn up by the roots, but Pencroft consoled himself by
thinking that he would not have the trouble of cutting them down.

"The wind is turning woodman, let it alone," he repeated.

Besides, there was no way of stopping it, if they had wished to do so.

How grateful the inhabitants of Granite House then were to Heaven for
having prepared for them this solid and immovable retreat! Cyrus Harding had
also his legitimate share of thanks, but after all, it was Nature who had hollowed
out this vast cavern, and he had only discovered it. There all were in safety, and
the tempest could not reach them. If they had constructed a house of bricks and
wood on Prospect Heights, it certainly would not have resisted the fury of this
storm. As to the Chimneys, it must have been absolutely uninhabitable, for the
sea, passing over the islet, would beat furiously against it. But here, in Granite
House, in the middle of a solid mass, over which neither the sea nor air had any
influence, there was nothing to fear.

During these days of seclusion the settlers did not remain inactive.

There was no want of wood, cut up into planks, in the storeroom, and little
by little they completed their furnishing; constructing the most solid of tables
and chairs, for material was not spared. Neb and Pencroft were very proud of
this rather heavy furniture, which they would not have changed on any account.

Then the carpenters became basket-makers, and they did not succeed badly
in this new manufacture. At the point of the lake which projected to the north,
they had discovered an osier-bed in which grew a large number of purple osiers.
Before the rainy season, Pencroft and Herbert had cut down these useful shrubs,
and their branches, well prepared, could now be effectively employed. The first
attempts were somewhat crude, but in consequence of the cleverness and
intelligence of the workmen, by consulting, and recalling the models which they
had seen, and by emulating each other, the possessions of the colony were soon
increased by several baskets of different sizes. The storeroom was provided with
them, and in special baskets Neb placed his collection of rhizomes, stone-pine
almonds, etc.

During the last week of the month of August the weather moderated again.
The temperature fell a little, and the tempest abated. The colonists sallied out
directly. There was certainly two feet of snow on the shore, but they were able to
walk without much difficulty on the hardened surface. Cyrus Harding and his
companions climbed Prospect Heights.


What a change! The woods, which they had left green, especially in the part
at which the firs predominated, had disappeared under a uniform color. All was
white, from the summit of Mount Franklin to the shore, the forests, the plains,
the lake, the river. The waters of the Mercy flowed under a roof of ice, which, at
each rising and ebbing of the tide, broke up with loud crashes. Numerous birds
fluttered over the frozen surface of the lake. Ducks and snipe, teal and
guillemots were assembled in thousands. The rocks among which the cascade
flowed were bristling with icicles. One might have said that the water escaped by
a monstrous gargoyle, shaped with all the imagination of an artist of the
Renaissance. As to the damage caused by the storm in the forest, that could not
as yet be ascertained; they would have to wait till the snowy covering was
dissipated.

Gideon Spilett, Pencroft, and Herbert did not miss this opportunity of going
to visit their traps. They did not find them easily, under the snow with which
they were covered. They had also to be careful not to fall into one or other of
them, which would have been both dangerous and humiliating; to be taken in
their own snares! But happily they avoided this unpleasantness, and found their
traps perfectly intact. No animal had fallen into them, and yet the footprints in
the neighborhood were very numerous, among others, certain very clear marks
of claws. Herbert did not hesitate to affirm that some animal of the feline species
had passed there, which justified the engineer's opinion that dangerous beasts
existed in Lincoln Island. These animals doubtless generally lived in the forests
of the Far West, but pressed by hunger, they had ventured as far as Prospect
Heights. Perhaps they had smelled out the inhabitants of Granite House. "Now,
what are these feline creatures?" asked Pencroft. "They are tigers," replied
Herbert. "I thought those beasts were only found in hot countries?"

"On the new continent," replied the lad, "they are found from Mexico to the
Pampas of Buenos Aires. Now, as Lincoln Island is nearly under the same
latitude as the provinces of La Plata, it is not surprising that tigers are to be met
with in it."

"Well, we must look out for them," replied Pencroft.

However, the snow soon disappeared, quickly dissolving under the influence
of the rising temperature. Rain fell, and the sheet of white soon vanished.
Notwithstanding the bad weather, the settlers renewed their stores of different
things, stone-pine almonds, rhizomes, syrup from the maple-tree, for the
vegetable part; rabbits from the warren, agouties, and kangaroos for the animal
part. This necessitated several excursions into the forest, and they found that a
great number of trees had been blown down by the last hurricane. Pencroft and
Neb also pushed with the cart as far as the vein of coal, and brought back several


tons of fuel. They saw in passing that the pottery kiln had been severely
damaged by the wind, at least six feet of it having been blown off.

At the same time as the coal, the store of wood was renewed at Granite
House, and they profited by the current of the Mercy having again become free,
to float down several rafts. They could see that the cold period was not ended.

A visit was also paid to the Chimneys, and the settlers could not but
congratulate themselves on not having been living there during the hurricane.
The sea had left unquestionable traces of its ravages. Sweeping over the islet, it
had furiously assailed the passages, half filling them with sand, while thick beds
of seaweed covered the rocks. While Neb, Herbert, and Pencroft hunted or
collected wood, Cyrus Harding and Gideon Spilett busied themselves in putting
the Chimneys to rights, and they found the forge and the bellows almost unhurt,
protected as they had been from the first by the heaps of sand.

The store of fuel had not been made uselessly. The settlers had not done with
the rigorous cold. It is known that, in the Northern Hemisphere, the month of
February is principally distinguished by rapid fallings of the temperature. It is
the same in the Southern Hemisphere, and the end of the month of August,
which is the February of North America, does not escape this climatic law.

About the 25th, after another change from snow to rain, the wind shifted to
the southeast, and the cold became, suddenly, very severe. According to the
engineer's calculation, the mercurial column of a Fahrenheit thermometer would
not have marked less than eight degrees below zero, and this intense cold,
rendered still more painful by a sharp gale, lasted for several days. The colonists
were again shut up in Granite House, and as it was necessary to hermetically seal
all the openings of the facade, only leaving a narrow passage for renewing the
air, the consumption of candles was considerable. To economize them, the
cavern was often only lighted by the blazing hearths, on which fuel was not
spared. Several times, one or other of the settlers descended to the beach in the
midst of ice which the waves heaped up at each tide, but they soon climbed up
again to Granite House, and it was not without pain and difficulty that their
hands could hold to the rounds of the ladder. In consequence of the intense cold,
their fingers felt as if bumed when they touched the rounds. To occupy the
leisure hours, which the tenants of Granite House now had at their disposal,
Cyrus Harding undertook an operation which could be performed indoors.

We know that the settlers had no other sugar at their disposal than the liquid
substance which they drew from the maple, by making deep incisions in the tree.
They contented themselves with collecting this liquor in jars and employing it in
this state for different culinary purposes, and the more so, as on growing old, this
liquid began to become white and to be of a syrupy consistence.


But there was something better to be made of it, and one day Cyrus Harding
announced that they were going to turn into refiners.

"Refiners!" replied Pencroft. "That is rather a warm trade, I think."

"Very warm," answered the engineer.

"Then it will be seasonable!" said the sailor.

This word refining need not awake in the mind thoughts of an elaborate
manufactory with apparatus and numerous workmen. No! to crystallize this
liquor, only an extremely easy operation is required. Placed on the fire in large
earthen pots, it was simply subjected to evaporation, and soon a scum arose to its
surface. As soon as this began to thicken, Neb carefully removed it with a
wooden spatula; this accelerated the evaporation, and at the same time prevented
it from contracting an empyreumatic flavor.

After boiling for several hours on a hot fire, which did as much good to the
operators as the substance operated upon, the latter was transformed into a thick
syrup. This syrup was poured into clay molds, previously fabricated in the
kitchen stove, and to which they had given various shapes. The next day this
syrup had become cold, and formed cakes and tablets. This was sugar of rather a
reddish color, but nearly transparent and of a delicious taste.

The cold continued to the middle of September, and the prisoners in Granite
House began to find their captivity rather tedious. Nearly every day they
attempted sorties which they could not prolong. They constantly worked at the
improvement of their dwelling. They talked while working. Harding instructed
his companions in many things, principally explaining to them the practical
applications of science. The colonists had no library at their disposal; but the
engineer was a book which was always at hand, always open at the page which
one wanted, a book which answered all their questions, and which they often
consulted. The time thus passed away pleasantly, these brave men not appearing
to have any fears for the future.

However, all were anxious to see, if not the fine season, at least the cessation
of the insupportable cold. If only they had been clothed in a way to meet it, how
many excursions they would have attempted, either to the downs or to Tadorn's
Fens! Game would have been easily approached, and the chase would certainly
have been most productive. But Cyrus Harding considered it of importance that
no one should injure his health, for he had need of all his hands, and his advice
was followed.

But it must be said, that the one who was most impatient of this
imprisonment, after Pencroft perhaps, was Top. The faithful dog found Granite
House very narrow. He ran backwards and forwards from one room to another,
showing in his way how weary he was of being shut up. Harding often remarked


that when he approached the dark well which communicated with the sea, and of
which the orifice opened at the back of the storeroom, Top uttered singular
growlings. He ran round and round this hole, which had been covered with a
wooden lid. Sometimes even he tried to put his paws under the lid, as if he
wished to raise it. He then yelped in a peculiar way, which showed at once anger
and uneasiness.

The engineer observed this maneuver several times.

What could there be in this abyss to make such an impression on the
intelligent animal? The well led to the sea, that was certain. Could narrow
passages spread from it through the foundations of the island? Did some marine
monster come from time to time, to breathe at the bottom of this well? The
engineer did not know what to think, and could not refrain from dreaming of
many strange improbabilities. Accustomed to go far into the regions of scientific
reality, he would not allow himself to be drawn into the regions of the strange
and almost of the supernatural; but yet how to explain why Top, one of those
sensible dogs who never waste their time in barking at the moon, should persist
in trying with scent and hearing to fathom this abyss, if there was nothing there
to cause his uneasiness? Top's conduct puzzled Cyrus Harding even more than
he cared to acknowledge to himself.

At all events, the engineer only communicated his impressions to Gideon
Spilett, for he thought it useless to explain to his companions the suspicions
which arose from what perhaps was only Top's fancy.

At last the cold ceased. There had been rain, squalls mingled with snow,
hailstorms, gusts of wind, but these inclemencies did not last. The ice melted, the
snow disappeared; the shore, the plateau, the banks of the Mercy, the forest,
again became practicable. This return of spring delighted the tenants of Granite
House, and they soon only passed it in the hours necessary for eating and
sleeping.

They hunted much in the second part of September, which led Pencroft to
again entreat for the firearms, which he asserted had been promised by Cyrus
Harding. The latter, knowing well that without special tools it would be nearly
impossible for him to manufacture a gun which would be of any use, still drew
back and put off the operation to some future time, observing in his usual dry
way, that Herbert and Spilett had become very skilful archers, so that many sorts
of excellent animals, agouties, kangaroos, capybaras, pigeons, bustards, wild
ducks, snipes, in short, game both with fur and feathers, fell victims to their
arrows, and that, consequently, they could wait. But the obstinate sailor would
listen to nothing of this, and he would give the engineer no peace till he
promised to satisfy his desire. Gideon Spilett, however, supported Pencroft.


"If, which may be doubted," said he, "the island is inhabited by wild beasts,
we must think how to fight with and exterminate them. A time may come when
this will be our first duty."

But at this period, it was not the question of firearms which occupied
Harding, but that of clothes. Those which the settlers wore had passed this
winter, but they would not last until next winter. Skins of carnivora or the wool
of ruminants must be procured at any price, and since there were plenty of
musmons, it was agreed to consult on the means of forming a flock which might
be brought up for the use of the colony. An enclosure for the domestic animals, a
poultry-yard for the birds, in a word to establish a sort of farm in the island, such
were the two important projects for the fine season.

In consequence and in view of these future establishments, it became of
much importance that they should penetrate into all the yet unknown parts of
Lincoln Island, that is to say, through that thick forest which extended on the
right bank of the Mercy, from its mouth to the extremity of the Serpentine
Peninsula, as well as on the whole of its western side. But this needed settled
weather, and a month must pass before this exploration could be profitably
undertaken.

They therefore waited with some impatience, when an incident occurred
which increased the desire the settlers had to visit the whole of their domain.

It was the 24th of October. On this day, Pencroft had gone to visit his traps,
which he always kept properly baited. In one of them he found three animals
which would be very welcome for the larder. They were a female peccary and
her two young ones.

Pencroft then returned to Granite House, enchanted with his capture, and, as
usual, he made a great show of his game.

"Come, we shall have a grand feast, captain!" he exclaimed. "And you too,
Mr. Spilett, you will eat some!"

"I shall be very happy," replied the reporter; "but what is it that I am going to
eat?"

"Suckling-pig."”

"Oh, indeed, suckling-pig, Pencroft? To hear you, I thought that you were
bringing back a young partridge stuffed with truffles!"

"What?" cried Pencroft. "Do you mean to say that you turn up your nose at
suckling-pig?'

"No," replied Gideon Spilett, without showing any enthusiasm; "provided
one doesn't eat too much."

"That's right, that's right," returned the sailor, who was not pleased whenever
he heard his chase made light of. "You like to make objections. Seven months


ago, when we landed on the island, you would have been only too glad to have
met with such game!"

"Well, well," replied the reporter, "man is never perfect, nor contented."

"Now," said Pencroft, "I hope that Neb will distinguish himself. Look here!
These two little peccaries are not more than three months old! They will be as
tender as quails! Come along, Neb, come! I will look after the cooking myself."

And the sailor, followed by Neb, entered the kitchen, where they were soon
absorbed in their culinary labors.

They were allowed to do it in their own way. Neb, therefore, prepared a
magnificent repast--the two little peccaries, kangaroo soup, a smoked ham,
stone-pine almonds, Oswego tea; in fact, all the best that they had, but among all
the dishes figured in the first rank the savory peccaries.

At five o'clock dinner was served in the dining-room of Granite House. The
kangaroo soup was smoking on the table. They found it excellent.

To the soup succeeded the peccaries, which Pencroft insisted on carving
himself, and of which he served out monstrous portions to each of the guests.

These suckling-pigs were really delicious, and Pencroft was devouring his
share with great gusto, when all at once a cry and an oath escaped him.

"What's the matter?" asked Cyrus Harding.

"The matter? the matter is that I have just broken a tooth!" replied the sailor.

"What, are there pebbles in your peccaries?" said Gideon Spilett.

"I suppose so," replied Pencroft, drawing from his lips the object which had
cost him a grinder--!

It was not a pebble--it was a leaden bullet.


PART 2


ABANDONED


Chapter 1


It was now exactly seven months since the balloon voyagers had been
thrown on Lincoln Island. During that time, notwithstanding the researches they
had made, no human being had been discovered. No smoke even had betrayed
the presence of man on the surface of the island. No vestiges of his handiwork
showed that either at an early or at a late period had man lived there. Not only
did it now appear to be uninhabited by any but themselves, but the colonists
were compelled to believe that it never had been inhabited. And now, all this
scaffolding of reasonings fell before a simple ball of metal, found in the body of
an inoffensive rodent! In fact, this bullet must have issued from a firearm, and
who but a human being could have used such a weapon?

When Pencroft had placed the bullet on the table, his companions looked at it
with intense astonishment. All the consequences likely to result from this
incident, notwithstanding its apparent insignificance, immediately took
possession of their minds. The sudden apparition of a supernatural being could
not have startled them more completely.

Cyrus Harding did not hesitate to give utterance to the suggestions which this
fact, at once surprising and unexpected, could not fail to raise in his mind. He
took the bullet, turned it over and over, rolled it between his finger and thumb;
then, turning to Pencroft, he asked,--

"Are you sure that the peccary wounded by this bullet was not more than
three months old?"

"Not more, captain," replied Pencroft. "It was still sucking its mother when I
found it in the trap."

"Well," said the engineer, "that proves that within three months a gunshot
was fired in Lincoln Island."

"And that a bullet," added Gideon Spilett, "wounded, though not mortally,
this little animal."

"That is unquestionable," said Cyrus Harding, "and these are the deductions
which must be drawn from this incident: that the island was inhabited before our
arrival, or that men have landed here within three months. Did these men arrive
here voluntarily or involuntarily, by disembarking on the shore or by being
wrecked? This point can only be cleared up later. As to what they were,
Europeans or Malays, enemies or friends of our race, we cannot possibly guess;
and if they still inhabit the island, or if they have left it, we know not. But these
questions are of too much importance to be allowed to remain long unsettled."


"No! a hundred times no! a thousand times no!" cried the sailor, springing up
from the table. "There are no other men than ourselves on Lincoln Island! By my
faith! The island isn't large and if it had been inhabited, we should have seen
some of the inhabitants long before this!"

"In fact, the contrary would be very astonishing,” said Herbert.

"But it would be much more astonishing, I should think," observed the
reporter, "if this peccary had been born with a bullet in its inside!"

"At least," said Neb seriously, "if Pencroft has not had--"

"Look here, Neb," burst out Pencroft. "Do you think I could have a bullet in
my jaw for five or six months without finding it out? Where could it be hidden?"
he asked, opening his mouth to show the two-and-thirty teeth with which it was
furnished. "Look well, Neb, and if you find one hollow tooth in this set, I will let
you pull out half a dozen!"

"Neb's supposition is certainly inadmissible," replied Harding, who,
notwithstanding the gravity of his thoughts, could not restrain a smile. "It is
certain that a gun has been fired in the island, within three months at most. But I
am inclined to think that the people who landed on this coast were only here a
very short time ago, or that they just touched here; for if, when we surveyed the
island from the summit of Mount Franklin, it had been inhabited, we should
have seen them or we should have been seen ourselves. It is therefore, probable
that within only a few weeks castaways have been thrown by a storm on some
part of the coast. However that may be, it is of consequence to us to have this
point settled."

"T think that we should act with caution," said the reporter.

"Such is my advice," replied Cyrus Harding, "for it is to be feared that Malay
pirates have landed on the island!"

"Captain," asked the sailor, "would it not be a good plan, before setting out,
to build a canoe in which we could either ascend the river, or, if we liked, coast
round the inland? It will not do to be unprovided."

"Your idea is good, Pencroft," replied the engineer, "but we cannot wait for
that. It would take at least a month to build a boat."

"Yes, a real boat," replied the sailor; "but we do not want one for a sea
voyage, and in five days at the most, I will undertake to construct a canoe fit to
navigate the Mercy."

"Five days," cried Neb, "to build a boat?"

"Yes, Neb; a boat in the Indian fashion."

"Of wood?" asked the Negro, looking still unconvinced.

"Of wood," replied Pencroft, "of rather of bark. I repeat, captain, that in five
days the work will be finished!"


"In five days, then, be it," replied the engineer.

"But till that time we must be very watchful,” said Herbert.

"Very watchful indeed, my friends," replied Harding; "and I beg you to
confine your hunting excursions to the neighborhood of Granite House."

The dinner ended less gaily than Pencroft had hoped.

So, then, the island was, or had been, inhabited by others than the settlers.
Proved as it was by the incident of the bullet, it was hereafter an unquestionable
fact, and such a discovery could not but cause great uneasiness among the
colonists.

Cyrus Harding and Gideon Spilett, before sleeping, conversed long about the
matter. They asked themselves if by chance this incident might not have some
connection with the inexplicable way in which the engineer had been saved, and
the other peculiar circumstances which had struck them at different times.
However, Cyrus Harding, after having discussed the pros and cons of the
question, ended by saying,--

"In short, would you like to know my opinion, my dear Spilett?"

"Yes, Cyrus."

"Well, then, it is this: however minutely we explore the island, we shall find
nothing."

The next day Pencroft set to work. He did not mean to build a boat with
boards and planking, but simply a flat-bottomed canoe, which would be well
suited for navigating the Mercy--above all, for approaching its source, where the
water would naturally be shallow. Pieces of bark, fastened one to the other,
would form a light boat; and in case of natural obstacles, which would render a
portage necessary, it would be easily carried. Pencroft intended to secure the
pieces of bark by means of nails, to insure the canoe being water-tight.

It was first necessary to select the trees which would afford a strong and
supple bark for the work. Now the last storm had brought down a number of
large birch-trees, the bark of which would be perfectly suited for their purpose.
Some of these trees lay on the ground, and they had only to be barked, which
was the most difficult thing of all, owing to the imperfect tools which the settlers
possessed. However, they overcame all difficulties.

While the sailor, seconded by the engineer, thus occupied himself without
losing an hour, Gideon Spilett and Herbert were not idle.

They were made purveyors to the colony. The reporter could not but admire
the boy, who had acquired great skill in handling the bow and spear. Herbert also
showed great courage and much of that presence of mind which may justly be
called "the reasoning of bravery." These two companions of the chase,
remembering Cyrus Harding's recommendations, did not go beyond a radius of


two miles round Granite House; but the borders of the forest furnished a
sufficient tribute of agoutis, capybaras, kangaroos, peccaries, etc.; and if the
result from the traps was less than during the cold, still the warren yielded its
accustomed quota, which might have fed all the colony in Lincoln Island.

Often during these excursions, Herbert talked with Gideon Spilett on the
incident of the bullet, and the deductions which the engineer drew from it, and
one day--it was the 26th of October--he said--"But, Mr. Spilett, do you not think
it very extraordinary that, if any castaways have landed on the island, they have
not yet shown themselves near Granite House?"

"Very astonishing if they are still here," replied the reporter, "but not
astonishing at all if they are here no longer!"

"So you think that these people have already quitted the island?" returned
Herbert.

"Tt is more than probable, my boy; for if their stay was prolonged, and above
all, if they were still here, some accident would have at last betrayed their
presence."

"But if they were able to go away," observed the lad, "they could not have
been castaways."

"No, Herbert; or, at least, they were what might be called provisional
castaways. It is very possible that a storm may have driven them to the island
without destroying their vessel, and that, the storm over, they went away again."

"IT must acknowledge one thing," said Herbert, "it is that Captain Harding
appears rather to fear than desire the presence of human beings on our island."

"In short," responded the reporter, "there are only Malays who frequent these
seas, and those fellows are ruffians which it is best to avoid."

"It is not impossible, Mr. Spilett," said Herbert, "that some day or other we
may find traces of their landing."

"I do not say no, my boy. A deserted camp, the ashes of a fire, would put us
on the track, and this is what we will look for in our next expedition."

The day on which the hunters spoke thus, they were in a part of the forest
near the Mercy, remarkable for its beautiful trees. There, among others, rose, to a
height of nearly 200 feet above the ground, some of those superb coniferae, to
which, in New Zealand, the natives give the name of Kauris.

"I have an idea, Mr. Spilett," said Herbert. "If I were to climb to the top of
one of these kauris, I could survey the country for an immense distance round."

"The idea is good," replied the reporter; "but could you climb to the top of
those giants?"

"IT can at least try," replied Herbert.

The light and active boy then sprang on the first branches, the arrangement


of which made the ascent of the kauri easy, and in a few minutes he arrived at
the summit, which emerged from the immense plain of verdure.

From this elevated situation his gaze extended over all the southern portion
of the island, from Claw Cape on the southeast, to Reptile End on the southwest.
To the northwest rose Mount Franklin, which concealed a great part of the
horizon.

But Herbert, from the height of his observatory, could examine all the yet
unknown portion of the island, which might have given shelter to the strangers
whose presence they suspected.

The lad looked attentively. There was nothing in sight on the sea, not a sail,
neither on the horizon nor near the island. However, as the bank of trees hid the
shore, it was possible that a vessel, especially if deprived of her masts, might lie
close to the land and thus be invisible to Herbert.

Neither in the forests of the Far West was anything to be seen. The wood
formed an impenetrable screen, measuring several square miles, without a break
or an opening. It was impossible even to follow the course of the Mercy, or to
ascertain in what part of the mountain it took its source. Perhaps other creeks
also ran towards the west, but they could not be seen.

But at last, if all indication of an encampment escaped Herbert's sight could
he not even catch a glimpse of smoke, the faintest trace of which would be easily
discernible in the pure atmosphere?

For an instant Herbert thought he could perceive a slight smoke in the west,
but a more attentive examination showed that he was mistaken. He strained his
eyes in every direction, and his sight was excellent. No, decidedly there was
nothing there.

Herbert descended to the foot of the kauri, and the two sportsmen returned to
Granite House. There Cyrus Harding listened to the lad's account, shook his head
and said nothing. It was very evident that no decided opinion could be
pronounced on this question until after a complete exploration of the island.

Two days after--the 28th of October--another incident occurred, for which an
explanation was again required.

While strolling along the shore about two miles from Granite House, Herbert
and Neb were fortunate enough to capture a magnificent specimen of the order
of chelonia. It was a turtle of the species Midas, the edible green turtle, so called
from the color both of its shell and fat.

Herbert caught sight of this turtle as it was crawling among the rocks to
reach the sea.

"Help, Neb, help!" he cried.

Neb ran up.


"What a fine animal!" said Neb; "but how are we to catch it?"

"Nothing is easier, Neb," replied Herbert. "We have only to turn the turtle on
its back, and it cannot possibly get away. Take your spear and do as I do."

The reptile, aware of danger, had retired between its carapace and plastron.
They no longer saw its head or feet, and it was motionless as a rock.

Herbert and Neb then drove their sticks underneath the animal, and by their
united efforts managed without difficulty to turn it on its back. The turtle, which
was three feet in length, would have weighed at least four hundred pounds.

"Capital!" cried Neb; "this is something which will rejoice friend Pencroft's
heart."

In fact, the heart of friend Pencroft could not fail to be rejoiced, for the flesh
of the turtle, which feeds on wrack-grass, is extremely savory. At this moment
the creature's head could be seen, which was small, flat, but widened behind by
the large temporal fossae hidden under the long roof.

"And now, what shall we do with our prize?" said Neb. "We can't drag it to
Granite House!"

"Leave it here, since it cannot turn over," replied Herbert, "and we will come
back with the cart to fetch it."

"That is the best plan."

However, for greater precaution, Herbert took the trouble, which Neb
deemed superfluous, to wedge up the animal with great stones; after which the
two hunters returned to Granite House, following the beach, which the tide had
left uncovered. Herbert, wishing to surprise Pencroft, said nothing about the
"superb specimen of a chelonian" which they had turned over on the sand; but,
two hours later, he and Neb returned with the cart to the place where they had
left it. The "superb specimen of a chelonian" was no longer there!

Neb and Herbert stared at each other first; then they stared about them. It
was just at this spot that the turtle had been left. The lad even found the stones
which he had used, and therefore he was certain of not being mistaken.

"Well!" said Neb, "these beasts can turn themselves over, then?"

"It appears so," replied Herbert, who could not understand it at all, and was
gazing at the stones scattered on the sand.

"Well, Pencroft will be disgusted!"

"And Captain Harding will perhaps be very perplexed how to explain this
disappearance," thought Herbert.

"Look here," said Neb, who wished to hide his ill-luck, "we won't speak
about it."

"On the contrary, Neb, we must speak about it," replied Herbert.

And the two, taking the cart, which there was now no use for, returned to


Granite House.

Arrived at the dockyard, where the engineer and the sailor were working
together, Herbert recounted what had happened.

"Oh! the stupids!" cried the sailor, "to have let at least fifty meals escape!"

"But, Pencroft," replied Neb, "it wasn't our fault that the beast got away; as I
tell you, we had turned it over on its back!"

"Then you didn't turn it over enough!" returned the obstinate sailor.

"Not enough!" cried Herbert.

And he told how he had taken care to wedge up the turtle with stones.

"Tt is a miracle, then!" replied Pencroft.

"I thought, captain," said Herbert, "that turtles, once placed on their backs,
could not regain their feet, especially when they are of a large size?"

"That is true, my boy," replied Cyrus Harding.

"Then how did it manage?"

"At what distance from the sea did you leave this turtle?" asked the engineer,
who, having suspended his work, was reflecting on this incident.

"Fifteen feet at the most," replied Herbert.

"And the tide was low at the time?"

"Yes, captain."

"Well," replied the engineer, "what the turtle could not do on the sand it
might have been able to do in the water. It turned over when the tide overtook it,
and then quietly returned to the deep sea."

"Oh! what stupids we were!" cried Neb.

"That is precisely what I had the honor of telling you before!" returned the
sailor.

Cyrus Harding had given this explanation, which, no doubt, was admissible.
But was he himself convinced of the accuracy of this explanation? It cannot be
said that he was.


Chapter 2


On the 9th of October the bark canoe was entirely finished. Pencroft had kept
his promise, and a light boat, the shell of which was joined together by the
flexible twigs of the crejimba, had been constructed in five days. A seat in the
stern, a second seat in the middle to preserve the equilibrium, a third seat in the
bows, rowlocks for the two oars, a scull to steer with, completed the little craft,
which was twelve feet long, and did not weigh more than two hundred pounds.
The operation of launching it was extremely simple. The canoe was carried to
the beach and laid on the sand before Granite House, and the rising tide floated
it. Pencroft, who leaped in directly, maneuvered it with the scull and declared it
to be just the thing for the purpose to which they wished to put it.

"Hurrah!" cried the sailor, who did not disdain to celebrate thus his own
triumph. "With this we could go round--"

"The world?" asked Gideon Spilett.

"No, the island. Some stones for ballast, a mast and a sail, which the captain
will make for us some day, and we shall go splendidly! Well, captain--and you,
Mr. Spilett; and you, Herbert; and you, Neb--aren't you coming to try our new
vessel? Come along! we must see if it will carry all five of us!"

This was certainly a trial which ought to be made. Pencroft soon brought the
canoe to the shore by a narrow passage among the rocks, and it was agreed that
they should make a trial of the boat that day by following the shore as far as the
first point at which the rocks of the south ended.

As they embarked, Neb cried,--

"But your boat leaks rather, Pencroft."

"That's nothing, Neb," replied the sailor; "the wood will get seasoned. In two
days there won't be a single leak, and our boat will have no more water in her
than there is in the stomach of a drunkard. Jump in!"

They were soon all seated, and Pencroft shoved off. The weather was
magnificent, the sea as calm as if its waters were contained within the narrow
limits of a lake. Thus the boat could proceed with as much security as if it was
ascending the tranquil current of the Mercy.

Neb took one of the oars, Herbert the other, and Pencroft remained in the
stern in order to use the scull.

The sailor first crossed the channel, and steered close to the southern point of
the islet. A light breeze blew from the south. No roughness was found either in
the channel or the green sea. A long swell, which the canoe scarcely felt, as it


was heavily laden, rolled regularly over the surface of the water. They pulled out
about half a mile distant from the shore, that they might have a good view of
Mount Franklin.

Pencroft afterwards returned towards the mouth of the river. The boat then
skirted the shore, which, extending to the extreme point, hid all Tadorn's Fens.

This point, of which the distance was increased by the irregularity of the
coast, was nearly three miles from the Mercy. The settlers resolved to go to its
extremity, and only go beyond it as much as was necessary to take a rapid survey
of the coast as far as Claw Cape.

The canoe followed the windings of the shore, avoiding the rocks which
fringed it, and which the rising tide began to cover. The cliff gradually sloped
away from the mouth of the river to the point. This was formed of granite reeks,
capriciously distributed, very different from the cliff at Prospect Heights, and of
an extremely wild aspect. It might have been said that an immense cartload of
rocks had been emptied out there. There was no vegetation on this sharp
promontory, which projected two miles from the forest, and it thus represented a
giant's arm stretched out from a leafy sleeve.

The canoe, impelled by the two oars, advanced without difficulty. Gideon
Spilett, pencil in one hand and notebook in the other, sketched the coast in bold
strokes. Neb, Herbert, and Pencroft chatted, while examining this part of their
domain, which was new to them, and, in proportion as the canoe proceeded
towards the south, the two Mandible Capes appeared to move, and surround
Union Bay more closely.

As to Cyrus Harding, he did not speak; he simply gazed, and by the mistrust
which his look expressed, it appeared that he was examining some strange
country.

In the meantime, after a voyage of three-quarters of an hour, the canoe
reached the extremity of the point, and Pencroft was preparing to return, when
Herbert, rising, pointed to a black object, saying,--

"What do I see down there on the beach?"

All eyes turned towards the point indicated.

"Why," said the reporter, "there is something. It looks like part of a wreck
half buried in the sand."

"Ah!" cried Pencroft, "I see what it is!"

"What?" asked Neb.

"Barrels, barrels, which perhaps are full," replied the sailor.

"Pull to the shore, Pencroft!" said Cyrus.

A few strokes of the oar brought the canoe into a little creek, and its
passengers leaped on shore.


Pencroft was not mistaken. Two barrels were there, half buried in the sand,
but still firmly attached to a large chest, which, sustained by them, had floated to
the moment when it stranded on the beach.

"There has been a wreck, then, in some part of the island," said Herbert.

"Evidently," replied Spilett.

"But what's in this chest?" cried Pencroft, with very natural impatience.
"What's in this chest? It is shut up, and nothing to open it with! Well, perhaps a
stone--"

And the sailor, raising a heavy block, was about to break in one of the sides
of the chest, when the engineer arrested his hand.

"Pencroft," said he, "can you restrain your impatience for one hour only?"

"But, captain, just think! Perhaps there is everything we want in there!"

"We shall find that out, Pencroft," replied the engineer; "but trust to me, and
do not break the chest, which may be useful to us. We must convey it to Granite
House, where we can open it easily, and without breaking it. It is quite prepared
for a voyage; and since it has floated here, it may just as well float to the mouth
of the river."

"You are right, captain, and I was wrong, as usual," replied the sailor.

The engineer's advice was good. In fact, the canoe probably would not have
been able to contain the articles possibly enclosed in the chest, which doubtless
was heavy, since two empty barrels were required to buoy it up. It was,
therefore, much better to tow it to the beach at Granite House.

And now, whence had this chest come? That was the important question.
Cyrus Harding and his companions looked attentively around them, and
examined the shore for several hundred steps. No other articles or pieces of
wreck could be found. Herbert and Neb climbed a high rock to survey the sea,
but there was nothing in sight--neither a dismasted vessel nor a ship under sail.

However, there was no doubt that there had been a wreck. Perhaps this
incident was connected with that of the bullet? Perhaps strangers had landed on
another part of the island? Perhaps they were still there? But the thought which
came naturally to the settlers was, that these strangers could not be Malay
pirates, for the chest was evidently of American or European make.

All the party returned to the chest, which was of an unusually large size. It
was made of oak wood, very carefully closed and covered with a thick hide,
which was secured by copper nails. The two great barrels, hermetically sealed,
but which sounded hollow and empty, were fastened to its sides by strong ropes,
knotted with a skill which Pencroft directly pronounced sailors alone could
exhibit. It appeared to be in a perfect state of preservation, which was explained
by the fact that it had stranded on a sandy beach, and not among rocks. They had


no doubt whatever, on examining it carefully, that it had not been long in the
water, and that its arrival on this coast was recent. The water did not appear to
have penetrated to the inside, and the articles which it contained were no doubt
uninjured.

It was evident that this chest had been thrown overboard from some
dismasted vessel driven towards the island, and that, in the hope that it would
reach the land, where they might afterwards find it, the passengers had taken the
precaution to buoy it up by means of this floating apparatus.

"We will tow this chest to Granite House," said the engineer, "where we can
make an inventory of its contents; then, if we discover any of the survivors from
the supposed wreck, we can return it to those to whom it belongs. If we find no
one--"

"We will keep it for ourselves!" cried Pencroft. "But what in the world can
there be in it?”

The sea was already approaching the chest, and the high tide would evidently
float it. One of the ropes which fastened the barrels was partly unlashed and used
as a cable to unite the floating apparatus with the canoe. Pencroft and Neb then
dug away the sand with their oars, so as to facilitate the moving of the chest,
towing which the boat soon began to double the point, to which the name of
Flotsam Point was given.

The chest was heavy, and the barrels were scarcely sufficient to keep it above
water. The sailor also feared every instant that it would get loose and sink to the
bottom of the sea. But happily his fears were not realized, and an hour and a half
after they set out--all that time had been taken up in going a distance of three
miles--the boat touched the beach below Granite House.

Canoe and chest were then hauled up on the sands; and as the tide was then
going out, they were soon left high and dry. Neb, hurrying home, brought back
some tools with which to open the chest in such a way that it might be injured as
little as possible, and they proceeded to its inventory. Pencroft did not try to hide
that he was greatly excited.

The sailor began by detaching the two barrels, which, being in good
condition, would of course be of use. Then the locks were forced with a cold
chisel and hammer, and the lid thrown back. A second casing of zinc lined the
interior of the chest, which had been evidently arranged that the articles which it
enclosed might under any circumstances be sheltered from damp.

"Oh!" cried Neb, "suppose it's jam!

"I hope not," replied the reporter.

"If only there was--" said the sailor in a low voice.

"What?" asked Neb, who overheard him.


"Nothing!"

The covering of zinc was torn off and thrown back over the sides of the
chest, and by degrees numerous articles of very varied character were produced
and strewn about on the sand. At each new object Pencroft uttered fresh hurrahs,
Herbert clapped his hands, and Neb danced up and down. There were books
which made Herbert wild with joy, and cooking utensils which Neb covered with
kisses!

In short, the colonists had reason to be extremely satisfied, for this chest
contained tools, weapons, instruments, clothes, books; and this is the exact list of
them as stated in Gideon Spilett's notebook: --Tools:--3 knives with several
blades, 2 woodmen's axes, 2 carpenter's hatchets, 3 planes, 2 adzes, 1 twibil or
mattock, 6 chisels, 2 files, 3 hammers, 3 gimlets, 2 augers, 10 bags of nails and
screws, 3 saws of different sizes, 2 boxes of needles.

Weapons:--2 flint-lock guns, 2 for percussion caps, 2 breach-loader carbines,
5 boarding cutlasses, 4 sabers, 2 barrels of powder, each containing twenty-five
pounds; 12 boxes of percussion caps.

Instruments:--1 sextant, 1 double opera-glass, 1 telescope, 1 box of
mathematical instruments, 1 mariner's compass, 1 Fahrenheit thermometer, 1
aneroid barometer, 1 box containing a photographic apparatus, object-glass,
plates, chemicals, etc.

Clothes:--2 dozen shirts of a peculiar material resembling wool, but
evidently of a vegetable origin; 3 dozen stockings of the same material.

Utensils:--1 iron pot, 6 copper saucepans, 3 iron dishes, 10 metal plates, 2
kettles, 1 portable stove, 6 table-knives.

Books:--1 Bible, 1 atlas, 1 dictionary of the different Polynesian idioms, 1
dictionary of natural science, in six volumes; 3 reams of white paper, 2 books
with blank pages.

"It must be allowed," said the reporter, after the inventory had been made,
"that the owner of this chest was a practical man! Tools, weapons, instruments,
clothes, utensils, books--nothing is wanting! It might really be said that he
expected to be wrecked, and had prepared for it beforehand."

"Nothing is wanting, indeed," murmured Cyrus Harding thoughtfully.

"And for a certainty," added Herbert, "the vessel which carried this chest and
its Owner was not a Malay pirate!"

"Unless," said Pencroft, "the owner had been taken prisoner by pirates--"

"That is not admissible," replied the reporter. "It is more probable that an
American or European vessel has been driven into this quarter, and that her
passengers, wishing to save necessaries at least, prepared this chest and threw it
overboard."


"Is that your opinion, captain?” asked Herbert.

"Yes, my boy," replied the engineer, "that may have been the case. It is
possible that at the moment, or in expectation of a wreck, they collected into this
chest different articles of the greatest use in hopes of finding it again on the
coast--"

"Even the photographic box!" exclaimed the sailor incredulously.

"As to that apparatus," replied Harding, "I do not quite see the use of it; and a
more complete supply of clothes or more abundant ammunition would have been
more valuable to us as well as to any other castaways!"

"But isn't there any mark or direction on these instruments, tools, or books,
which would tell us something about them?" asked Gideon Spilett.

That might be ascertained. Each article was carefully examined, especially
the books, instruments and weapons. Neither the weapons nor the instruments,
contrary to the usual custom, bore the name of the maker; they were, besides, in
a perfect state, and did not appear to have been used. The same peculiarity
marked the tools and utensils; all were new, which proved that the articles had
not been taken by chance and thrown into the chest, but, on the contrary, that the
choice of things had been well considered and arranged with care. This was also
indicated by the second case of metal which had preserved them from damp, and
which could not have been soldered in a moment of haste.

As to the dictionaries of natural science and Polynesian idioms, both were
English; but they neither bore the name of the publisher nor the date of
publication.

The same with the Bible printed in English, in quarto, remarkable from a
typographic point of view, and which appeared to have been often used.

The atlas was a magnificent work, comprising maps of every country in the
world, and several planispheres arranged upon Mercator's projection, and of
which the nomenclature was in French--but which also bore neither date nor
name of publisher.

There was nothing, therefore, on these different articles by which they could
be traced, and nothing consequently of a nature to show the nationality of the
vessel which must have recently passed these shores.

But, wherever the chest might have come from, it was a treasure to the
settlers on Lincoln Island. Till then, by making use of the productions of nature,
they had created everything for themselves, and, thanks to their intelligence, they
had managed without difficulty. But did it not appear as if Providence had
wished to reward them by sending them these productions of human industry?
Their thanks rose unanimously to Heaven.

However, one of them was not quite satisfied: it was Pencroft. It appeared


that the chest did not contain something which he evidently held in great esteem,
for in proportion as they approached the bottom of the box, his hurrahs
diminished in heartiness, and, the inventory finished, he was heard to mutter
these words:--"That's all very fine, but you can see that there is nothing for me in
that box!"

This led Neb to say,--

"Why, friend Pencroft, what more do you expect?"

"Half a pound of tobacco," replied Pencroft seriously, "and nothing would
have been wanting to complete my happiness!"

No one could help laughing at this speech of the sailor's.

But the result of this discovery of the chest was, that it was now more than
ever necessary to explore the island thoroughly. It was therefore agreed that the
next moming at break of day, they should set out, by ascending the Mercy so as
to reach the western shore. If any castaways had landed on the coast, it was to be
feared they were without resources, and it was therefore the more necessary to
carry help to them without delay.

During the day the different articles were carried to Granite House, where
they were methodically arranged in the great hall. This day--the 29th of October-
-happened to be a Sunday, and, before going to bed, Herbert asked the engineer
if he would not read them something from the Gospel.

"Willingly," replied Cyrus Harding.

He took the sacred volume, and was about to open it, when Pencroft stopped
him, saying,--"Captain, I am superstitious. Open at random and read the first
verse which, your eye falls upon. We will see if it applies to our situation."

Cyrus Harding smiled at the sailor's idea, and, yielding to his wish, he
opened exactly at a place where the leaves were separated by a marker.

Immediately his eyes were attracted by a cross which, made with a pencil,
was placed against the eighth verse of the seventh chapter of the Gospel of St.
Matthew. He read the verse, which was this:--

"For every one that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth."


Chapter 3


The next day, the 30th of October, all was ready for the proposed exploring
expedition, which recent events had rendered so necessary. In fact, things had so
come about that the settlers in Lincoln Island no longer needed help for
themselves, but were even able to carry it to others.

It was therefore agreed that they should ascend the Mercy as far as the river
was navigable. A great part of the distance would thus be traversed without
fatigue, and the explorers could transport their provisions and arms to an
advanced point in the west of the island.

It was necessary to think not only of the things which they should take with
them, but also of those which they might have by chance to bring back to
Granite House. If there had been a wreck on the coast, as was supposed, there
would be many things cast up, which would be lawfully their prizes. In the event
of this, the cart would have been of more use than the light canoe, but it was
heavy and clumsy to drag, and therefore more difficult to use; this led Pencroft
to express his regret that the chest had not contained, besides "his halfpound of
tobacco," a pair of strong New Jersey horses, which would have been very useful
to the colony!

The provisions, which Neb had already packed up, consisted of a store of
meat and of several gallons of beer, that is to say enough to sustain them for
three days, the time which Harding assigned for the expedition. They hoped
besides to supply themselves on the road, and Neb took care not to forget the
portable stove.

The only tools the settlers took were the two woodmen's axes, which they
could use to cut a path through the thick forests, as also the instruments, the
telescope and pocket-compass.

For weapons they selected the two flint-lock guns, which were likely to be
more useful to them than the percussion fowling-pieces, the first only requiring
flints which could be easily replaced, and the latter needing fulminating caps, a
frequent use of which would soon exhaust their limited stock. However, they
took also one of the carbines and some cartridges. As to the powder, of which
there was about fifty pounds in the barrel, a small supply of it had to be taken,
but the engineer hoped to manufacture an explosive substance which would
allow them to husband it. To the firearms were added the five cutlasses well
sheathed in leather, and, thus supplied, the settlers could venture into the vast
forest with some chance of success.


It is useless to add that Pencroft, Herbert, and Neb, thus armed, were at the
summit of their happiness, although Cyrus Harding made them promise not to
fire a shot unless it was necessary.

At six in the morning the canoe put off from the shore; all had embarked,
including Top, and they proceeded to the mouth of the Mercy.

The tide had begun to come up half an hour before. For several hours,
therefore, there would be a current, which it was well to profit by, for later the
ebb would make it difficult to ascend the river. The tide was already strong, for
in three days the moon would be full, and it was enough to keep the boat in the
center of the current, where it floated swiftly along between the high banks
without its being necessary to increase its speed by the aid of the oars. In a few
minutes the explorers arrived at the angle formed by the Mercy and exactly at
the place where, seven months before, Pencroft had made his first raft of wood.

After this sudden angle the river widened and flowed under the shade of
great evergreen firs.

The aspect of the banks was magnificent. Cyrus Harding and his companions
could not but admire the lovely effects so easily produced by nature with water
and trees. As they advanced the forest element diminished. On the right bank of
the river grew magnificent specimens of the ulmaceae tribe, the precious elm, so
valuable to builders, and which withstands well the action of water. Then there
were numerous groups belonging to the same family, among others one in
particular, the fruit of which produces a very useful oil. Further on, Herbert
remarked the lardizabala, a twining shrub which, when bruised in water,
furnishes excellent cordage; and two or three ebony trees of a beautiful black,
crossed with capricious veins.

From time to time, in certain places where the landing was easy, the canoe
was stopped, when Gideon Spilett, Herbert, and Pencroft, their guns in their
hands, and preceded by Top, jumped on shore. Without expecting game, some
useful plant might be met with, and the young naturalist was delighted with
discovering a sort of wild spinach, belonging to the order of chenopodiaceae,
and numerous specimens of cruciferae, belonging to the cabbage tribe, which it
would certainly be possible to cultivate by transplanting. There were cresses,
horseradish, turnips, and lastly, little branching hairy stalks, scarcely more than
three feet high, which produced brownish grains.

"Do you know what this plant is?" asked Herbert of the sailor.

"Tobacco!" cried Pencroft, who evidently had never seen his favorite plant
except in the bowl of his pipe.

"No, Pencroft," replied Herbert; "this is not tobacco, it is mustard."

"Mustard be hanged!" returned the sailor; "but if by chance you happen to


come across a tobacco-plant, my boy, pray don't scorn that!"

"We shall find it some day!" said Gideon Spilett.

"Well!" exclaimed Pencroft, "when that day comes, I do not know what more
will be wanting in our island!"

These different plants, which had been carefully rooted up, were carried to
the canoe, where Cyrus Harding had remained buried in thought.

The reporter, Herbert, and Pencroft in this manner frequently disembarked,
sometimes on the right bank, sometimes on the left bank of the Mercy.

The latter was less abrupt, but the former more wooded. The engineer
ascertained by consulting his pocket-compass that the direction of the river from
the first turn was obviously southwest and northeast, and nearly straight for a
length of about three miles. But it was to be supposed that this direction changed
beyond that point, and that the Mercy continued to the northwest, towards the
spurs of Mount Franklin, among which the river rose.

During one of these excursions, Gideon Spilett managed to get hold of two
couples of living gallinaceae. They were birds with long, thin beaks, lengthened
necks, short wings, and without any appearance of a tail. Herbert rightly gave
them the name of tinamous, and it was resolved that they should be the first
tenants of their future poultry-yard.

But till then the guns had not spoken, and the first report which awoke the
echoes of the forest of the Far West was provoked by the appearance of a
beautiful bird, resembling the kingfisher.

"I recognize him!" cried Pencroft, and it seemed as if his gun went off by
itself.

"What do you recognize?" asked the reporter.

"The bird which escaped us on our first excursion, and from which we gave
the name to that part of the forest."

"A jacamar!" cried Herbert.

It was indeed a jacamar, of which the plumage shines with a metallic luster.
A shot brought it to the ground, and Top carried it to the canoe. At the same time
half a dozen lories were brought down. The lory is of the size of a pigeon, the
plumage dashed with green, part of the wings crimson, and its crest bordered
with white. To the young boy belonged the honor of this shot, and he was proud
enough of it. Lories are better food than the jacamar, the flesh of which is rather
tough, but it was difficult to persuade Pencroft that he had not killed the king of
eatable birds. It was ten o'clock in the morning when the canoe reached a second
angle of the Mercy, nearly five miles from its mouth. Here a halt was made for
breakfast under the shade of some splendid trees. The river still measured from
sixty to seventy feet in breadth, and its bed from five to six feet in depth. The


engineer had observed that it was increased by numerous affluents, but they were
unnavigable, being simply little streams. As to the forest, including Jacamar
Wood, as well as the forests of the Far West, it extended as far as the eye could
reach. In no place, either in the depths of the forests or under the trees on the
banks of the Mercy, was the presence of man revealed. The explorers could not
discover one suspicious trace. It was evident that the woodman's axe had never
touched these trees, that the pioneer's knife had never severed the creepers
hanging from one trunk to another in the midst of tangled brushwood and long
grass. If castaways had landed on the island, they could not have yet quitted the
shore, and it was not in the woods that the survivors of the supposed shipwreck
should be sought.

The engineer therefore manifested some impatience to reach the western
coast of Lincoln Island, which was at least five miles distant according to his
estimation.

The voyage was continued, and as the Mercy appeared to flow not towards
the shore, but rather towards Mount Franklin, it was decided that they should use
the boat as long as there was enough water under its keel to float it. It was both
fatigue spared and time gained, for they would have been obliged to cut a path
through the thick wood with their axes. But soon the flow completely failed
them, either the tide was going down, and it was about the hour, or it could no
longer be felt at this distance from the mouth of the Mercy. They had therefore to
make use of the oars. Herbert and Neb each took one, and Pencroft took the
scull. The forest soon became less dense, the trees grew further apart and often
quite isolated. But the further they were from each other the more magnificent
they appeared, profiting, as they did, by the free, pure air which circulated
around them.

What splendid specimens of the flora of this latitude! Certainly their
presence would have been enough for a botanist to name without hesitation the
parallel which traversed Lincoln Island.

"Eucalypti!" cried Herbert.

They were, in fact, those splendid trees, the giants of the extratropical zone,
the congeners of the Australian and New Zealand eucalyptus, both situated under
the same latitude as Lincoln Island. Some rose to a height of two hundred feet.
Their trunks at the base measured twenty feet in circumference, and their bark
was covered by a network of farrows containing a red, sweet-smelling gum.
Nothing is more wonderful or more singular than those enormous specimens of
the order of the myrtaceae, with their leaves placed vertically and not
horizontally, so that an edge and not a surface looks upwards, the effect being
that the sun's rays penetrate more freely among the trees.


The ground at the foot of the eucalypti was carpeted with grass, and from the
bushes escaped flights of little birds, which glittered in the sunlight like winged
rubies.

"These are something like trees!" cried Neb; "but are they good for
anything?"

"Pooh!" replied Pencroft. "Of course there are vegetable giants as well as
human giants, and they are no good, except to show themselves at fairs!"

"I think that you are mistaken, Pencroft," replied Gideon Spilett, "and that
the wood of the eucalyptus has begun to be very advantageously employed in
cabinet-making."

"And I may add," said Herbert, "that the eucalyptus belongs to a family
which comprises many useful members; the guava-tree, from whose fruit guava
jelly is made; the clove-tree, which produces the spice; the pomegranate-tree,
which bears pomegranates; the Eugeacia Cauliflora, the fruit of which is used in
making a tolerable wine; the Ugui myrtle, which contains an excellent alcoholic
liquor; the Caryophyllus myrtle, of which the bark forms an esteemed cinnamon;
the Eugenia Pimenta, from whence comes Jamaica pepper; the common myrtle,
from whose buds and berries spice is sometimes made; the Eucalyptus manifera,
which yields a sweet sort of manna; the Guinea Eucalyptus, the sap of which is
transformed into beer by fermentation; in short, all those trees known under the
name of gum-trees or iron-bark trees in Australia, belong to this family of the
myrtaceae, which contains forty-six genera and thirteen hundred species!"

The lad was allowed to run on, and he delivered his little botanical lecture
with great animation. Cyrus Harding listened smiling, and Pencroft with an
indescribable feeling of pride.

"Very good, Herbert," replied Pencroft, "but I could swear that all those
useful specimens you have just told us about are none of them giants like these!"

"That is true, Pencroft."

"That supports what I said," returned the sailor, "namely, that these giants are
good for nothing!"

"There you are wrong, Pencroft," said the engineer; "these gigantic eucalypti,
which shelter us, are good for something."

"And what is that?"

"To render the countries which they inhabit healthy. Do you know what they
are called in Australia and New Zealand?"

"No, captain.”

"They are called ‘fever trees."

"Because they give fevers?"

"No, because they prevent them!"


"Good. I must note that," said the reporter.

"Note it then, my dear Spilett; for it appears proved that the presence of the
eucalyptus is enough to neutralize miasmas. This natural antidote has been tried
in certain countries in the middle of Europe and the north of Africa where the
soil was absolutely unhealthy, and the sanitary condition of the inhabitants has
been gradually ameliorated. No more intermittent fevers prevail in the regions
now covered with forests of the myrtaceae. This fact is now beyond doubt, and it
is a happy circumstance for us settlers in Lincoln Island."

"Ah! what an island! What a blessed island!" cried Pencroft. "I tell you, it
wants nothing--unless it is--"

"That will come, Pencroft, that will be found," replied the engineer; "but now
we must continue our voyage and push on as far as the river will carry our boat!"

The exploration was therefore continued for another two miles in the midst
of country covered with eucalypti, which predominated in the woods of this
portion of the island. The space which they occupied extended as far as the eye
could reach on each side of the Mercy, which wound along between high green
banks. The bed was often obstructed by long weeds, and even by pointed rocks,
which rendered the navigation very difficult. The action of the oars was
prevented, and Pencroft was obliged to push with a pole. They found also that
the water was becoming shallower and shallower, and that the canoe must soon
stop. The sun was already sinking towards the horizon, and the trees threw long
shadows on the ground. Cyrus Harding, seeing that he could not hope to reach
the western coast of the island in one joumey, resolved to camp at the place
where any further navigation was prevented by want of water. He calculated that
they were still five or six miles from the coast, and this distance was too great
for them to attempt during the night in the midst of unknown woods.

The boat was pushed on through the forest, which gradually became thicker
again, and appeared also to have more inhabitants; for if the eyes of the sailor
did not deceive him, he thought he saw bands of monkeys springing among the
trees. Sometimes even two or three of these animals stopped at a little distance
from the canoe and gazed at the settlers without manifesting any terror, as if,
seeing men for the first time, they had not yet learned to fear them. It would have
been easy to bring down one of these quadramani with a gunshot, and Pencroft
was greatly tempted to fire, but Harding opposed so useless a massacre. This
was prudent, for the monkeys, or apes rather, appearing to be very powerful and
extremely active, it was useless to provoke an unnecessary aggression, and the
creatures might, ignorant of the power of the explorers’ firearms, have attacked
them. It is true that the sailor considered the monkeys from a purely alimentary
point of view, for those animals which are herbivorous make very excellent


game; but since they had an abundant supply of provisions, it was a pity to waste
their ammunition.

Towards four o'clock, the navigation of the Mercy became exceedingly
difficult, for its course was obstructed by aquatic plants and rocks. The banks
rose higher and higher, and already they were approaching the spurs of Mount
Franklin. The source could not be far off, since it was fed by the water from the
southern slopes of the mountain.

"In a quarter of an hour," said the sailor, "we shall be obliged to stop,
captain."

"Very well, we will stop, Pencroft, and we will make our encampment for the
night."

"At what distance are we from Granite House?" asked Herbert.


"About seven miles," replied the engineer, "taking into calculation, however,
the detours of the river, which has carried us to the northwest."

"Shall we go on?" asked the reporter.

"Yes, as long as we can," replied Cyrus Harding. "To-morrow, at break of
day, we will leave the canoe, and in two hours I hope we shall cross the distance
which separates us from the coast, and then we shall have the whole day in
which to explore the shore."

"Go ahead!" replied Pencroft.

But soon the boat grated on the stony bottom of the river, which was now not
more than twenty feet in breadth. The trees met like a bower overhead, and
caused a half-darkness. They also heard the noise of a waterfall, which showed
that a few hundred feet up the river there was a natural barrier.

Presently, after a sudden turn of the river, a cascade appeared through the
trees. The canoe again touched the bottom, and in a few minutes it was moored
to a trunk near the right bank.

It was nearly five o'clock. The last rays of the sun gleamed through the thick
foliage and glanced on the little waterfall, making the spray sparkle with all the
colors of the rainbow. Beyond that, the Mercy was lost in the bushwood, where
it was fed from some hidden source. The different streams which flowed into it
increased it to a regular river further down, but here it was simply a shallow,
limpid brook.

It was agreed to camp here, as the place was charming. The colonists
disembarked, and a fire was soon lighted under a clump of trees, among the
branches of which Cyrus Harding and his companions could, if it was necessary,
take refuge for the night.

Supper was quickly devoured, for they were very hungry, and then there was
only sleeping to think of. But, as roarings of rather a suspicious nature had been
heard during the evening, a good fire was made up for the night, so as to protect
the sleepers with its crackling flames. Neb and Pencroft also watched by turns,
and did not spare fuel. They thought they saw the dark forms of some wild
animals prowling round the camp among the bushes, but the night passed
without incident, and the next day, the 31st of October, at five o'clock in the
morning, all were on foot, ready for a start.


Chapter 4


It was six o' clock in the morning when the settlers, after a hasty breakfast,
set out to reach by the shortest way, the western coast of the island. And how
long would it take to do this? Cyrus Harding had said two hours, but of course
that depended on the nature of the obstacles they might meet with As it was
probable that they would have to cut a path through the grass, shrubs, and
creepers, they marched axe in hand, and with guns also ready, wisely taking
warning from the cries of the wild beasts heard in the night.

The exact position of the encampment could be determined by the bearing of
Mount Franklin, and as the volcano arose in the north at a distance of less than
three miles, they had only to go straight towards the southwest to reach the
western coast. They set out, having first carefully secured the canoe. Pencroft
and Neb carried sufficient provision for the little band for at least two days. It
would not thus be necessary to hunt. The engineer advised his companions to
refrain from firing, that their presence might not be betrayed to any one near the
shore. The first hatchet blows were given among the brushwood in the midst of
some mastic-trees, a little above the cascade; and his compass in his hand, Cyrus
Harding led the way.

The forest here was composed for the most part of trees which had already
been met with near the lake and on Prospect Heights. There were deodars,
Douglas firs, casuarinas, gum trees, eucalypti, hibiscus, cedars, and other trees,
generally of a moderate size, for their number prevented their growth.

Since their departure, the settlers had descended the slopes which constituted
the mountain system of the island, on to a dry soil, but the luxuriant vegetation
of which indicated it to be watered either by some subterranean marsh or by
some stream. However, Cyrus Harding did not remember having seen, at the
time of his excursion to the crater, any other watercourses but the Red Creek and
the Mercy.

During the first part of their excursion, they saw numerous troops of
monkeys who exhibited great astonishment at the sight of men, whose
appearance was so new to them. Gideon Spilett jokingly asked whether these
active and merry quadrupeds did not consider him and his companions as
degenerate brothers.

And certainly, pedestrians, hindered at each step by bushes, caught by
creepers, barred by trunks of trees, did not shine beside those supple animals,
who, bounding from branch to branch, were hindered by nothing on their course.


The monkeys were numerous, but happily they did not manifest any hostile
disposition.

Several pigs, agoutis, kangaroos, and other rodents were seen, also two or
three koalas, at which Pencroft longed to have a shot.

"But," said he, "you may jump and play just now; we shall have one or two
words to say to you on our way back!"

At half-past nine the way was suddenly found to be barred by an unknown
stream, from thirty to forty feet broad, whose rapid current dashed foaming over
the numerous rocks which interrupted its course. This creek was deep and clear,
but it was absolutely unnavigable.

"We are cut off!" cried Neb.

"No," replied Herbert, "it is only a stream, and we can easily swim over."

"What would be the use of that?" returned Harding. "This creek evidently
runs to the sea. Let us remain on this side and follow the bank, and I shall be
much astonished if it does not lead us very quickly to the coast. Forward!"

"One minute," said the reporter. "The name of this creek, my friends? Do not
let us leave our geography incomplete."

"All right!" said Pencroft.

"Name it, my boy," said the engineer, addressing the lad.

"Will it not be better to wait until we have explored it to its mouth?"
answered Herbert.

"Very well," replied Cyrus Harding. "Let us follow it as fast as we can
without stopping."

"Still another minute!" said Pencroft.

"What's the matter?" asked the reporter.

"Though hunting is forbidden, fishing is allowed, I suppose," said the sailor.

"We have no time to lose," replied the engineer.

"Oh! five minutes!" replied Pencroft, "I only ask for five minutes to use in
the interest of our breakfast!"

And Pencroft, lying down on the bank, plunged his arm into the water, and
soon pulled up several dozen of fine crayfish from among the stones.

"These will be good!" cried Neb, going to the sailor's aid.

"As I said, there is everything in this island, except tobacco!" muttered
Pencroft with a sigh.

The fishing did not take five minutes, for the crayfish were swarming in the
creek. A bag was filled with the crustaceae, whose shells were of a cobalt blue.
The settlers then pushed on.

They advanced more rapidly and easily along the bank of the river than in
the forest. From time to time they came upon the traces of animals of a large size


who had come to quench their thirst at the stream, but none were actually seen,
and it was evidently not in this part of the forest that the peccary had received
the bullet which had cost Pencroft a grinder.

In the meanwhile, considering the rapid current, Harding was led to suppose
that he and his companions were much farther from the western coast than they
had at first supposed. In fact, at this hour, the rising tide would have turned back
the current of the creek, if its mouth had only been a few miles distant. Now, this
effect was not produced, and the water pursued its natural course. The engineer
was much astonished at this, and frequently consulted his compass, to assure
himself that some turn of the river was not leading them again into the Far West.

However, the creek gradually widened and its waters became less
tumultuous. The trees on the right bank were as close together as on the left
bank, and it was impossible to distinguish anything beyond them; but these
masses of wood were evidently uninhabited, for Top did not bark, and the
intelligent animal would not have failed to signal the presence of any stranger in
the neighborhood.

At half-past ten, to the great surprise of Cyrus Harding, Herbert, who was a
little in front, suddenly stopped and exclaimed,--

"The sea!"

In a few minutes more, the whole western shore of the island lay extended
before the eyes of the settlers.

But what a contrast between this and the eastern coast, upon which chance
had first thrown them. No granite cliff, no rocks, not even a sandy beach. The
forest reached the shore, and the tall trees bending over the water were beaten by
the waves. It was not such a shore as is usually formed by nature, either by
extending a vast carpet of sand, or by grouping masses of rock, but a beautiful
border consisting of the most splendid trees. The bank was raised a little above
the level of the sea, and on this luxuriant soil, supported by a granite base, the
fine forest trees seemed to be as firmly planted as in the interior of the island.

The colonists were then on the shore of an unimportant little harbor, which
would scarcely have contained even two or three fishing-boats. It served as a
neck to the new creek, of which the curious thing was that its waters, instead of
joining the sea by a gentle slope, fell from a height of more than forty feet,
which explained why the rising tide was not felt up the stream. In fact, the tides
of the Pacific, even at their maximum elevation, could never reach the level of
the river, and, doubtless, millions of years would pass before the water would
have worn away the granite and hollowed a practicable mouth.

It was settled that the name of Falls River should be given to this stream.
Beyond, towards the north, the forest border was prolonged for a space of nearly


two miles; then the trees became scarcer, and beyond that again the picturesque
heights described a nearly straight line, which ran north and south. On the
contrary, all the part of the shore between Falls River and Reptile End was a
mass of wood, magnificent trees, some straight, others bent, so that the long sea-
swell bathed their roots. Now, it was this coast, that is, all the Serpentine
Peninsula, that was to be explored, for this part of the shore offered a refuge to
castaways, which the other wild and barren side must have refused.

The weather was fine and clear, and from a height of a hillock on which Neb
and Pencroft had arranged breakfast, a wide view was obtained. There was,
however, not a sail in sight; nothing could be seen along the shore as far as the
eye could reach. But the engineer would take nothing for granted until he had
explored the coast to the very extremity of the Serpentine Peninsula.

Breakfast was soon despatched, and at half-past eleven the captain gave the
signal for departure. Instead of proceeding over the summit of a cliff or along a
sandy beach, the settlers were obliged to remain under cover of the trees so that
they might continue on the shore.

The distance which separated Falls River from Reptile End was about twelve
miles. It would have taken the settlers four hours to do this, on a clear ground
and without hurrying themselves; but as it was they needed double the time, for
what with trees to go round, bushes to cut down, and creepers to chop away, they
were impeded at every step, these obstacles greatly lengthening their journey.

There was, however, nothing to show that a shipwreck had taken place
recently. It is true that, as Gideon Spilett observed, any remains of it might have
drifted out to sea, and they must not take it for granted that because they could
find no traces of it, a ship had not been castaway on the coast.

The reporter's argument was just, and besides, the incident of the bullet
proved that a shot must have been fired in Lincoln Island within three months.

It was already five o'clock, and there were still two miles between the settlers
and the extremity of the Serpentine Peninsula. It was evident that after having
reached Reptile End, Harding and his companions would not have time to return
before dark to their encampment near the source of the Mercy. It would therefore
be necessary to pass the night on the promontory. But they had no lack of
provisions, which was lucky, for there were no animals on the shore, though
birds, on the contrary, abound--jacamars, couroucous, tragopans, grouse, lories,
parrots, cockatoos, pheasants, pigeons, and a hundred others. There was not a
tree without a nest, and not a nest which was not full of flapping wings.

Towards seven o'clock the weary explorers arrived at Reptile End. Here the
seaside forest ended, and the shore resumed the customary appearance of a coast,
with rocks, reefs, and sands. It was possible that something might be found here,


but darkness came on, and the further exploration had to be put off to the next
day.

Pencroft and Herbert hastened on to find a suitable place for their camp.
Among the last trees of the forest of the Far West, the boy found several thick
clumps of bamboos.

"Good," said he; "this is a valuable discovery."

"Valuable?" returned Pencroft.

"Certainly," replied Herbert. "I may say, Pencroft, that the bark of the
bamboo, cut into flexible laths, is used for making baskets; that this bark,
mashed into a paste, is used for the manufacture of Chinese paper; that the stalks
furnish, according to their size, canes and pipes and are used for conducting
water; that large bamboos make excellent material for building, being light and
strong, and being never attacked by insects. I will add that by sawing the
bamboo in two at the joint, keeping for the bottom the part of the transverse film
which forms the joint, useful cups are obtained, which are much in use among
the Chinese. No! you don't care for that. But--"

"But what?"

"But I can tell you, if you are ignorant of it, that in India these bamboos are
eaten like asparagus."

"Asparagus thirty feet high!" exclaimed the sailor. "And are they good?"

"Excellent," replied Herbert. "Only it is not the stems of thirty feet high
which are eaten, but the young shoots."

"Perfect, my boy, perfect!" replied Pencroft.

"T will also add that the pith of the young stalks, preserved in vinegar, makes
a good pickle."

"Better and better, Herbert!"

"And lastly, that the bamboos exude a sweet liquor which can be made into a
very agreeable drink."

"Is that all?" asked the sailor.

"That is all!"

"And they don't happen to do for smoking?"

"No, my poor Pencroft."

Herbert and the sailor had not to look long for a place in which to pass the
night. The rocks, which must have been violently beaten by the sea under the
influence of the winds of the southwest, presented many cavities in which shelter
could be found against the night air. But just as they were about to enter one of
these caves a loud roaring arrested them.

"Back!" cried Pencroft. "Our guns are only loaded with small shot, and
beasts which can roar as loud as that would care no more for it than for grains of


salt!" And the sailor, seizing Herbert by the arm, dragged him behind a rock, just
as a magnificent animal showed itself at the entrance of the cavern.

It was a jaguar of a size at least equal to its Asiatic congeners, that is to say,
it measured five feet from the extremity of its head to the beginning of its tail.
The yellow color of its hair was relieved by streaks and regular oblong spots of
black, which contrasted with the white of its chest. Herbert recognized it as the
ferocious rival of the tiger, as formidable as the puma, which is the rival of the
largest wolf!

The jaguar advanced and gazed around him with blazing eyes, his hair
bristling as if this was not the first time he had scented men.

At this moment the reporter appeared round a rock, and Herbert, thinking
that he had not seen the jaguar, was about to rush towards him, when Gideon
Spilett signed to him to remain where he was. This was not his first tiger, and
advancing to within ten feet of the animal he remained motionless, his gun to his
shoulder, without moving a muscle. The jaguar collected itself for a spring, but
at that moment a shot struck it in the eyes, and it fell dead.

Herbert and Pencroft rushed towards the jaguar. Neb and Harding also ran
up, and they remained for some instants contemplating the animal as it lay
stretched on the ground, thinking that its magnificent skin would be a great
ornament to the hall at Granite House.

"Oh, Mr. Spilett, how I admire and envy you!" cried Herbert, in a fit of very
natural enthusiasm.

"Well, my boy," replied the reporter, "you could have done the same."

"I! with such coolness!--"

"Imagine to yourself, Herbert, that the jaguar is only a hare, and you would
fire as quietly as possible."

"That is," rejoined Pencroft, "that it is not more dangerous than a hare!"

"And now," said Gideon Spilett, "since the jaguar has left its abode, I do not
see, my friends, why we should not take possession of it for the night."

"But others may come," said Pencroft.

"It will be enough to light a fire at the entrance of the cavern," said the
reporter, "and no wild beasts will dare to cross the threshold."

"Into the jaguar's house, then!" replied the sailor, dragging after him the body
of the animal.

While Neb skinned the jaguar, his companions collected an abundant supply
of dry wood from the forest, which they heaped up at the cave.

Cyrus Harding, seeing the clump of bamboos, cut a quantity, which he
mingled with the other fuel.

This done, they entered the grotto, of which the floor was strewn with bones,


the guns were carefully loaded, in case of a sudden attack, they had supper, and
then just before they lay down to rest, the heap of wood piled at the entrance was
set fire to. Immediately, a regular explosion, or rather a series of reports, broke
the silence! The noise was caused by the bamboos, which, as the flames reached
them, exploded like fireworks. The noise was enough to terrify even the boldest
of wild beasts.

It was not the engineer who had invented this way of causing loud
explosions, for, according to Marco Polo, the Tartars have employed it for many
centuries to drive away from their encampments the formidable wild beasts of
Central Asia.


Chapter 5


Cyrus Harding and his companions slept like innocent marmots in the cave
which the jaguar had so politely left at their disposal.

At sunrise all were on the shore at the extremity of the promontory, and their
gaze was directed towards the horizon, of which two-thirds of the circumference
were visible. For the last time the engineer could ascertain that not a sail nor the
wreck of a ship was on the sea, and even with the telescope nothing suspicious
could be discovered.

There was nothing either on the shore, at least, in the straight line of three
miles which formed the south side of the promontory, for beyond that, rising
ground had the rest of the coast, and even from the extremity of the Serpentine
Peninsula Claw Cape could not be seen.

The southern coast of the island still remained to be explored. Now should
they undertake it immediately, and devote this day to it?

This was not included in their first plan. In fact, when the boat was
abandoned at the sources of the Mercy, it had been agreed that after having
surveyed the west coast, they should go back to it, and return to Granite House
by the Mercy. Harding then thought that the western coast would have offered
refuge, either to a ship in distress, or to a vessel in her regular course; but now,
as he saw that this coast presented no good anchorage, he wished to seek on the
south what they had not been able to find on the west.

Gideon Spilett proposed to continue the exploration, that the question of the
supposed wreck might be completely settled, and he asked at what distance Claw
Cape might be from the extremity of the peninsula.

"About thirty miles," replied the engineer, "if we take into consideration the
curvings of the coast."

"Thirty miles!" returned Spilett. "That would be a long day's march.
Nevertheless, I think that we should return to Granite House by the south coast."

"But," observed Herbert, "from Claw Cape to Granite House there must be at
least another ten miles.

"Make it forty miles in all," replied the engineer, "and do not hesitate to do it.
At least we should survey the unknown shore, and then we shall not have to
begin the exploration again."

"Very good," said Pencroft. "But the boat?"

"The boat has remained by itself for one day at the sources of the Mercy,"
replied Gideon Spilett; "it may just as well stay there two days! As yet, we have


had no reason to think that the island is infested by thieves!"

"Yet," said the sailor, "when I remember the history of the turtle, I am far
from confident of that."

"The turtle! the turtle!" replied the reporter. "Don't you know that the sea
turned it over?"

"Who knows?" murmured the engineer.

"But,--" said Neb.

Neb had evidently something to say, for he opened his mouth to speak and
yet said nothing.

"What do you want to say, Neb?" asked the engineer.

"If we return by the shore to Claw Cape," replied Neb, "after having doubled
the Cape, we shall be stopped--"

"By the Mercy! of course," replied Herbert, "and we shall have neither
bridge nor boat by which to cross."

"But, captain,” added Pencroft, "with a few floating trunks we shall have no
difficulty in crossing the river."

"Never mind," said Spilett, "it will be useful to construct a bridge if we wish
to have an easy access to the Far West!"

"A bridge!" cried Pencroft. "Well, is not the captain the best engineer in his
profession? He will make us a bridge when we want one. As to transporting you
this evening to the other side of the Mercy, and that without wetting one thread
of your clothes, I will take care of that. We have provisions for another day, and
besides we can get plenty of game. Forward!"

The reporter's proposal, so strongly seconded by the sailor, received general
approbation, for each wished to have their doubts set at rest, and by returning by
Claw Cape the exploration would be ended. But there was not an hour to lose,
for forty miles was a long march, and they could not hope to reach Granite
House before night.

At six o'clock in the morning the little band set out. As a precaution the guns
were loaded with ball, and Top, who led the van, received orders to beat about
the edge of the forest.

From the extremity of the promontory which formed the tail of the peninsula
the coast was rounded for a distance of five miles, which was rapidly passed
over, without even the most minute investigations bringing to light the least trace
of any old or recent landings; no debris, no mark of an encampment, no cinders
of a fire, nor even a footprint!

From the point of the peninsula on which the settlers now were their gaze
could extend along the southwest. Twenty-five miles off the coast terminated in
the Claw Cape, which loomed dimly through the morning mists, and which, by


the phenomenon of the mirage, appeared as if suspended between land and
water.

Between the place occupied by the colonists and the other side of the
immense bay, the shore was composed, first, of a tract of low land, bordered in
the background by trees; then the shore became more irregular, projecting sharp
points into the sea, and finally ended in the black rocks which, accumulated in
picturesque disorder, formed Claw Cape.

Such was the development of this part of the island, which the settlers took
in at a glance, while stopping for an instant.

"If a vessel ran in here," said Pencroft, "she would certainly be lost.
Sandbanks and reefs everywhere! Bad quarters!"

"But at least something would be left of the ship," observed the reporter.

"There might be pieces of wood on the rocks, but nothing on the sands,"
replied the sailor.

"Why?"

"Because the sands are still more dangerous than the rocks, for they swallow
up everything that is thrown on them. In a few days the hull of a ship of several
hundred tons would disappear entirely in there!"

"So, Pencroft," asked the engineer, "if a ship has been wrecked on these
banks, is it not astonishing that there is now no trace of her remaining?"

"No, captain, with the aid of time and tempest. However, it would be
surprising, even in this case, that some of the masts or spars should not have
been thrown on the beach, out of reach of the waves."

"Let us go on with our search, then," returned Cyrus Harding.

At one o'clock the colonists arrived at the other side of Washington Bay, they
having now gone a distance of twenty miles.

They then halted for breakfast.

Here began the irregular coast, covered with lines of rocks and sandbanks.
The long sea-swell could be seen breaking over the rocks in the bay, forming a
foamy fringe. From this point to Claw Cape the beach was very narrow between
the edge of the forest and the reefs.

Walking was now more difficult, on account of the numerous rocks which
encumbered the beach. The granite cliff also gradually increased in height, and
only the green tops of the trees which crowned it could be seen.

After half an hour's rest, the settlers resumed their journey, and not a spot
among the rocks was left unexamined. Pencroft and Neb even rushed into the
surf whenever any object attracted their attention. But they found nothing, some
curious formations of the rocks having deceived them. They ascertained,
however, that eatable shellfish abounded there, but these could not be of any


great advantage to them until some easy means of communication had been
established between the two banks of the Mercy, and until the means of transport
had been perfected.

Nothing therefore which threw any light on the supposed wreck could be
found on this shore, yet an object of any importance, such as the hull of a ship,
would have been seen directly, or any of her masts and spans would have been
washed on shore, just as the chest had been, which was found twenty miles from
here. But there was nothing.

Towards three o'clock Harding and his companions arrived at a snug little
creek. It formed quite a natural harbor, invisible from the sea, and was entered
by a narrow channel.

At the back of this creek some violent convulsion had torn up the rocky
border, and a cutting, by a gentle slope, gave access to an upper plateau, which
might be situated at least ten miles from Claw Cape, and consequently four miles
in a straight line from Prospect Heights. Gideon Spilett proposed to his
companions that they should make a halt here. They agreed readily, for their
walk had sharpened their appetites; and although it was not their usual dinner-
hour, no one refused to strengthen himself with a piece of venison. This
luncheon would sustain them until their supper, which they intended to take at
Granite House. In a few minutes the settlers, seated under a clump of fine sea-
pines, were devouring the provisions which Neb produced from his bag.

This spot was raised from fifty to sixty feet above the level of the sea. The
view was very extensive, but beyond the cape it ended in Union Bay. Neither the
islet nor Prospect Heights was visible, and could not be from thence, for the
rising ground and the curtain of trees closed the northern horizon.

It is useless to add that notwithstanding the wide extent of sea which the
explorers could survey, and though the engineer swept the horizon with his glass,
no vessel could be found.

The shore was of course examined with the same care from the edge of the
water to the cliff, and nothing could be discovered even with the aid of the
instrument.

"Well," said Gideon Spilett, "it seems we must make up our minds to console
ourselves with thinking that no one will come to dispute with us the possession
of Lincoln Island!"

"But the bullet," cried Herbert. "That was not imaginary, I suppose!"

"Hang it, no!" exclaimed Pencroft, thinking of his absent tooth.

"Then what conclusion may be drawn?" asked the reporter.

"This," replied the engineer, "that three months or more ago, a vessel, either
voluntarily or not, came here."


"What! then you admit, Cyrus, that she was swallowed up without leaving
any trace?" cried the reporter.

"No, my dear Spilett; but you see that if it is certain that a human being set
foot on the island, it appears no less certain that he has now left it."

"Then, if I understand you right, captain," said Herbert, "the vessel has left
again?”

"Evidently."

"And we have lost an opportunity to get back to our country?" said Neb.

"I fear so."

"Very well, since the opportunity is lost, let us go on; it can't be helped,” said
Pencroft, who felt home-sickness for Granite House.

But just as they were rising, Top was heard loudly barking; and the dog
issued from the wood, holding in his mouth a rag soiled with mud.

Neb seized it. It was a piece of strong cloth!

Top still barked, and by his going and coming, seemed to invite his master to
follow him into the forest.

"Now there's something to explain the bullet!" exclaimed Pencroft.

"A castaway!" replied Herbert.

"Wounded, perhaps!" said Neb.

"Or dead!" added the reporter.

All ran after the dog, among the tall pines on the border of the forest.
Harding and his companions made ready their firearms, in case of an emergency.

They advanced some way into the wood, but to their great disappointment,
they as yet saw no signs of any human being having passed that way. Shrubs and
creepers were uninjured, and they had even to cut them away with the axe, as
they had done in the deepest recesses of the forest. It was difficult to fancy that
any human creature had ever passed there, but yet Top went backward and
forward, not like a dog who searches at random, but like a dog being endowed
with a mind, who is following up an idea.

In about seven or eight minutes Top stopped in a glade surrounded with tall
trees. The settlers gazed around them, but saw nothing, neither under the bushes
nor among the trees.

"What is the matter, Top?" said Cyrus Harding.

Top barked louder, bounding about at the foot of a gigantic pine. All at once
Pencroft shouted,--"Ho, splendid! capital!"

"What is it?” asked Spilett.

"We have been looking for a wreck at sea or on land!"

"Well?"

"Well; and here we've found one in the air!"


And the sailor pointed to a great white rag, caught in the top of the pine, a
fallen scrap of which the dog had brought to them.

"But that is not a wreck!" cried Gideon Spilett.

"I beg your pardon!" returned Pencroft.

"Why? is it--2?"

"Tt is all that remains of our airy boat, of our balloon, which has been caught
up aloft there, at the top of that tree!"

Pencroft was not mistaken, and he gave vent to his feelings in a tremendous
hurrah, adding,--

"There is good cloth! There is what will furnish us with linen for years.
There is what will make us handkerchiefs and shirts! Ha, ha, Mr. Spilett, what do
you say to an island where shirts grow on the trees?"

It was certainly a lucky circumstance for the settlers in Lincoln Island that
the balloon, after having made its last bound into the air, had fallen on the island
and thus given them the opportunity of finding it again, whether they kept the
case under its present form, or whether they wished to attempt another escape by
it, or whether they usefully employed the several hundred yards of cotton, which
was of fine quality. Pencroft's joy was therefore shared by all.

But it was necessary to bring down the remains of the balloon from the tree,
to place it in security, and this was no slight task. Neb, Herbert, and the sailor,
climbing to the summit of the tree, used all their skill to disengage the now
reduced balloon.

The operation lasted two hours, and then not only the case, with its valve, its
springs, its brasswork, lay on the ground, but the net, that is to say a considerable
quantity of ropes and cordage, and the circle and the anchor. The case, except for
the fracture, was in good condition, only the lower portion being torn.

It was a fortune which had fallen from the sky.

"All the same, captain," said the sailor, "if we ever decide to leave the island,
it won't be in a balloon, will it? These airboats won't go where we want them to
go, and we have had some experience in that way! Look here, we will build a
craft of some twenty tons, and then we can make a mainsail, a foresail, and a jib
out of that cloth. As to the rest of it, that will help to dress us."

"We shall see, Pencroft," replied Cyrus Harding; "we shall see."

"In the meantime, we must put it in a safe place," said Neb.

They certainly could not think of carrying this load of cloth, ropes, and
cordage, to Granite House, for the weight of it was very considerable, and while
waiting for a suitable vehicle in which to convey it, it was of importance that this
treasure should not be left longer exposed to the mercies of the first storm. The
settlers, uniting their efforts, managed to drag it as far as the shore, where they


discovered a large rocky cavity, which owing to its position could not be visited
either by the wind or rain.

"We needed a locker, and now we have one," said Pencroft; "but as we
cannot lock it up, it will be prudent to hide the opening. I don't mean from two-
legged thieves, but from those with four paws!"

At six o'clock, all was stowed away, and after having given the creek the
very suitable name of "Port Balloon," the settlers pursued their way along Claw
Cape. Pencroft and the engineer talked of the different projects which it was
agreed to put into execution with the briefest possible delay. It was necessary
first of all to throw a bridge over the Mercy, so as to establish an easy
communication with the south of the island; then the cart must be taken to bring
back the balloon, for the canoe alone could not carry it, then they would build a
decked boat, and Pencroft would rig it as a cutter, and they would be able to
undertake voyages of circumnavigation round the island, etc.

In the meanwhile night came on, and it was already dark when the settlers
reached Flotsam Point, where they had found the precious chest.

The distance between Flotsam Point and Granite House was another four
miles, and it was midnight when, after having followed the shore to the mouth of
the Mercy, the settlers arrived at the first angle formed by the Mercy.

There the river was eighty feet in breadth, which was awkward to cross, but
as Pencroft had taken upon himself to conquer this difficulty, he was compelled
to do it. The settlers certainly had reason to be pretty tired. The journey had been
long, and the task of getting down the balloon had not rested either their arms or
legs. They were anxious to reach Granite House to eat and sleep, and if the
bridge had been constructed, in a quarter of an hour they would have been at
home.

The night was very dark. Pencroft prepared to keep his promise by
constructing a sort of raft, on which to make the passage of the Mercy. He and
Neb, armed with axes, chose two trees near the water, and began to attack them
at the base.

Cyrus Harding and Spilett, seated on the bank, waited till their companions
were ready for their help, while Herbert roamed about, though without going to
any distance. All at once, the lad, who had strolled by the river, came running
back, and, pointing up the Mercy, exclaimed,--

"What is floating there?"

Pencroft stopped working, and seeing an indistinct object moving through
the gloom,--

"A canoe!" cried he.

All approached, and saw to their extreme surprise, a boat floating down the


current.

"Boat ahoy!" shouted the sailor, without thinking that perhaps it would be
best to keep silence.

No reply. The boat still drifted onward, and it was not more than twelve feet
off, when the sailor exclaimed,--

"But it is our own boat! she has broken her moorings, and floated down the
current. I must say she has arrived very opportunely."

"Our boat?" murmured the engineer.

Pencroft was right. It was indeed the canoe, of which the rope had
undoubtedly broken, and which had come alone from the sources of the Mercy.
It was very important to seize it before the rapid current should have swept it
away out of the mouth of the river, but Neb and Pencroft cleverly managed this
by means of a long pole.

The canoe touched the shore. The engineer leaped in first, and found, on
examining the rope, that it had been really worn through by rubbing against the
rocks.

"Well," said the reporter to him, in a low voice, "this is a strange thing."

"Strange indeed!" returned Cyrus Harding.

Strange or not, it was very fortunate. Herbert, the reporter, Neb, and
Pencroft, embarked in turn. There was no doubt about the rope having been
worn through, but the astonishing part of the affair was, that the boat should
arrive just at the moment when the settlers were there to seize it on its way, for a
quarter of an hour earlier or later it would have been lost in the sea.

If they had been living in the time of genii, this incident would have given
them the right to think that the island was haunted by some supernatural being,
who used his power in the service of the castaways!

A few strokes of the oar brought the settlers to the mouth of the Mercy. The
canoe was hauled up on the beach near the Chimneys, and all proceeded towards
the ladder of Granite House.

But at that moment, Top barked angrily, and Neb, who was looking for the
first steps, uttered a cry.

There was no longer a ladder!


Chapter 6


Cyrus Harding stood still, without saying a word. His companions searched
in the darkness on the wall, in case the wind should have moved the ladder, and
on the ground, thinking that it might have fallen down.... But the ladder had
quite disappeared. As to ascertaining if a squall had blown it on the landing-
place, half way up, that was impossible in the dark.

"If it is a joke," cried Pencroft, "it is a very stupid one! To come home and
find no staircase to go up to your room by--that's nothing for weary men to laugh
at."

Neb could do nothing but cry out "Oh! oh! oh!"

"I begin to think that very curious things happen in Lincoln Island!" said
Pencroft.

"Curious?" replied Gideon Spilett, "not at all, Pencroft, nothing can be more
natural. Some one has come during our absence, taken possession of our
dwelling and drawn up the ladder."

"Some one," cried the sailor. "But who?"

"Who but the hunter who fired the bullet?" replied the reporter.

"Well, if there is any one up there,” replied Pencroft, who began to lose
patience, "I will give them a hail, and they must answer."

And in a stentorian voice the sailor gave a prolonged "Halloo!" which was
echoed again and again from the cliff and rocks.

The settlers listened and they thought they heard a sort of chuckling laugh, of
which they could not guess the origin. But no voice replied to Pencroft, who in
vain repeated his vigorous shouts.

There was something indeed in this to astonish the most apathetic of men,
and the settlers were not men of that description. In their situation every incident
had its importance, and, certainly, during the seven months which they had spent
on the island, they had not before met with anything of so surprising a character.

Be that as it may, forgetting their fatigue in the singularity of the event, they
remained below Granite House, not knowing what to think, not knowing what to
do, questioning each other without any hope of a satisfactory reply, every one
starting some supposition each more unlikely than the last. Neb bewailed
himself, much disappointed at not being able to get into his kitchen, for the
provisions which they had had on their expedition were exhausted, and they had
no means of renewing them.

"My friends," at last said Cyrus Harding, "there is only one thing to be done


at present; wait for day, and then act according to circumstances. But let us go to
the Chimneys. There we shall be under shelter, and if we cannot eat, we can at
least sleep."

"But who is it that has played us this cool trick?" again asked Pencroft,
unable to make up his mind to retire from the spot.

Whoever it was, the only thing practicable was to do as the engineer
proposed, to go to the Chimneys and there wait for day. In the meanwhile Top
was ordered to mount guard below the windows of Granite House, and when
Top received an order he obeyed it without any questioning. The brave dog
therefore remained at the foot of the cliff while his master with his companions
sought a refuge among the rocks.

To say that the settlers, notwithstanding their fatigue, slept well on the sandy
floor of the Chimneys would not be true. It was not only that they were
extremely anxious to find out the cause of what had happened, whether it was
the result of an accident which would be discovered at the return of day, or
whether on the contrary it was the work of a human being; but they also had very
uncomfortable beds. That could not be helped, however, for in some way or
other at that moment their dwelling was occupied, and they could not possibly
enter it.

Now Granite House was more than their dwelling, it was their warehouse.
There were all the stores belonging to the colony, weapons, instruments, tools,
ammunition, provisions, etc. To think that all that might be pillaged and that the
settlers would have all their work to do over again, fresh weapons and tools to
make, was a serious matter. Their uneasiness led one or other of them also to go
out every few minutes to see if Top was keeping good watch. Cyrus Harding
alone waited with his habitual patience, although his strong mind was
exasperated at being confronted with such an inexplicable fact, and he was
provoked at himself for allowing a feeling to which he could not give a name, to
gain an influence over him. Gideon Spilett shared his feelings in this respect, and
the two conversed together in whispers of the inexplicable circumstance which
baffled even their intelligence and experience.

"It is a joke," said Pencroft; "it is a trick some one has played us. Well, I
don't like such jokes, and the joker had better look out for himself, if he falls into
my hands, I can tell him."

As soon as the first gleam of light appeared in the east, the colonists, suitably
armed, repaired to the beach under Granite House. The rising sun now shone on
the cliff and they could see the windows, the shutters of which were closed,
through the curtains of foliage.

All here was in order; but a cry escaped the colonists when they saw that the


door, which they had closed on their departure, was now wide open.

Some one had entered Granite House--there could be no more doubt about
that.

The upper ladder, which generally hung from the door to the landing, was in
its place, but the lower ladder was drawn up and raised to the threshold. It was
evident that the intruders had wished to guard themselves against a surprise.

Pencroft hailed again.

No reply.

"The beggars," exclaimed the sailor. "There they are sleeping quietly as if
they were in their own house. Hallo there, you pirates, brigands, robbers, sons of
John Bull!"

When Pencroft, being a Yankee, treated any one to the epithet of "son of
John Bull," he considered he had reached the last limits of insult.

The sun had now completely risen, and the whole facade of Granite House
became illuminated by its rays; but in the interior as well as on the exterior all
was quiet and calm.

The settlers asked if Granite House was inhabited or not, and yet the position
of the ladder was sufficient to show that it was; it was also certain that the
inhabitants, whoever they might be, had not been able to escape. But how were
they to be got at?

Herbert then thought of fastening a cord to an arrow, and shooting the arrow
so that it should pass between the first rounds of the ladder which hung from the
threshold. By means of the cord they would then be able to draw down the
ladder to the ground, and so re-establish the communication between the beach
and Granite House. There was evidently nothing else to be done, and, with a
little skill, this method might succeed. Very fortunately bows and arrows had
been left at the Chimneys, where they also found a quantity of light hibiscus
cord. Pencroft fastened this to a well-feathered arrow. Then Herbert fixing it to
his bow, took a careful aim for the lower part of the ladder.

Cyrus Harding, Gideon Spilett, Pencroft, and Neb drew back, so as to see if
anything appeared at the windows. The reporter lifted his gun to his shoulder and
covered the door.

The bow was bent, the arrow flew, taking the cord with it, and passed
between the two last rounds.

The operation had succeeded.

Herbert immediately seized the end of the cord, but, at that moment when he
gave it a pull to bring down the ladder, an arm, thrust suddenly out between the
wall and the door, grasped it and dragged it inside Granite House.

"The rascals!" shouted the sailor. "If a ball can do anything for you, you shall


not have long to wait for it.

"But who was it?” asked Neb.

"Who was it? Didn't you see?"

"No."

"It was a monkey, a sapajou, an orangoutang, a baboon, a gorilla, a sagoin.
Our dwelling has been invaded by monkeys, who climbed up the ladder during
our absence."

And, at this moment, as if to bear witness to the truth of the sailor's words,
two or three quadrumana showed themselves at the windows, from which they
had pushed back the shutters, and saluted the real proprietors of the place with a
thousand hideous grimaces.

"I knew that it was only a joke," cried Pencroft; "but one of the jokers shall
pay the penalty for the rest."

So saying, the sailor, raising his piece, took a rapid aim at one of the
monkeys and fired. All disappeared, except one who fell mortally wounded on
the beach. This monkey, which was of a large size, evidently belonged to the
first order of the quadrumana. Whether this was a chimpanzee, an orangoutang,
or a gorilla, he took rank among the anthropoid apes, who are so called from
their resemblance to the human race. However, Herbert declared it to be an
orangoutang.

"What a magnificent beast!" cried Neb.

"Magnificent, if you like," replied Pencroft; "but still I do not see how we are
to get into our house."

"Herbert is a good marksman," said the reporter, "and his bow is here. He
can try again."

"Why, these apes are so cunning,” returned Pencroft; "they won't show
themselves again at the windows and so we can't kill them; and when I think of
the mischief they may do in the rooms and storehouse--"

"Have patience," replied Harding; "these creatures cannot keep us long at
bay."

"T shall not be sure of that till I see them down here," replied the sailor. "And
now, captain, do you know how many dozens of these fellows are up there?"

It was difficult to reply to Pencroft, and as for the young boy making another
attempt, that was not easy; for the lower part of the ladder had been drawn again
into the door, and when another pull was given, the line broke and the ladder
remained firm. The case was really perplexing. Pencroft stormed. There was a
comic side to the situation, but he did not think it funny at all. It was certain that
the settlers would end by reinstating themselves in their domicile and driving out
the intruders, but when and how? this is what they were not able to say.


Two hours passed, during which the apes took care not to show themselves,
but they were still there, and three or four times a nose or a paw was poked out
at the door or windows, and was immediately saluted by a gunshot.

"Let us hide ourselves," at last said the engineer. "Perhaps the apes will think
we have gone quite away and will show themselves again. Let Spilett and
Herbert conceal themselves behind those rocks and fire on all that may appear."

The engineer's orders were obeyed, and while the reporter and the lad, the
best marksmen in the colony, posted themselves in a good position, but out of
the monkeys' sight, Neb, Pencroft, and Cyrus climbed the plateau and entered
the forest in order to kill some game, for it was now time for breakfast and they
had no provisions remaining.

In half an hour the hunters returned with a few rock pigeons, which they
roasted as well as they could. Not an ape had appeared. Gideon Spilett and
Herbert went to take their share of the breakfast, leaving Top to watch under the
windows. They then, having eaten, returned to their post.

Two hours later, their situation was in no degree improved. The quadrumana
gave no sign of existence, and it might have been supposed that they had
disappeared; but what seemed more probable was that, terrified by the death of
one of their companions, and frightened by the noise of the firearms, they had
retreated to the back part of the house or probably even into the storeroom. And
when they thought of the valuables which this storeroom contained, the patience
so much recommended by the engineer, fast changed into great irritation, and
there certainly was room for it.

"Decidedly it is too bad," said the reporter; "and the worst of it is, there is no
way of putting an end to it."

"But we must drive these vagabonds out somehow," cried the sailor. "We
could soon get the better of them, even if there are twenty of the rascals; but for
that, we must meet them hand to hand. Come now, is there no way of getting at
them?"

"Let us try to enter Granite House by the old opening at the lake," replied the
engineer.

"Oh!" shouted the sailor, "and I never thought of that."

This was in reality the only way by which to penetrate into Granite House so
as to fight with and drive out the intruders. The opening was, it is true, closed up
with a wall of cemented stones, which it would be necessary to sacrifice, but that
could easily be rebuilt. Fortunately, Cyrus Harding had not as yet effected his
project of hiding this opening by raising the waters of the lake, for the operation
would then have taken some time.

It was already past twelve o'clock, when the colonists, well armed and


provided with picks and spades, left the Chimneys, passed beneath the windows
of Granite House, after telling Top to remain at his post, and began to ascend the
left bank of the Mercy, so as to reach Prospect Heights.

But they had not made fifty steps in this direction, when they heard the dog
barking furiously.

And all rushed down the bank again.

Arrived at the turning, they saw that the situation had changed.

In fact, the apes, seized with a sudden panic, from some unknown cause,
were trying to escape. Two or three ran and clambered from one window to
another with the agility of acrobats. They were not even trying to replace the
ladder, by which it would have been easy to descend; perhaps in their terror they
had forgotten this way of escape. The colonists, now being able to take aim
without difficulty, fired. Some, wounded or killed, fell back into the rooms,
uttering piercing cries. The rest, throwing themselves out, were dashed to pieces
in their fall, and in a few minutes, so far as they knew, there was not a living
quadrumana in Granite House.

At this moment the ladder was seen to slip over the threshold, then unroll
and fall to the ground.

"Hullo!" cried the sailor, "this is queer!"

"Very strange!" murmured the engineer, leaping first up the ladder.

"Take care, captain!" cried Pencroft, "perhaps there are still some of these
rascals.

"We shall soon see," replied the engineer, without stopping however.

All his companions followed him, and in a minute they had arrived at the
threshold. They searched everywhere. There was no one in the rooms nor in the
storehouse, which had been respected by the band of quadrumana.

"Well now, and the ladder," cried the sailor; "who can the gentleman have
been who sent us that down?"

But at that moment a cry was heard, and a great orang, who had hidden
himself in the passage, rushed into the room, pursued by Neb.

"Ah, the robber!" cried Pencroft.

And hatchet in hand, he was about to cleave the head of the animal, when
Cyrus Harding seized his arm, saying,--

"Spare him, Pencroft."

"Pardon this rascal?"

"Yes! it was he who threw us the ladder!"

And the engineer said this in such a peculiar voice that it was difficult to
know whether he spoke seriously or not.

Nevertheless, they threw themselves on the orang, who defended himself


gallantly, but was soon overpowered and bound.

"There!" said Pencroft. "And what shall we make of him, now we've got
him?"

"A servant!" replied Herbert.

The lad was not joking in saying this, for he knew how this intelligent race
could be turned to account.

The settlers then approached the ape and gazed at it attentively. He belonged
to the family of anthropoid apes, of which the facial angle is not much inferior to
that of the Australians and Hottentots. It was an orangoutang, and as such, had
neither the ferocity of the gorilla, nor the stupidity of the baboon. It is to this
family of the anthropoid apes that so many characteristics belong which prove
them to be possessed of an almost human intelligence. Employed in houses, they
can wait at table, sweep rooms, brush clothes, clean boots, handle a knife, fork,
and spoon properly, and even drink wine... doing everything as well as the best
servant that ever walked upon two legs. Buffon possessed one of these apes, who
served him for a long time as a faithful and zealous servant.

The one which had been seized in the hall of Granite House was a great
fellow, six feet high, with an admirably poportioned frame, a broad chest, head
of a moderate size, the facial angle reaching sixty-five degrees, round skull,
projecting nose, skin covered with soft glossy hair, in short, a fine specimen of
the anthropoids. His eyes, rather smaller than human eyes, sparkled with
intelligence; his white teeth glittered under his mustache, and he wore a little
curly brown beard.

"A handsome fellow!" said Pencroft; "if we only knew his language, we
could talk to him."

"But, master," said Neb, "are you serious? Are we going to take him as a
servant?"

"Yes, Neb," replied the engineer, smiling. "But you must not be jealous."

"And I hope he will make an excellent servant," added Herbert. "He appears
young, and will be easy to educate, and we shall not be obliged to use force to
subdue him, nor draw his teeth, as is sometimes done. He will soon grow fond of
his masters if they are kind to him."

"And they will be," replied Pencroft, who had forgotten all his rancor against
"the jokers."

Then, approaching the orang,--

"Well, old boy!" he asked, "how are you?"

The orang replied by a little grunt which did not show any anger.

"You wish to join the colony?" again asked the sailor. "You are going to enter
the service of Captain Cyrus Harding?"


Another respondent grunt was uttered by the ape.

"And you will be satisfied with no other wages than your food?"

Third affirmative grunt.

"This conversation is slightly monotonous," observed Gideon Spilett.

"So much the better," replied Pencroft; "the best servants are those who talk
the least. And then, no wages, do you hear, my boy? We will give you no wages
at first, but we will double them afterwards if we are pleased with you."

Thus the colony was increased by a new member. As to his name the sailor
begged that in memory of another ape which he had known, he might be called
Jupiter, and Jup for short.

And so, without more ceremony, Master Jup was installed in Granite House.


Chapter 7


The settlers in Lincoln Island had now regained their dwelling, without
having been obliged to reach it by the old opening, and were therefore spared the
trouble of mason's work. It was certainly lucky, that at the moment they were
about to set out to do so, the apes had been seized with that terror, no less sudden
than inexplicable, which had driven them out of Granite House. Had the animals
discovered that they were about to be attacked from another direction? This was
the only explanation of their sudden retreat.

During the day the bodies of the apes were carried into the wood, where they
were buried; then the settlers busied themselves in repairing the disorder caused
by the intruders, disorder but not damage, for although they had turned
everything in the rooms topsy-turvy, yet they had broken nothing. Neb relighted
his stove, and the stores in the larder furnished a substantial repast, to which all
did ample justice.

Jup was not forgotten, and he ate with relish some stonepine almonds and
rhizome roots, with which he was abundantly supplied. Pencroft had unfastened
his arms, but judged it best to have his legs tied until they were more sure of his
submission.

Then, before retiring to rest, Harding and his companions seated round their
table, discussed those plans, the execution of which was most pressing. The most
important and most urgent was the establishment of a bridge over the Mercy, so
as to form a communication with the southern part of the island and Granite
House; then the making of an enclosure for the musmons or other woolly
animals which they wished to capture.

These two projects would help to solve the difficulty as to their clothing,
which was now serious. The bridge would render easy the transport of the
balloon case, which would furnish them with linen, and the inhabitants of the
enclosure would yield wool which would supply them with winter clothes.

As to the enclosure, it was Cyrus Harding's intention to establish it at the
sources of the Red Creek, where the ruminants would find fresh and abundant
pasture. The road between Prospect Heights and the sources of the stream was
already partly beaten, and with a better cart than the first, the material could be
easily conveyed to the spot, especially if they could manage to capture some
animals to draw it.

But though there might be no inconvenience in the enclosure being so far
from Granite House, it would not be the same with the poultry-yard, to which


Neb called the attention of the colonists. It was indeed necessary that the birds
should be close within reach of the cook, and no place appeared more favorable
for the establishment of the said poultry-yard than that portion of the banks of
the lake which was close to the old opening.

Water-birds would prosper there as well as others, and the couple of
tinamous taken in their last excursion would be the first to be domesticated.

The next day, the 3rd of November, the new works were begun by the
construction of the bridge, and all hands were required for this important task.
Saws, hatchets, and hammers were shouldered by the settlers, who, now
transformed into carpenters, descended to the shore.

There Pencroft observed,--

"Suppose, that during our absence, Master Jup takes it into his head to draw
up the ladder which he so politely returned to us yesterday?"

"Let us tie its lower end down firmly," replied Cyrus Harding.

This was done by means of two stakes securely fixed in the sand. Then the
settlers, ascending the left bank of the Mercy, soon arrived at the angle formed
by the river.

There they halted, in order to ascertain if the bridge could be thrown across.
The place appeared suitable.

In fact, from this spot, to Port Balloon, discovered the day before on the
southern coast, there was only a distance of three miles and a half, and from the
bridge to the Port, it would be easy to make a good cart-road which would render
the communication between Granite House and the south of the island extremely
easy.

Cyrus Harding now imparted to his companions a scheme for completely
isolating Prospect Heights so as to shelter it from the attacks both of quadrupeds
and quadrumana. In this way, Granite House, the Chimneys, the poultry-yard,
and all the upper part of the plateau which was to be used for cultivation, would
be protected against the depredations of animals. Nothing could be easier than to
execute this project, and this is how the engineer intended to set to work.

The plateau was already defended on three sides by watercourses, either
artificial or natural. On the northwest, by the shores of Lake Grant, from the
entrance of the passage to the breach made in the banks of the lake for the escape
of the water.

On the north, from this breach to the sea, by the new watercourse which had
hollowed out a bed for itself across the plateau and shore, above and below the
fall, and it would be enough to dig the bed of this creek a little deeper to make it
impracticable for animals, on all the eastern border by the sea itself, from the
mouth of the aforesaid creek to the mouth of the Mercy.


Lastly, on the south, from the mouth to the turn of the Mercy where the
bridge was to be established.

The western border of the plateau now remained between the turn of the
river and the southern angle of the lake, a distance of about a mile, which was
open to all comers. But nothing could be easier than to dig a broad deep ditch,
which could be filled from the lake, and the overflow of which would throw
itself by a rapid fall into the bed of the Mercy. The level of the lake would, no
doubt, be somewhat lowered by this fresh discharge of its waters, but Cyrus
Harding had ascertained that the volume of water in the Red Creek was
considerable enough to allow of the execution of this project.

"So then," added the engineer, "Prospect Heights will become a regular
island, being surrounded with water on all sides, and only communicating with
the rest of our domain by the bridge which we are about to throw across the
Mercy, the two little bridges already established above and below the fall; and,
lastly, two other little bridges which must be constructed, one over the canal
which I propose to dig, the other across to the left bank of the Mercy. Now, if
these bridges can be raised at will, Prospect Heights will be guarded from any
surprise."

The bridge was the most urgent work. Trees were selected, cut down,
stripped of their branches, and cut into beams, joists, and planks. The end of the
bridge which rested on the right bank of the Mercy was to be firm, but the other
end on the left bank was to be movable, so that it might be raised by means of a
counterpoise, as some canal bridges are managed.

This was certainly a considerable work, and though it was skillfully
conducted, it took some time, for the Mercy at this place was eighty feet wide. It
was therefore necessary to fix piles in the bed of the river so as to sustain the
floor of the bridge and establish a pile-driver to act on the tops of these piles,
which would thus form two arches and allow the bridge to support heavy loads.

Happily there was no want of tools with which to shape the wood, nor of
ironwork to make it firm, nor of the ingenuity of a man who had a marvelous
knowledge of the work, nor lastly, the zeal of his companions, who in seven
months had necessarily acquired great skill in the use of their tools; and it must
be said that not the least skilful was Gideon Spilett, who in dexterity almost
equaled the sailor himself. "Who would ever have expected so much from a
newspaper man!" thought Pencroft.

The construction of the Mercy bridge lasted three weeks of regular hard
work. They even breakfasted on the scene of their labors, and the weather being
magnificent, they only returned to Granite House to sleep.

During this period it may be stated that Master Jup grew more accustomed to


his new masters, whose movements he always watched with very inquisitive
eyes. However, as a precautionary measure, Pencroft did not as yet allow him
complete liberty, rightly wishing to wait until the limits of the plateau should be
settled by the projected works. Top and Jup were good friends and played
willingly together, but Jup did everything solemnly.

On the 20th of November the bridge was finished. The movable part,
balanced by the counterpoise, swung easily, and only a slight effort was needed
to rise it; between its hinge and the last cross-bar on which it rested when closed,
there existed a space of twenty feet, which was sufficiently wide to prevent any
animals from crossing.

The settlers now began to talk of fetching the balloon-case, which they were
anxious to place in perfect security; but to bring it, it would be necessary to take
a cart to Port Balloon, and consequently, necessary to beat a road through the
dense forests of the Far West. This would take some time. Also, Neb and
Pencroft having gone to examine into the state of things at Port Balloon, and
reported that the stock of cloth would suffer no damage in the grotto where it
was stored, it was decided that the work at Prospect Heights should not be
discontinued.

"That," observed Pencroft, "will enable us to establish our poultry-yard under
better conditions, since we need have no fear of visits from foxes nor the attacks
of other beasts."

"Then," added Neb, "we can clear the plateau, and transplant wild plants to
ibe

"And prepare our second cornfield!" cried the sailor with a triumphant air.

In fact, the first cornfield sown with a single grain had prospered admirably,
thanks to Pencroft's care. It had produced the ten ears foretold by the engineer,
and each ear containing eighty grains, the colony found itself in possession of
eight hundred grains, in six months, which promised a double harvest each year.

These eight hundred grains, except fifty, which were prudently reserved,
were to be sown in a new field, but with no less care than was bestowed on the
single grain.

The field was prepared, then surrounded with a strong palisade, high and
pointed, which quadrupeds would have found difficulty in leaping. As to birds,
some scarecrows, due to Pencroft's ingenious brain, were enough to frighten
them. The seven hundred and fifty grains deposited in very regular furrows were
then left for nature to do the rest.

On the 21st of November, Cyrus Harding began to plan the canal which was
to close the plateau on the west, from the south angle of Lake Grant to the angle
of the Mercy. There was there two or three feet of vegetable earth, and below


that granite. It was therefore necessary to manufacture some more nitro-
glycerine, and the nitro-glycerine did its accustomed work. In less than a
fortnight a ditch, twelve feet wide and six deep, was dug out in the hard ground
of the plateau. A new trench was made by the same means in the rocky border of
the lake, forming a small stream, to which they gave the name of Creek
Glycerine, and which was thus an affluent of the Mercy. As the engineer had
predicted, the level of the lake was lowered, though very slightly. To complete
the enclosure the bed of the stream on the beach was considerably enlarged, and
the sand supported by means of stakes.

By the end of the first fortnight of December these works were finished, and
Prospect Heights--that is to say, a sort of irregular pentagon, having a perimeter
of nearly four miles, surrounded by a liquid belt--was completely protected from
depredators of every description.

During the month of December, the heat was very great. In spite of it,
however, the settlers continued their work, and as they were anxious to possess a
poultry-yard they forthwith commenced it.

It is useless to say that since the enclosing of the plateau had been
completed, Master Jup had been set at liberty. He did not leave his masters, and
evinced no wish to escape. He was a gentle animal, though very powerful and
wonderfully active. He was already taught to make himself useful by drawing
loads of wood and carting away the stones which were extracted from the bed of
Creek Glycerine.

The poultry-yard occupied an area of two hundred square yards, on the
southeastern bank of the lake. It was surrounded by a palisade, and in it were
constructed various shelters for the birds which were to populate it. These were
simply built of branches and divided into compartments, made ready for the
expected guests.

The first were the two tinamous, which were not long in having a number of
young ones; they had for companions half a dozen ducks, accustomed to the
borders of the lake. Some belonged to the Chinese species, of which the wings
open like a fan, and which by the brilliancy of their plumage rival the golden
pheasants. A few days afterwards, Herbert snared a couple of gallinaceae, with
spreading tails composed of long feathers, magnificent alectors, which soon
became tame. As to pelicans, kingfishers, water-hens, they came of themselves
to the shores of the poultry-yard, and this little community, after some disputes,
cooing, screaming, clucking, ended by settling down peacefully, and increased in
encouraging proportion for the future use of the colony.

Cyrus Harding, wishing to complete his performance, established a pigeon-
house in a comer of the poultry-yard. There he lodged a dozen of those pigeons


which frequented the rocks of the plateau. These birds soon became accustomed
to returning every evening to their new dwelling, and showed more disposition
to domesticate themselves than their congeners, the wood-pigeons.

Lastly, the time had come for turning the balloon-case to use, by cutting it up
to make shirts and other articles; for as to keeping it in its present form, and
risking themselves in a balloon filled with gas, above a sea of the limits of which
they had no idea, it was not to be thought of.

It was necessary to bring the case to Granite House, and the colonists
employed themselves in rendering their heavy cart lighter and more manageable.
But though they had a vehicle, the moving power was yet to be found.

But did there not exist in the island some animal which might supply the
place of the horse, ass, or ox? That was the question.

"Certainly," said Pencroft, "a beast of burden would be very useful to us until
the captain has made a steam cart, or even an engine, for some day we shall have
a railroad from Granite House to Port Balloon, with a branch line to Mount
Franklin!"

One day, the 23rd of December, Neb and Top were heard shouting and
barking, each apparently trying to see who could make the most noise. The
settlers, who were busy at the Chimneys, ran, fearing some vexatious incident.

What did they see? Two fine animals of a large size that had imprudently
ventured on the plateau, when the bridges were open. One would have said they
were horses, or at least donkeys, male and female, of a fine shape, dove-colored,
the legs and tail white, striped with black on the head and neck. They advanced
quietly without showing any uneasiness, and gazed at the men, in whom they
could not as yet recognize their future masters.

"These are onagers!" cried Herbert, "animals something between the zebra
and the quagga!"

"Why not donkeys?" asked Neb.

"Because they have not long ears, and their shape is more graceful!"

"Donkeys or horses," interrupted Pencroft, "they are 'moving powers,’ as the
captain would say, and as such must be captured!"

The sailor, without frightening the animals, crept through the grass to the
bridge over Creek Glycerine, lowered it, and the onagers were prisoners.

Now, should they seize them with violence and master them by force? No. It
was decided that for a few days they should be allowed to roam freely about the
plateau, where there was an abundance of grass, and the engineer immediately
began to prepare a stable near the poultry-yard, in which the onagers might find
food, with a good litter, and shelter during the night.

This done, the movements of the two magnificent creatures were left entirely


free, and the settlers avoided even approaching them so as to terrify them.
Several times, however, the onagers appeared to wish to leave the plateau, too
confined for animals accustomed to the plains and forests. They were then seen
following the water-barrier which everywhere presented itself before them,
uttering short neighs, then galloping through the grass, and becoming calmer,
they would remain entire hours gazing at the woods, from which they were cut
off for ever!

In the meantime harness of vegetable fiber had been manufactured, and some
days after the capture of the onagers, not only the cart was ready, but a straight
road, or rather a cutting, had been made through the forests of the Far West, from
the angle of the Mercy to Port Balloon. The cart might then be driven there, and
towards the end of December they tried the onagers for the first time.

Pencroft had already coaxed the animals to come and eat out of his hand, and
they allowed him to approach without making any difficulty, but once harnessed
they reared and could with difficulty be held in. However, it was not long before
they submitted to this new service, for the onager, being less refractory than the
zebra, is frequently put in harness in the mountainous regions of Southern
Africa, and it has even been acclimatized in Europe, under zones of a relative
coolness.

On this day all the colony, except Pencroft who walked at the animals' heads,
mounted the cart, and set out on the road to Port Balloon.

Of course they were jolted over the somewhat rough road, but the vehicle
arrived without any accident, and was soon loaded with the case and rigging of
the balloon.

At eight o'clock that evening the cart, after passing over the Mercy bridge,
descended the left bank of the river, and stopped on the beach. The onagers
being unharnessed, were thence led to their stable, and Pencroft before going to
sleep gave vent to his feelings in a deep sigh of satisfaction that awoke all the
echoes of Granite House.


Chapter 8


The first week of January was devoted to the manufacture of the linen
garments required by the colony. The needles found in the box were used by
sturdy if not delicate fingers, and we may be sure that what was sewn was sewn
firmly.

There was no lack of thread, thanks to Cyrus Harding's idea of re-employing
that which had been already used in the covering of the balloon. This with
admirable patience was all unpicked by Gideon Spilett and Herbert, for Pencroft
had been obliged to give this work up, as it irritated him beyond measure; but he
had no equal in the sewing part of the business. Indeed, everybody knows that
sailors have a remarkable aptitude for tailoring.

The cloth of which the balloon-case was made was then cleaned by means of
soda and potash, obtained by the incineration of plants, in such a way that the
cotton, having got rid of the varnish, resumed its natural softness and elasticity;
then, exposed to the action of the atmosphere, it soon became perfectly white.
Some dozen shirts and sock--the latter not knitted, of course, but made of cotton-
-were thus manufactured. What a comfort it was to the settlers to clothe
themselves again in clean linen, which was doubtless rather rough, but they were
not troubled about that! and then to go to sleep between sheets, which made the
couches at Granite House into quite comfortable beds!

It was about this time also that they made boots of seal-leather, which were
greatly needed to replace the shoes and boots brought from America. We may be
sure that these new shoes were large enough and never pinched the feet of the
wearers.

With the beginning of the year 1866 the heat was very great, but the hunting
in the forests did not stand still. Agouties, peccaries, capybaras, kangaroos, game
of all sorts, actually swarmed there, and Spilett and Herbert were too good
marksmen ever to throw away their shot uselessly.

Cyrus Harding still recommended them to husband the ammunition, and he
took measures to replace the powder and shot which had been found in the box,
and which he wished to reserve for the future. How did he know where chance
might one day cast his companions and himself in the event of their leaving their
domain? They should, then, prepare for the unknown future by husbanding their
ammunition and by substituting for it some easily renewable substance.

To replace lead, of which Harding had found no traces in the island, he
employed granulated iron, which was easy to manufacture. These bullets, not


having the weight of leaden bullets, were made larger, and each charge contained
less, but the skill of the sportsmen made up this deficiency. As to powder, Cyrus
Harding would have been able to make that also, for he had at his disposal
saltpeter, sulphur, and coal; but this preparation requires extreme care, and
without special tools it is difficult to produce it of a good quality. Harding
preferred, therefore, to manufacture pyroxyle, that is to say gun-cotton, a
substance in which cotton is not indispensable, as the elementary tissue of
vegetables may be used, and this is found in an almost pure state, not only in
cotton, but in the textile fiber of hemp and flax, in paper, the pith of the elder,
etc. Now, the elder abounded in the island towards the mouth of Red Creek, and
the colonists had already made coffee of the berries of these shrubs, which
belong to the family of the caprifoliaceae.

The only thing to be collected, therefore, was elder-pith, for as to the other
substance necessary for the manufacture of pyroxyle, it was only fuming azotic
acid. Now, Harding having sulphuric acid at his disposal, had already been easily
able to produce azotic acid by attacking the saltpeter with which nature supplied
him. He accordingly resolved to manufacture and employ pyroxyle, although it
has some inconveniences, that is to say, a great inequality of effect, an excessive
inflammability, since it takes fire at one hundred and seventy degrees instead of
two hundred and forty, and lastly, an instantaneous deflagration which might
damage the firearms. On the other hand, the advantages of pyroxyle consist in
this, that it is not injured by damp, that it does not make the gun-barrels dirty,
and that its force is four times that of ordinary powder.

To make pyroxyle, the cotton must be immersed in the fuming azotic acid for
a quarter of an hour, then washed in cold water and dried. Nothing could be
more simple.

Cyrus Harding had only at his disposal the ordinary azotic acid and not the
fuming or monohydrate azotic acid, that is to say, acid which emits white vapors
when it comes in contact with damp air; but by substituting for the latter
ordinary azotic acid, mixed, in the proportion of from three to five volumes of
concentrated sulphuric acid, the engineer obtained the same result. The
sportsmen of the island therefore soon had a perfectly prepared substance,
which, employed discreetly, produced admirable results.

About this time the settlers cleared three acres of the plateau, and the rest
was preserved in a wild state, for the benefit of the onagers. Several excursions
were made into the Jacamar Wood and the forests of the Far West, and they
brought back from thence a large collection of wild vegetables, spinach, cress,
radishes, and turnips, which careful culture would soon improve, and which
would temper the regimen on which the settlers had till then subsisted. Supplies


of wood and coal were also carted. Each excursion was at the same time a means
of improving the roads, which gradually became smoother under the wheels of
the cart.

The rabbit-warren still continued to supply the larder of Granite House. As
fortunately it was situated on the other side of Creek Glycerine, its inhabitants
could not reach the plateau nor ravage the newly-made plantation. The oyster-
bed among the rocks was frequently renewed and furnished excellent molluscs.
Besides that, the fishing, either in the lake or the Mercy, was very profitable, for
Pencroft had made some lines, armed with iron hooks, with which they
frequently caught fine trout, and a species of fish whose silvery sides were
speckled with yellow, and which were also extremely savory. Master Neb, who
was Skilled in the culinary art, knew how to vary agreeably the bill of fare. Bread
alone was wanting at the table of the settlers, and as has been said, they felt this
privation greatly.

The settlers hunted too the turtles which frequented the shores of Cape
Mandible. At this place the beach was covered with little mounds, concealing
perfectly spherical turtles' eggs, with white hard shells, the albumen of which
does not coagulate as that of birds' eggs. They were hatched by the sun, and their
number was naturally considerable, as each turtle can lay annually two hundred
and fifty.

"A regular egg-field," observed Gideon Spilett, "and we have nothing to do
but to pick them up."

But not being contented with simply the produce, they made chase after the
producers, the result of which was that they were able to bring back to Granite
House a dozen of these chelonians, which were really valuable from an
alimentary point of view. The turtle soup, flavored with aromatic herbs, often
gained well-merited praises for its preparer, Neb.

We must here mention another fortunate circumstance by which new stores
for the winter were laid in. Shoals of salmon entered the Mercy, and ascended
the country for several miles. It was the time at which the females, going to find
suitable places in which to spawn, precede the males and make a great noise
through the fresh water. A thousand of these fish, which measured about two feet
and a half in length, came up the river, and a large quantity were retained by
fixing dams across the stream. More than a hundred were thus taken, which were
salted and stored for the time when winter, freezing up the streams, would render
fishing impracticable. By this time the intelligent Jup was raised to the duty of
valet. He had been dressed in a jacket, white linen breeches, and an apron, the
pockets of which were his delight. The clever orang had been marvelously
trained by Neb, and any one would have said that the Negro and the ape


understood each other when they talked together. Jup had besides a real affection
for Neb, and Neb returned it. When his services were not required, either for
carrying wood or for climbing to the top of some tree, Jup passed the greatest
part of his time in the kitchen, where he endeavored to imitate Neb in all that he
saw him do. The black showed the greatest patience and even extreme zeal in
instructing his pupil, and the pupil exhibited remarkable intelligence in profiting
by the lessons he received from his master.

Judge then of the pleasure Master Jup gave to the inhabitants of Granite
House when, without their having had any idea of it, he appeared one day,
napkin on his arm, ready to wait at table. Quick, attentive, he acquitted himself
perfectly, changing the plates, bringing dishes, pouring out water, all with a
gravity which gave intense amusement to the settlers, and which enraptured
Pencroft.

"Jup, some soup!"

"Jup, a little agouti!"

"Jup, a plate!"

"Jup! Good Jup! Honest Jup!"

Nothing was heard but that, and Jup without ever being disconcerted, replied
to every one, watched for everything, and he shook his head in a knowing way
when Pencroft, referring to his joke of the first day, said to him,--

"Decidedly, Jup, your wages must be doubled."

It is useless to say that the orang was now thoroughly domesticated at
Granite House, and that he often accompanied his masters to the forest without
showing any wish to leave them. It was most amusing to see him walking with a
stick which Pencroft had given him, and which he carried on his shoulder like a
gun. If they wished to gather some fruit from the summit of a tree, how quickly
he climbed for it. If the wheel of the cart stuck in the mud, with what energy did
Jup with a single heave of his shoulder put it right again.

"What a jolly fellow he is!" cried Pencroft often. "If he was as mischievous
as he is good, there would be no doing anything with him!"

It was towards the end of January the colonists began their labors in the
center of the island. It had been decided that a corral should be established near
the sources of the Red Creek, at the foot of Mount Franklin, destined to contain
the ruminants, whose presence would have been troublesome at Granite House,
and especially for the musmons, who were to supply the wool for the settlers’
winter garments.

Each morning, the colony, sometimes entire, but more often represented only
by Harding, Herbert, and Pencroft, proceeded to the sources of the Creek, a
distance of not more than five miles, by the newly beaten road to which the


name of Corral Road had been given.

There a site was chosen, at the back of the southern ridge of the mountain. It
was a meadow land, dotted here and there with clumps of trees, and watered by a
little stream, which sprung from the slopes which closed it in on one side. The
grass was fresh, and it was not too much shaded by the trees which grew about
it. This meadow was to be surrounded by a palisade, high enough to prevent
even the most agile animals from leaping over. This enclosure would be large
enough to contain a hundred musmons and wild goats, with all the young ones
they might produce.

The perimeter of the corral was then traced by the engineer, and they would
then have proceeded to fell the trees necessary for the construction of the
palisade, but as the opening up of the road had already necessitated the sacrifice
of a considerable number, those were brought and supplied a hundred stakes,
which were firmly fixed in the ground.

The construction of this corral did not take less than three weeks, for besides
the palisade, Cyrus Harding built large sheds, in which the animals could take
shelter. These buildings had also to be made very strong, for musmons are
powerful animals, and their first fury was to be feared. The stakes, sharpened at
their upper end and hardened by fire, had been fixed by means of cross-bars, and
at regular distances props assured the solidity of the whole.

The corral finished, a raid had to be made on the pastures frequented by the
ruminants. This was done on the 7th of February, on a beautiful summer's day,
and every one took part in it. The onagers, already well trained, were ridden by
Spilett and Herbert, and were of great use.

The maneuver consisted simply in surrounding the musmons and goats, and
gradually narrowing the circle around them. Cyrus Harding, Pencroft, Neb, and
Jup, posted themselves in different parts of the wood, while the two cavaliers
and Top galloped in a radius of half a mile round the corral.

The musmons were very numerous in this part of the island. These fine
animals were as large as deer; their horns were stronger than those of the ram,
and their gray-colored fleece was mixed with long hair.

This hunting day was very fatiguing. Such going and coming, and running
and riding and shouting! Of a hundred musmons which had been surrounded,
more than two-thirds escaped, but at last, thirty of these animals and ten wild
goats were gradually driven back towards the corral, the open door of which
appearing to offer a means of escape, they rushed in and were prisoners.

In short, the result was satisfactory, and the settlers had no reason to
complain. There was no doubt that the flock would prosper, and that at no distant
time not only wool but hides would be abundant.


That evening the hunters returned to Granite House quite exhausted.
However, notwithstanding their fatigue, they returned the next day to visit the
corral. The prisoners had been trying to overthrow the palisade, but of course
had not succeeded, and were not long in becoming more tranquil.

During the month of February, no event of any importance occurred. The
daily labors were pursued methodically, and, as well as improving the roads to
the corral and to Port Balloon, a third was commenced, which, starting from the
enclosure, proceeded towards the western coast. The yet unknown portion of
Lincoln Island was that of the wood-covered Serpentine Peninsula, which
sheltered the wild beasts, from which Gideon Spilett was so anxious to clear
their domain.

Before the cold season should appear the most assiduous care was given to
the cultivation of the wild plants which had been transplanted from the forest to
Prospect Heights. Herbert never returned from an excursion without bringing
home some useful vegetable. One day, it was some specimens of the chicory
tribe, the seeds of which by pressure yield an excellent oil; another, it was some
common sorrel, whose antiscorbutic qualities were not to be despised; then,
some of those precious tubers, which have at all times been cultivated in South
America, potatoes, of which more than two hundred species are now known. The
kitchen garden, now well stocked and carefully defended from the birds, was
divided into small beds, where grew lettuces, kidney potatoes, sorrel, turnips,
radishes, and other coneiferae. The soil on the plateau was particularly fertile,
and it was hoped that the harvests would be abundant.

They had also a variety of different beverages, and so long as they did not
demand wine, the most hard to please would have had no reason to complain. To
the Oswego tea, and the fermented liquor extracted from the roots of the
dragonnier, Harding had added a regular beer, made from the young shoots of
the spruce-fir, which, after having been boiled and fermented, made that
agreeable drink called by the Anglo-Americans spring-beer.

Towards the end of the summer, the poultry-yard was possessed of a couple
of fine bustards, which belonged to the houbara species, characterized by a sort
of feathery mantle; a dozen shovelers, whose upper mandible was prolonged on
each side by a membraneous appendage; and also some magnificent cocks,
similar to the Mozambique cocks, the comb, caruncle, and epidermis being
black. So far, everything had succeeded, thanks to the activity of these
courageous and intelligent men. Nature did much for them, doubtless; but
faithful to the great precept, they made a right use of what a bountiful
Providence gave them.

After the heat of these warm summer days, in the evening when their work


was finished and the sea-breeze began to blow, they liked to sit on the edge of
Prospect Heights, in a sort of veranda, covered with creepers, which Neb had
made with his own hands. There they talked, they instructed each other, they
made plans, and the rough good-humor of the sailor always amused this little
world, in which the most perfect harmony had never ceased to reign.

They often spoke of their country, of their dear and great America. What was
the result of the War of Secession? It could not have been greatly prolonged.
Richmond had doubtless soon fallen into the hands of General Grant. The taking
of the capital of the Confederates must have been the last action of this terrible
struggle. Now the North had triumphed in the good cause, how welcome would
have been a newspaper to the exiles in Lincoln Island! For eleven months all
communication between them and the rest of their fellow-creatures had been
interrupted, and in a short time the 24th of March would arrive, the anniversary
of the day on which the balloon had thrown them on this unknown coast. They
were then mere castaways, not even knowing how they should preserve their
miserable lives from the fury of the elements! And now, thanks to the knowledge
of their captain, and their own intelligence, they were regular colonists,
furnished with arms, tools, and instruments; they had been able to turn to their
profit the animals, plants, and minerals of the island, that is to say, the three
kingdoms of Nature.

Yes; they often talked of all these things and formed still more plans.

As to Cyrus Harding he was for the most part silent, and listened to his
companions more often than he spoke to them. Sometimes he smiled at Herbert's
ideas or Pencroft's nonsense, but always and everywhere he pondered over those
inexplicable facts, that strange enigma, of which the secret still escaped him!


Chapter 9


The weather changed during the first week of March. There had been a full
moon at the commencement of the month, and the heat was excessive. The
atmosphere was felt to be full of electricity, and a period of some length of
tempestuous weather was to be feared.

Indeed, on the 2nd, peals of thunder were heard, the wind blew from the east,
and hail rattled against the facade of Granite House like volleys of grape-shot.
The door and windows were immediately closed, or everything in the rooms
would have been drenched. On seeing these hailstones, some of which were the
size of a pigeon's egg, Pencroft's first thought was that his cornfield was in
serious danger.

He directly rushed to his field, where little green heads were already
appearing, and by means of a great cloth, he managed to protect his crop.

This bad weather lasted a week, during which time the thunder rolled
without cessation in the depths of the sky.

The colonists, not having any pressing work out of doors, profited by the bad
weather to work at the interior of Granite House, the arrangement of which was
becoming more complete from day to day. The engineer made a turning-lathe,
with which he turned several articles both for the toilet and the kitchen,
particularly buttons, the want of which was greatly felt. A gunrack had been
made for the firearms, which were kept with extreme care, and neither tables nor
cupboards were left incomplete. They sawed, they planed, they filed, they
turned; and during the whole of this bad season, nothing was heard but the
grinding of tools or the humming of the turning-lathe which responded to the
growling of the thunder.

Master Jup had not been forgotten, and he occupied a room at the back, near
the storeroom, a sort of cabin with a cot always full of good litter, which
perfectly suited his taste.

"With good old Jup there is never any quarreling,” often repeated Pencroft,
"never any improper reply. What a servant, Neb, what a servant!"

Of course Jup was now well used to service. He brushed their clothes, he
turned the spit, he waited at table, he swept the rooms, he gathered wood, and he
performed another admirable piece of service which delighted Pencroft--he
never went to sleep without first coming to tuck up the worthy sailor in his bed.

As to the health of the members of the colony, bipeds or bimana,
quadrumana or quadrupeds, it left nothing to be desired. With their life in the


open air, on this salubrious soil, under that temperate zone, working both with
head and hands, they could not suppose that illness would ever attack them.

All were indeed wonderfully well. Herbert had already grown two inches in
the year. His figure was forming and becoming more manly, and he promised to
be an accomplished man, physically as well as morally. Besides he improved
himself during the leisure hours which manual occupations left to him; he read
the books found in the case; and after the practical lessons which were taught by
the very necessity of their position, he found in the engineer for science, and the
reporter for languages, masters who were delighted to complete his education.

The tempest ended about the 9th of March, but the sky remained covered
with clouds during the whole of this last summer month. The atmosphere,
violently agitated by the electric commotions, could not recover its former
purity, and there was almost invariably rain and fog, except for three or four fine
days on which several excursions were made. About this time the female onager
gave birth to a young one which belonged to the same sex as its mother, and
which throve capitally. In the corral, the flock of musmons had also increased,
and several lambs already bleated in the sheds, to the great delight of Neb and
Herbert, who had each their favorite among these newcomers. An attempt was
also made for the domestication of the peccaries, which succeeded well. A sty
was constructed under the poultry-yard, and soon contained several young ones
in the way to become civilized, that is to say, to become fat under Neb's care.
Master Jup, entrusted with carrying them their daily nourishment, leavings from
the kitchen, etc., acquitted himself conscientiously of his task. He sometimes
amused himself at the expense of his little pensioners by tweaking their tails; but
this was mischief, and not wickedness, for these little twisted tails amused him
like a plaything, and his instinct was that of a child. One day in this month of
March, Pencroft, talking to the engineer, reminded Cyrus Harding of a promise
which the latter had not as yet had time to fulfil.

"You once spoke of an apparatus which would take the place of the long
ladders at Granite House, captain," said he; "won't you make it some day?"

"Nothing will be easier; but is this a really useful thing?"

"Certainly, captain. After we have given ourselves necessaries, let us think a
little of luxury. For us it may be luxury, if you like, but for things it is necessary.
It isn't very convenient to climb up a long ladder when one is heavily loaded."

"Well, Pencroft, we will try to please you," replied Cyrus Harding.

"But you have no machine at your disposal."

"We will make one."

"A steam machine?"

"No, a water machine."


And, indeed, to work his apparatus there was already a natural force at the
disposal of the engineer which could be used without great difficulty. For this, it
was enough to augment the flow of the little stream which supplied the interior
of Granite House with water. The opening among the stones and grass was then
increased, thus producing a strong fall at the bottom of the passage, the overflow
from which escaped by the inner well. Below this fall the engineer fixed a
cylinder with paddles, which was joined on the exterior with a strong cable
rolled on a wheel, supporting a basket. In this way, by means of a long rope
reaching to the ground, which enabled them to regulate the motive power, they
could rise in the basket to the door of Granite House.

It was on the 17th of March that the lift acted for the first time, and gave
universal satisfaction. Henceforward all the loads, wood, coal, provisions, and
even the settlers themselves, were hoisted by this simple system, which replaced
the primitive ladder, and, as may be supposed, no one thought of regretting the
change. Top particularly was enchanted with this improvement, for he had not,
and never could have possessed Master Jup's skill in climbing ladders, and often
it was on Neb's back, or even on that of the orang that he had been obliged to
make the ascent to Granite House. About this time, too, Cyrus Harding
attempted to manufacture glass, and he at first put the old pottery-kiln to this
new use. There were some difficulties to be encountered; but, after several
fruitless attempts, he succeeded in setting up a glass manufactory, which Gideon
Spilett and Herbert, his usual assistants, did not leave for several days. As to the
substances used in the composition of glass, they are simply sand, chalk, and
soda, either carbonate or sulphate. Now the beach supplied sand, lime supplied
chalk, seaweeds supplied soda, pyrites supplied sulphuric acid, and the ground
supplied coal to heat the kiln to the wished-for temperature. Cyrus Harding thus
soon had everything ready for setting to work.

The tool, the manufacture of which presented the most difficulty, was the
pipe of the glass-maker, an iron tube, five or six feet long, which collects on one
end the material in a state of fusion. But by means of a long, thin piece of iron
rolled up like the barrel of a gun, Pencroft succeeded in making a tube soon
ready for use.

On the 28th of March the tube was heated. A hundred parts of sand, thirty-
five of chalk, forty of sulphate of soda, mixed with two or three parts of
powdered coal, composed the substance, which was placed in crucibles. When
the high temperature of the oven had reduced it to a liquid, or rather a pasty
state, Cyrus Harding collected with the tube a quantity of the paste: he turned it
about on a metal plate, previously arranged, so as to give it a form suitable for
blowing, then he passed the tube to Herbert, telling him to blow at the other


extremity.

And Herbert, swelling out his cheeks, blew so much and so well into the
tube-taking care to twirl it round at the same time--that his breath dilated the
glassy mass. Other quantities of the substance in a state of fusion were added to
the first, and in a short time the result was a bubble which measured a foot in
diameter. Harding then took the tube out of Herbert's hands, and, giving it a
pendulous motion, he ended by lengthening the malleable bubble so as to give it
a cylindroconic shape.

The blowing operation had given a cylinder of glass terminated by two
hemispheric caps, which were easily detached by means of a sharp iron dipped
in cold water; then, by the same proceeding, this cylinder was cut lengthways,
and after having been rendered malleable by a second heating, it was extended
on a plate and spread out with a wooden roller.

The first pane was thus manufactured, and they had only to perform this
operation fifty times to have fifty panes. The windows at Granite House were
soon furnished with panes; not very white, perhaps, but still sufficiently
transparent.

As to bottles and tumblers, that was only play. They were satisfied with
them, besides, just as they came from the end of the tube. Pencroft had asked to
be allowed to "blow" in his turn, and it was great fun for him; but he blew so
hard that his productions took the most ridiculous shapes, which he admired
immensely.

Cyrus Harding and Herbert, while hunting one day, had entered the forest of
the Far West, on the left bank of the Mercy, and, as usual, the lad was asking a
thousand questions of the engineer, who answered them heartily. Now, as
Harding was not a sportsman, and as, on the other side, Herbert was talking
chemistry and natural philosophy, numbers of kangaroos, capybaras, and
agouties came within range, which, however, escaped the lad's gun; the
consequence was that the day was already advanced, and the two hunters were in
danger of having made a useless excursion, when Herbert, stopping, and uttering
a cry of joy, exclaimed,--

"Oh, Captain Harding, do you see that tree?" and he pointed to a shrub,
rather than a tree, for it was composed of a single stem, covered with a scaly
bark, which bore leaves streaked with little parallel veins.

"And what is this tree which resembles a little palm?" asked Harding.

"Tt is a 'cycas revoluta,' of which I have a picture in our dictionary of Natural
History!" said Herbert.

"But I can't see any fruit on this shrub!" observed his companion.

"No, captain," replied Herbert; "but its stem contains a flour with which


nature has provided us all ready ground."

"It is, then, the bread-tree?"

"Yes, the bread-tree."

"Well, my boy," replied the engineer, "this is a valuable discovery, since our
wheat harvest is not yet ripe; I hope that you are not mistaken!"

Herbert was not mistaken: he broke the stem of a cycas, which was
composed of a glandulous tissue, containing a quantity of floury pith, traversed
with woody fiber, separated by rings of the same substance, arranged
concentrically. With this fecula was mingled a mucilaginous juice of
disagreeable flavor, but which it would be easy to get rid of by pressure. This
cellular substance was regular flour of a superior quality, extremely nourishing;
its exportation was formerly forbidden by the Japanese laws.

Cyrus Harding and Herbert, after having examined that part of the Far West
where the cycas grew, took their bearings, and returned to Granite House, where
they made known their discovery.

The next day the settlers went to collect some, and returned to Granite House
with an ample supply of cycas stems. The engineer constructed a press, with
which to extract the mucilaginous juice mingled with the fecula, and he obtained
a large quantity of flour, which Neb soon transformed into cakes and puddings.
This was not quite real wheaten bread, but it was very like it.

Now, too, the onager, the goats, and the sheep in the corral furnished daily
the milk necessary to the colony. The cart, or rather a sort of light carriole which
had replaced it, made frequent journeys to the corral, and when it was Pencroft's
turn to go he took Jup, and let him drive, and Jup, cracking his whip, acquitted
himself with his customary intelligence.

Everything prospered, as well in the corral as in Granite House, and certainly
the settlers, if it had not been that they were so far from their native land, had no
reason to complain. They were so well suited to this life, and were, besides, so
accustomed to the island, that they could not have left its hospitable soil without
regret!

And yet so deeply is the love of his country implanted in the heart of man,
that if a ship had unexpectedly come in sight of the island, the colonists would
have made signals, would have attracted her attention, and would have departed!

It was the ist of April, a Sunday, Easter Day, which Harding and his
companions sanctified by rest and prayer. The day was fine, such as an October
day in the Northern Hemisphere might be.

All, towards the evening after dinner, were seated under the veranda on the
edge of Prospect Heights, and they were watching the darkness creeping up from
the horizon. Some cups of the infusion of elderberries, which took the place of


coffee, had been served by Neb. They were speaking of the island and of its
isolated situation in the Pacific, which led Gideon Spilett to say,--

"My dear Cyrus, have you ever, since you possessed the sextant found in the
case, again taken the position of our island?"

"No," replied the engineer.

"But it would perhaps be a good thing to do it with this instrument, which is
more perfect than that which you before used."

"What is the good?" said Pencroft. "The island is quite comfortable where it
is!"

"Well, who knows," returned the reporter, "who knows but that we may be
much nearer inhabited land than we think?"

"We shall know to-morrow," replied Cyrus Harding, "and if it had not been
for the occupations which left me no leisure, we should have known it already."

"Good!" said Pencroft. "The captain is too good an observer to be mistaken,
and, if it has not moved from its place, the island is just where he put it."

"We shall see."

On the next day, therefore, by means of the sextant, the engineer made the
necessary observations to verify the position which he had already obtained, and
this was the result of his operation. His first observation had given him the
situation of Lincoln Island,--

In west longitude: from 1500 to 1550;

In south latitude: from 300 to 350

The second gave exactly:

In longitude: 1500 30'

In south latitude: 340 57’

So then, notwithstanding the imperfection of his apparatus, Cyrus Harding
had operated with so much skill that his error did not exceed five degrees.

"Now," said Gideon Spilett, "since we possess an atlas as well as a sextant,
let us see, my dear Cyrus, the exact position which Lincoln Island occupies in
the Pacific."

Herbert fetched the atlas, and the map of the Pacific was opened, and the
engineer, compass in hand, prepared to determine their position.

Suddenly the compasses stopped, and he exclaimed,

"But an island exists in this part of the Pacific already!"

"An island?" cried Pencroft.

"Tabor Island."

"An important island?"

"No, an islet lost in the Pacific, and which perhaps has never been visited."

"Well, we will visit it," said Pencroft.


"We?"

"Yes, captain. We will build a decked boat, and I will undertake to steer her.
At what distance are we from this Tabor Island?"

"About a hundred and fifty miles to the northeast," replied Harding.

"A hundred and fifty miles! And what's that?" returned Pencroft. "In forty-
eight hours, with a good wind, we should sight it!"

And, on this reply, it was decided that a vessel should be constructed in time


to be launched towards the month of next October, on the return of the fine
season.


Chapter 10


When Pencroft had once got a plan in his head, he had no peace till it was
executed. Now he wished to visit Tabor Island, and as a boat of a certain size
was necessary for this voyage, he determined to build one.

What wood should he employ? Elm or fir, both of which abounded in the
island? They decided for the fir, as being easy to work, but which stands water as
well as the elm.

These details settled, it was agreed that since the fine season would not
return before six months, Cyrus Harding and Pencroft should work alone at the
boat. Gideon Spilett and Herbert were to continue to hunt, and neither Neb nor
Master Jup, his assistant, were to leave the domestic duties which had devolved
upon them.

Directly the trees were chosen, they were felled, stripped of their branches,
and sawn into planks as well as sawyers would have been able to do it. A week
after, in the recess between the Chimneys and the cliff, a dockyard was prepared,
and a keel five-and-thirty feet long, furnished with a stern-post at the stern and a
stem at the bows, lay along the sand.

Cyrus Harding was not working in the dark at this new trade. He knew as
much about ship-building as about nearly everything else, and he had at first
drawn the model of his ship on paper. Besides, he was ably seconded by
Pencroft, who, having worked for several years in a dockyard in Brooklyn, knew
the practical part of the trade. It was not until after careful calculation and deep
thought that the timbers were laid on the keel.

Pencroft, as may be believed, was all eagerness to carry out his new
enterprise, and would not leave his work for an instant.

A single thing had the honor of drawing him, but for one day only, from his
dockyard. This was the second wheat-harvest, which was gathered in on the 15th
of April. It was as much a success as the first, and yielded the number of grains
which had been predicted.

"Five bushels, captain,” said Pencroft, alter having scrupulously measured
his treasure.

"Five bushels," replied the engineer; "and a hundred and thirty thousand
grains a bushel will make six hundred and fifty thousand grains."

"Well, we will sow them all this time," said the sailor, "except a little in
reserve."

"Yes, Pencroft, and if the next crop gives a proportionate yield, we shall have


four thousand bushels."

"And shall we eat bread?"

"We shall eat bread."

"But we must have a mill.

"We will make one."

The third cornfield was very much larger than the two first, and the soil,
prepared with extreme care, received the precious seed. That done, Pencroft
returned to his work.

During this time Spilett and Herbert hunted in the neighborhood, and they
ventured deep into the still unknown parts of the Far West, their guns loaded
with ball, ready for any dangerous emergency. It was a vast thicket of
magnificent trees, crowded together as if pressed for room. The exploration of
these dense masses of wood was difficult in the extreme, and the reporter never
ventured there without the pocket-compass, for the sun scarcely pierced through
the thick foliage and it would have been very difficult for them to retrace their
way. It naturally happened that game was more rare in those situations where
there was hardly sufficient room to move; two or three large herbivorous animals
were however killed during the last fortnight of April. These were koalas,
specimens of which the settlers had already seen to the north of the lake, and
which stupidly allowed themselves to be killed among the thick branches of the
trees in which they took refuge. Their skins were brought back to Granite House,
and there, by the help of sulphuric acid, they were subjected to a sort of tanning
process which rendered them capable of being used.

On the 30th of April, the two sportsmen were in the depth of the Far West,
when the reporter, preceding Herbert a few paces, arrived in a sort of clearing,
into which the trees more sparsely scattered had permitted a few rays to
penetrate. Gideon Spilett was at first surprised at the odor which exhaled from
certain plants with straight stalks, round and branchy, bearing grape-like clusters
of flowers and very small berries. The reporter broke off one or two of these
stalks and returned to the lad, to whom he said,--

"What can this be, Herbert?"

"Well, Mr. Spilett," said Herbert, "this is a treasure which will secure you
Pencroft's gratitude forever."

"Is it tobacco?"

"Yes, and though it may not be of the first quality, it is none the less
tobacco!"

"Oh, good old Pencroft! Won't he be pleased! But we must not let him smoke
it all, he must give us our share."

"Ah! an idea occurs to me, Mr. Spilett," replied Herbert. "Don't let us say


anything to Pencroft yet; we will prepare these leaves, and one fine day we will
present him with a pipe already filled!"

"All right, Herbert, and on that day our worthy companion will have nothing
left to wish for in this world."

The reporter and the lad secured a good store of the precious plant, and then
returned to Granite House, where they smuggled it in with as much precaution as
if Pencroft had been the most vigilant and severe of custom-house officers.

Cyrus Harding and Neb were taken into confidence, and the sailor suspected
nothing during the whole time, necessarily somewhat long, which was required
in order to dry the small leaves, chop them up, and subject them to a certain
torrefaction on hot stones. This took two months; but all these manipulations
were successfully carried on unknown to Pencroft, for, occupied with the
construction of his boat, he only returned to Granite House at the hour of rest.

For some days they had observed an enormous animal two or three miles out
in the open sea swimming around Lincoln Island. This was a whale of the largest
size, which apparently belonged to the southern species, called the "Cape
Whale.”

"What a lucky chance it would be if we could capture it!" cried the sailor.
"Ah! if we only had a proper boat and a good harpoon, I would say ‘After the
beast,’ for he would be well worth the trouble of catching!"

"Well, Pencroft," observed Harding, "I should much like to watch you
handling a harpoon. It would be very interesting."

"IT am astonished," said the reporter, "to see a whale in this comparatively
high latitude."

"Why so, Mr. Spilett?" replied Herbert. "We are exactly in that part of the
Pacific which English and American whalemen call the whale field, and it is
here, between New Zealand and South America, that the whales of the Southern
Hemisphere are met with in the greatest numbers."

And Pencroft returned to his work, not without uttering a sigh of regret, for
every sailor is a born fisherman, and if the pleasure of fishing is in exact
proportion to the size of the animal, one can judge how a whaler feels in sight of
a whale. And if this had only been for pleasure! But they could not help feeling
how valuable such a prize would have been to the colony, for the oil, fat, and
bones would have been put to many uses.

Now it happened that this whale appeared to have no wish to leave the
waters of the island. Therefore, whether from the windows of Granite House, or
from Prospect Heights, Herbert and Gideon Spilett, when they were not hunting,
or Neb, unless presiding over his fires, never left the telescope, but watched all
the animal's movements. The cetacean, having entered far into Union Bay, made


rapid furrows across it from Mandible Cape to Claw Cape, propelled by its
enormously powerful flukes, on which it supported itself, and making its way
through the water at the rate little short of twelve knots an hour. Sometimes also
it approached so near to the island that it could be clearly distinguished. It was
the southern whale, which is completely black, the head being more depressed
than that of the northern whale.

They could also see it throwing up from its air-holes to a great height a cloud
of vapor, or of water, for, strange as it may appear, naturalists and whalers are
not agreed on this subject. Is it air or is it water which is thus driven out? It is
generally admitted to be vapor, which, condensing suddenly by contact with the
cold air, falls again as rain.

However, the presence of this mammifer preoccupied the colonists. It
irritated Pencroft especially, as he could think of nothing else while at work. He
ended by longing for it, like a child for a thing which it has been denied. At night
he talked about it in his sleep, and certainly if he had had the means of attacking
it, if the sloop had been in a fit state to put to sea, he would not have hesitated to
set out in pursuit.

But what the colonists could not do for themselves chance did for them, and
on the 3rd of May shouts from Neb, who had stationed himself at the kitchen
window, announced that the whale was stranded on the beach of the island.

Herbert and Gideon Spilett, who were just about to set out hunting, left their
guns, Pencroft threw down his ax, and Harding and Neb joining their
companions, all rushed towards the scene of action.

The stranding had taken place on the beach of Flotsam Point, three miles
from Granite House, and at high tide. It was therefore probable that the cetacean
would not be able to extricate itself easily; at any rate it was best to hasten, so as
to cut off its retreat if necessary. They ran with pickaxes and iron-tipped poles in
their hands, passed over the Mercy bridge, descended the right bank of the river,
along the beach, and in less than twenty minutes the settlers were close to the
enormous animal, above which flocks of birds already hovered.

"What a monster!" cried Neb.

And the exclamation was natural, for it was a southern whale, eighty feet
long, a giant of the species, probably not weighing less than a hundred and fifty
thousand pounds!

In the meanwhile, the monster thus stranded did not move, nor attempt by
struggling to regain the water while the tide was still high.

It was dead, and a harpoon was sticking out of its left side.

"There are whalers in these quarters, then?" said Gideon Spilett directly.

"Oh, Mr. Spilett, that doesn't prove anything!" replied Pencroft. "Whales


have been known to go thousands of miles with a harpoon in the side, and this
one might even have been struck in the north of the Atlantic and come to die in
the south of the Pacific, and it would be nothing astonishing."

Pencroft, having torn the harpoon from the animal's side, read this inscription
on it:

MARIA STELLA, VINEYARD

"A vessel from the Vineyard! A ship from my country!" he cried. "The 'Maria
Stella!’ A fine whaler, 'pon my word; I know her well! Oh, my friends, a vessel
from the Vineyard!--a whaler from the Vineyard!"

And the sailor brandishing the harpoon, repeated, not without emotion, the
name which he loved so well--the name of his birthplace.

But as it could not be expected that the "Maria Stella" would come to reclaim
the animal harpooned by her, they resolved to begin cutting it up before
decomposition should commence. The birds, who had watched this rich prey for
several days, had determined to take possession of it without further delay, and it
was necessary to drive them off by firing at them repeatedly.

The whale was a female, and a large quantity of milk was taken from it,
which, according to the opinion of the naturalist Duffenbach, might pass for
cow's milk, and, indeed, it differs from it neither in taste, color, nor density.

Pencroft had formerly served on board a whaling-ship, and he could
methodically direct the operation of cutting up, a sufficiently disagreeable
operation lasting three days, but from which the settlers did not flinch, not even
Gideon Spilett, who, as the sailor said, would end by making a "real good
castaway."

The blubber, cut in parallel slices of two feet and a half in thickness, then
divided into pieces which might weigh about a thousand pounds each, was
melted down in large earthen pots brought to the spot, for they did not wish to
taint the environs of Granite House, and in this fusion it lost nearly a third of its
weight.

But there was an immense quantity of it; the tongue alone yielded six
thousand pounds of oil, and the lower lip four thousand. Then, besides the fat,
which would insure for a long time a store of stearine and glycerine, there were
still the bones, for which a use could doubtless be found, although there were
neither umbrellas nor stays used at Granite House. The upper part of the mouth
of the cetacean was, indeed, provided on both sides with eight hundred horny
blades, very elastic, of a fibrous texture, and fringed at the edge like great
combs, at which the teeth, six feet long, served to retain the thousands of
animalculae, little fish, and molluscs, on which the whale fed.

The operation finished, to the great satisfaction of the operators, the remains


of the animal were left to the birds, who would soon make every vestige of it
disappear, and their usual daily occupations were resumed by the inmates of
Granite House.

However, before returning to the dockyard, Cyrus Harding conceived the
idea of fabricating certain machines, which greatly excited the curiosity of his
companions. He took a dozen of the whale's bones, cut them into six equal parts,
and sharpened their ends.

"This machine is not my own invention, and it is frequently employed by the
Aleutian hunters in Russian America. You see these bones, my friends; well,
when it freezes, I will bend them, and then wet them with water till they are
entirely covered with ice, which will keep them bent, and I will strew them on
the snow, having previously covered them with fat. Now, what will happen if a
hungry animal swallows one of these baits? Why, the heat of his stomach will
melt the ice, and the bone, springing straight, will pierce him with its sharp
points.”

"Well! I do call that ingenious!" said Pencroft.

"And it will spare the powder and shot," rejoined Cyrus Harding.

"That will be better than traps!" added Neb.

In the meanwhile the boat-building progressed, and towards the end of the
month half the planking was completed. It could already be seen that her shape
was excellent, and that she would sail well.

Pencroft worked with unparalleled ardor, and only a sturdy frame could have
bore such fatigue; but his companions were preparing in secret a reward for his
labors, and on the 31st of May he was to meet with one of the greatest joys of his
life.

On that day, after dinner, just as he was about to leave the table, Pencroft felt
a hand on his shoulder.

It was the hand of Gideon Spilett, who said,--

"One moment, Master Pencroft, you mustn't sneak off like that! You've
forgotten your dessert."

"Thank you, Mr. Spilett," replied the sailor, "I am going back to my work."

"Well, a cup of coffee, my friend?"

"Nothing more."

"A pipe, then?”

Pencroft jumped up, and his great good-natured face grew pale when he saw
the reporter presenting him with a ready-filled pipe, and Herbert with a glowing
coal.

The sailor endeavored to speak, but could not get out a word; so, seizing the
pipe, he carried it to his lips, then applying the coal, he drew five or six great


whiffs. A fragrant blue cloud soon arose, and from its depths a voice was heard
repeating excitedly,--

"Tobacco! real tobacco!"

"Yes, Pencroft," returned Cyrus Harding, "and very good tobacco too!"

"O, divine Providence; sacred Author of all things!" cried the sailor.
"Nothing more is now wanting to our island."

And Pencroft smoked, and smoked, and smoked.

"And who made this discovery?" he asked at length. "You, Herbert, no
doubt?"

"No, Pencroft, it was Mr. Spilett."

"Mr. Spilett!" exclaimed the sailor, seizing the reporter, and clasping him to
his breast with such a squeeze that he had never felt anything like it before.

"Oh Pencroft," said Spilett, recovering his breath at last, "a truce for one
moment. You must share your gratitude with Herbert, who recognized the plant,
with Cyrus, who prepared it, and with Neb, who took a great deal of trouble to
keep our secret."

"Well, my friends, I will repay you some day," replied the sailor. "Now we
are friends for life."


Chapter 11


Winter arrived with the month of June, which is the December of the
northern zones, and the great business was the making of warm and solid
clothing.

The musmons in the corral had been stripped of their wool, and this precious
textile material was now to be transformed into stuff.

Of course Cyrus Harding, having at his disposal neither carders, combers,
polishers, stretchers, twisters, mule-jenny, nor self-acting machine to spin the
wool, nor loom to weave it, was obliged to proceed in a simpler way, so as to do
without spinning and weaving. And indeed he proposed to make use of the
property which the filaments of wool possess when subjected to a powerful
pressure of mixing together, and of manufacturing by this simple process the
material called felt. This felt could then be obtained by a simple operation
which, if it diminished the flexibility of the stuff, increased its power of retaining
heat in proportion. Now the wool furnished by the musmons was composed of
very short hairs, and was in a good condition to be felted.

The engineer, aided by his companions, including Pencroft, who was once
more obliged to leave his boat, commenced the preliminary operations, the
subject of which was to rid the wool of that fat and oily substance with which it
is impregnated, and which is called grease. This cleaning was done in vats filled
with water, which was maintained at the temperature of seventy degrees, and in
which the wool was soaked for four-and-twenty hours; it was then thoroughly
washed in baths of soda, and, when sufficiently dried by pressure, it was in a
state to be compressed, that is to say, to produce a solid material, rough, no
doubt, and such as would have no value in a manufacturing center of Europe or
America, but which would be highly esteemed in the Lincoln Island markets.

This sort of material must have been known from the most ancient times,
and, in fact, the first woolen stuffs were manufactured by the process which
Harding was now about to employ. Where Harding's engineering qualifications
now came into play was in the construction of the machine for pressing the
wool; for he knew how to turn ingeniously to profit the mechanical force,
hitherto unused, which the waterfall on the beach possessed to move a fulling-
mill.

Nothing could be more rudimentary. The wool was placed in troughs, and
upon it fell in turns heavy wooden mallets; such was the machine in question,
and such it had been for centuries until the time when the mallets were replaced


by cylinders of compression, and the material was no longer subjected to
beating, but to regular rolling.

The operation, ably directed by Cyrus Harding, was a complete success. The
wool, previously impregnated with a solution of soap, intended on the one hand
to facilitate the interlacing, the compression, and the softening of the wool, and
on the other to prevent its diminution by the beating, issued from the mill in the
shape of thick felt cloth. The roughnesses with which the staple of wool is
naturally filled were so thoroughly entangled and interlaced together that a
material was formed equally suitable either for garments or bedclothes. It was
certainly neither merino, muslin, cashmere, rep, satin, alpaca, cloth, nor flannel.
It was "Lincolnian felt," and Lincoln Island possessed yet another manufacture.
The colonists had now warm garments and thick bedclothes, and they could
without fear await the approach of the winter of 1866-67.

The severe cold began to be felt about the 20th of June, and, to his great
regret, Pencroft was obliged to suspend his boat-building, which he hoped to
finish in time for next spring.

The sailor's great idea was to make a voyage of discovery to Tabor Island,
although Harding could not approve of a voyage simply for curiosity's sake, for
there was evidently nothing to be found on this desert and almost arid rock. A
voyage of a hundred and fifty miles in a comparatively small vessel, over
unknown seas, could not but cause him some anxiety. Suppose that their vessel,
once out at sea, should be unable to reach Tabor Island, and could not return to
Lincoln Island, what would become of her in the midst of the Pacific, so fruitful
of disasters?

Harding often talked over this project with Pencroft, and he found him
strangely bent upon undertaking this voyage, for which determination he himself
could give no sufficient reason.

"Now," said the engineer one day to him, "I must observe, my friend, that
after having said so much, in praise of Lincoln Island, after having spoken so
often of the sorrow you would feel if you were obliged to forsake it, you are the
first to wish to leave it."

"Only to leave it for a few days," replied Pencroft, "only for a few days,
captain. Time to go and come back, and see what that islet is like!"

"But it is not nearly as good as Lincoln Island."

"I know that beforehand."

"Then why venture there?"

"To know what is going on in Tabor Island."

"But nothing is going on there; nothing could happen there."

"Who knows?"


'


"And if you are caught in a hurricane?"

"There is no fear of that in the fine season," replied Pencroft. "But, captain,
as we must provide against everything, I shall ask your permission to take
Herbert only with me on this voyage."

"Pencroft," replied the engineer, placing his hand on the sailor's shoulder, "if
any misfortune happens to you, or to this lad, whom chance has made our child,
do you think we could ever cease to blame ourselves?"

"Captain Harding," replied Pencroft, with unshaken confidence, "we shall
not cause you that sorrow. Besides, we will speak further of this voyage, when
the time comes to make it. And I fancy, when you have seen our tight-rigged
little craft, when you have observed how she behaves at sea, when we sail round
our island, for we will do so together--I fancy, I say, that you will no longer
hesitate to let me go. I don't conceal from you that your boat will be a
masterpiece."

"Say ‘our’ boat, at least, Pencroft," replied the engineer, disarmed for the
moment. The conversation ended thus, to be resumed later on, without
convincing either the sailor or the engineer.

The first snow fell towards the end of the month of June. The corral had
previously been largely supplied with stores, so that daily visits to it were not
requisite; but it was decided that more than a week should never be allowed to
pass without someone going to it.

Traps were again set, and the machines manufactured by Harding were tried.
The bent whalebones, imprisoned in a case of ice, and covered with a thick outer
layer of fat, were placed on the border of the forest at a spot where animals
usually passed on their way to the lake.

To the engineer's great satisfaction, this invention, copied from the Aleutian
fishermen, succeeded perfectly. A dozen foxes, a few wild boars, and even a
jaguar, were taken in this way, the animals being found dead, their stomachs
pierced by the unbent bones.

An incident must here be related, not only as interesting in itself, but because
it was the first attempt made by the colonists to communicate with the rest of
mankind.

Gideon Spilett had already several times pondered whether to throw into the
sea a letter enclosed in a bottle, which currents might perhaps carry to an
inhabited coast, or to confide it to pigeons.

But how could it be seriously hoped that either pigeons or bottles could cross
the distance of twelve hundred miles which separated the island from any
inhabited land? It would have been pure folly.

But on the 30th of June the capture was effected, not without difficulty, of an


albatross, which a shot from Herbert's gun had slightly wounded in the foot. It
was a magnificent bird, measuring ten feet from wing to wing, and which could
traverse seas as wide as the Pacific.

Herbert would have liked to keep this superb bird, as its wound would soon
heal, and he thought he could tame it; but Spilett explained to him that they
should not neglect this opportunity of attempting to communicate by this
messenger with the lands of the Pacific; for if the albatross had come from some
inhabited region, there was no doubt but that it would return there so soon as it
was set free.

Perhaps in his heart Gideon Spilett, in whom the journalist sometimes came
to the surface, was not sorry to have the opportunity of sending forth to take its
chance an exciting article relating the adventures of the settlers in Lincoln
Island. What a success for the authorized reporter of the New York Herald, and
for the number which should contain the article, if it should ever reach the
address of its editor, the Honorable James Bennett!

Gideon Spilett then wrote out a concise account, which was placed in a
strong waterproof bag, with an earnest request to whoever might find it to
forward it to the office of the New York Herald. This little bag was fastened to
the neck of the albatross, and not to its foot, for these birds are in the habit of
resting on the surface of the sea; then liberty was given to this swift courier of
the air, and it was not without some emotion that the colonists watched it
disappear in the misty west.

"Where is he going to?" asked Pencroft.

"Towards New Zealand," replied Herbert.

"A good voyage to you," shouted the sailor, who himself did not expect any
great result from this mode of correspondence.

With the winter, work had been resumed in the interior of Granite House,
mending clothes and different occupations, among others making the sails for
their vessel, which were cut from the inexhaustible balloon-case.

During the month of July the cold was intense, but there was no lack of
either wood or coal. Cyrus Harding had established a second fireplace in the
diningroom, and there the long winter evenings were spent. Talking while they
worked, reading when the hands remained idle, the time passed with profit to all.

It was real enjoyment to the settlers when in their room, well lighted with
candles, well warmed with coal, after a good dinner, elderberry coffee smoking
in the cups, the pipes giving forth an odoriferous smoke, they could hear the
storm howling without. Their comfort would have been complete, if complete
comfort could ever exist for those who are far from their fellow-creatures, and
without any means of communication with them. They often talked of their


country, of the friends whom they had left, of the grandeur of the American
Republic, whose influence could not but increase; and Cyrus Harding, who had
been much mixed up with the affairs of the Union, greatly interested his auditors
by his recitals, his views, and his prognostics.

It chanced one day that Spilett was led to say--

"But now, my dear Cyrus, all this industrial and commercial movement to
which you predict a continual advance, does it not run the danger of being
sooner or later completely stopped?"

"Stopped! And by what?"

"By the want of coal, which may justly be called the most precious of
minerals."

"Yes, the most precious indeed," replied the engineer; "and it would seem
that nature wished to prove that it was so by making the diamond, which is
simply pure carbon crystallized."

"You don't mean to say, captain," interrupted Pencroft, "that we bum
diamonds in our stoves in the shape of coal?"

"No, my friend," replied Harding.

"However," resumed Gideon Spilett, "you do not deny that some day the coal
will be entirely consumed?"

"Oh! the veins of coal are still considerable, and the hundred thousand
miners who annually extract from them a hundred millions of hundredweights
have not nearly exhausted them."

"With the increasing consumption of coal," replied Gideon Spilett, "it can be
foreseen that the hundred thousand workmen will soon become two hundred
thousand, and that the rate of extraction will be doubled."

"Doubtless; but after the European mines, which will be soon worked more
thoroughly with new machines, the American and Australian mines will for a
long time yet provide for the consumption in trade."

"For how long a time?" asked the reporter.

"For at least two hundred and fifty or three hundred years."

"That is reassuring for us, but a bad look-out for our great-grandchildren!"
observed Pencroft.

"They will discover something else," said Herbert.

"It is to be hoped so," answered Spilett, "for without coal there would be no
machinery, and without machinery there would be no railways, no steamers, no
manufactories, nothing of that which is indispensable to modern civilization!"

"But what will they find?" asked Pencroft. "Can you guess, captain?"

"Nearly, my friend."

"And what will they burn instead of coal?"


"Water," replied Harding.

"Water!" cried Pencroft, "water as fuel for steamers and engines! water to
heat water!"

"Yes, but water decomposed into its primitive elements," replied Cyrus
Harding, "and decomposed doubtless, by electricity, which will then have
become a powerful and manageable force, for all great discoveries, by some
inexplicable laws, appear to agree and become complete at the same time. Yes,
my friends, I believe that water will one day be employed as fuel, that hydrogen
and oxygen which constitute it, used singly or together, will furnish an
inexhaustible source of heat and light, of an intensity of which coal is not
capable. Some day the coalrooms of steamers and the tenders of locomotives
will, instead of coal, be stored with these two condensed gases, which will burn
in the furnaces with enormous calorific power. There is, therefore, nothing to
fear. As long as the earth is inhabited it will supply the wants of its inhabitants,
and there will be no want of either light or heat as long as the productions of the
vegetable, mineral or animal kingdoms do not fail us. I believe, then, that when
the deposits of coal are exhausted we shall heat and warm ourselves with water.
Water will be the coal of the future."

"T should like to see that," observed the sailor.

"You were born too soon, Pencroft," returned Neb, who only took part in the
discussion by these words.

However, it was not Neb's speech which interrupted the conversation, but
Top's barking, which broke out again with that strange intonation which had
before perplexed the engineer. At the same time Top began to run round the
mouth of the well, which opened at the extremity of the interior passage.

"What can Top be barking in that way for?" asked Pencroft.

"And Jup be growling like that?" added Herbert.

In fact the orang, joining the dog, gave unequivocal signs of agitation, and,
singular to say, the two animals appeared more uneasy than angry.

"Tt is evident," said Gideon Spilett, "that this well is in direct communication
with the sea, and that some marine animal comes from time to time to breathe at
the bottom."

"That's evident," replied the sailor, "and there can be no other explanation to
give. Quiet there, Top!" added Pencroft, turning to the dog, "and you, Jup, be off
to your room!"

The ape and the dog were silent. Jup went off to bed, but Top remained in the
room, and continued to utter low growls at intervals during the rest of the
evening. There was no further talk on the subject, but the incident, however,
clouded the brow of the engineer.


During the remainder of the month of July there was alternate rain and frost.
The temperature was not so low as during the preceding winter, and its
maximum did not exceed eight degrees Fahrenheit. But although this winter was
less cold, it was more troubled by storms and squalls; the sea besides often
endangered the safety of the Chimneys. At times it almost seemed as if an under-
current raised these monstrous billows which thundered against the wall of
Granite House.

When the settlers, leaning from their windows, gazed on the huge watery
masses breaking beneath their eyes, they could not but admire the magnificent
spectacle of the ocean in its impotent fury. The waves rebounded in dazzling
foam, the beach entirely disapppearing under the raging flood, and the cliff
appearing to emerge from the sea itself, the spray rising to a height of more than
a hundred feet.

During these storms it was difficult and even dangerous to venture out,
owing to the frequently falling trees; however, the colonists never allowed a
week to pass without having paid a visit to the corral. Happily, this enclosure,
sheltered by the southeastern spur of Mount Franklin, did not greatly suffer from
the violence of the hurricanes, which spared its trees, sheds, and palisades; but
the poultry-yard on Prospect Heights, being directly exposed to the gusts of wind
from the east, suffered considerable damage. The pigeon-house was twice
unroofed and the paling blown down. All this required to be remade more solidly
than before, for, as may be clearly seen, Lincoln Island was situated in one of the
most dangerous parts of the Pacific. It really appeared as if it formed the central
point of vast cyclones, which beat it perpetually as the whip does the top, only
here it was the top which was motionless and the whip which moved. During the
first week of the month of August the weather became more moderate, and the
atmosphere recovered the calm which it appeared to have lost forever. With the
calm the cold again became intense, and the thermometer fell to eight degrees
Fahrenheit, below zero.

On the 3rd of August an excursion which had been talked of for several days
was made into the southeastern part of the island, towards Tadorn Marsh. The
hunters were tempted by the aquatic game which took up their winter quarters
there. Wild duck, snipe, teal and grebe abounded there, and it was agreed that a
day should be devoted to an expedition against these birds.

Not only Gideon Spilett and Herbert, but Pencroft and Neb also took part in
this excursion. Cyrus Harding alone, alleging some work as an excuse, did not
join them, but remained at Granite House.

The hunters proceeded in the direction of Port Balloon, in order to reach the
marsh, after having promised to be back by the evening. Top and Jup


accompanied them. As soon as they had passed over the Mercy Bridge, the
engineer raised it and returned, intending to put into execution a project for the
performance of which he wished to be alone.

Now this project was to minutely explore the interior well, the mouth of
which was on a level with the passage of Granite House, and which
communicated with the sea, since it formerly supplied a way to the waters of the
lake.

Why did Top so often run round this opening? Why did he utter such strange
barks when a sort of uneasiness seemed to draw him towards this well? Why did
Jup join Top in a sort of common anxiety? Had this well branches besides the
communication with the sea? Did it spread towards other parts of the island?
This is what Cyrus Harding wished to know. He had resolved, therefore, to
attempt the exploration of the well during the absence of his companions, and an
opportunity for doing so had now presented itself.

It was easy to descend to the bottom of the well by employing the rope
ladder which had not been used since the establishment of the lift. The engineer
drew the ladder to the hole, the diameter of which measured nearly six feet, and
allowed it to unroll itself after having securely fastened its upper extremity.
Then, having lighted a lantern, taken a revolver, and placed a cutlass in his belt,
he began the descent.

The sides were everywhere entire; but points of rock jutted out here and
there, and by means of these points it would have been quite possible for an
active creature to climb to the mouth of the well.

The engineer remarked this; but although he carefully examined these points
by the light of his lantern, he could find no impression, no fracture which could
give any reason to suppose that they had either recently or at any former time
been used as a Staircase. Cyrus Harding descended deeper, throwing the light of
his lantern on all sides.

He saw nothing suspicious.

When the engineer had reached the last rounds he came upon the water,
which was then perfectly calm. Neither at its level nor in any other part of the
well, did any passage open, which could lead to the interior of the cliff. The wall
which Harding struck with the hilt of his cutlass sounded solid. It was compact
granite, through which no living being could force a way. To arrive at the bottom
of the well and then climb up to its mouth it was necessary to pass through the
channel under the rocky subsoil of the beach, which placed it in communication
with the sea, and this was only possible for marine animals. As to the question of
knowing where this channel ended, at what point of the shore, and at what depth
beneath the water, it could not be answered.


Then Cyrus Harding, having ended his survey, re-ascended, drew up the
ladder, covered the mouth of the well, and returned thoughtfully to the
diningroom, saying to himself,--

"T have seen nothing, and yet there is something there!"


Chapter 12


In the evening the hunters returned, having enjoyed good sport, and being
literally loaded with game; indeed, they had as much as four men could possibly
carry. Top wore a necklace of teal and Jup wreaths of snipe round his body.

"Here, master," cried Neb; "here's something to employ our time! Preserved
and made into pies we shall have a welcome store! But I must have some one to
help me. I count on you, Pencroft."

"No, Neb," replied the sailor; "I have the rigging of the vessel to finish and to
look after, and you will have to do without me."

"And you, Mr. Herbert?"

"I must go to the corral to-morrow, Neb," replied the lad.

"Tt will be you then, Mr. Spilett, who will help me?"

"To oblige you, Neb, I will," replied the reporter; "but I warn you that if you
disclose your receipts to me, I shall publish them."

"Whenever you like, Mr. Spilett," replied Neb; "whenever you like."

And so the next day Gideon Spilett became Neb's assistant and was installed
in his culinary laboratory. The engineer had previously made known to him the
result of the exploration which he had made the day before, and on this point the
reporter shared Harding's opinion, that although he had found nothing, a secret
still remained to be discovered!

The frost continued for another week, and the settlers did not leave Granite
House unless to look after the poultry-yard. The dwelling was filled with
appetizing odors, which were emitted from the learned manipulation of Neb and
the reporter. But all the results of the chase were not made into preserved
provisions; and as the game kept perfectly in the intense cold, wild duck and
other fowl were eaten fresh, and declared superior to all other aquatic birds in
the known world.

During this week, Pencroft, aided by Herbert, who handled the sailmaker's
needle with much skill, worked with such energy that the sails of the vessel were
finished. There was no want of cordage. Thanks to the rigging which had been
discovered with the case of the balloon, the ropes and cables from the net were
all of good quality, and the sailor turned them all to account. To the sails were
attached strong bolt ropes, and there still remained enough from which to make
the halyards, shrouds, and sheets, etc. The blocks were manufactured by Cyrus
Harding under Pencroft's directions by means of the turning lathe. It therefore
happened that the rigging was entirely prepared before the vessel was finished.


Pencroft also manufactured a flag, that flag so dear to every true American,
containing the stars and stripes of their glorious Union. The colors for it were
supplied from certain plants used in dyeing, and which were very abundant in
the island; only to the thirty-seven stars, representing the thirty-seven States of
the Union, which shine on the American flag, the sailor added a thirty-eighth, the
star of "the State of Lincoln," for he considered his island as already united to
the great republic. "And," said he, "it is so already in heart, if not in deed!"

In the meantime, the flag was hoisted at the central window of Granite
House, and the settlers saluted it with three cheers.

The cold season was now almost at an end, and it appeared as if this second
winter was to pass without any unusual occurrence, when on the night of the
11th of August, the plateau of Prospect Heights was menaced with complete
destruction.

After a busy day the colonists were sleeping soundly, when towards four
o'clock in the morning they were suddenly awakened by Top's barking.

The dog was not this time barking near the mouth of the well, but at the
threshold of the door, at which he was scratching as if he wished to burst it open.
Jup was also uttering piercing cries.

"Hello, Top!" cried Neb, who was the first awake. But the dog continued to
bark more furiously than ever.

"What's the matter now?" asked Harding.

And all dressing in haste rushed to the windows, which they opened.

Beneath their eyes was spread a sheet of snow which looked gray in the dim
light. The settlers could see nothing, but they heard a singular yelping noise
away in the darkness. It was evident that the beach had been invaded by a
number of animals which could not be seen.

"What are they?" cried Pencroft.

"Wolves, jaguars, or apes?" replied Neb.

"They have nearly reached the plateau," said the reporter.

"And our poultry-yard," exclaimed Herbert, "and our garden!"

"Where can they have crossed?" asked Pencroft.

"They must have crossed the bridge on the shore," replied the engineer,
"which one of us must have forgotten to close."

"True," said Spilett, "I remember having left it open."

"A fine job you have made of it, Mr. Spilett," cried the sailor.

"What is done cannot be undone," replied Cyrus Harding. "We must consult
what it will now be best to do."

Such were the questions and answers which were rapidly exchanged between
Harding and his companions. It was certain that the bridge had been crossed, that


the shore had been invaded by animals, and that whatever they might be they
could by ascending the left bank of the Mercy reach Prospect Heights. They
must therefore be advanced against quickly and fought with if necessary.

"But what are these beasts?" was asked a second time, as the yelpings were
again heard more loudly than before. These yelps made Herbert start, and he
remembered having heard them before during his first visit to the sources of the
Red Creek.

"They are colpeo foxes!" he exclaimed.

"Forward!" shouted the sailor.

And all arming themselves with hatchets, carbines, and revolvers, threw
themselves into the lift and soon set foot on the shore.

Colpeos are dangerous animals when in great numbers and irritated by
hunger, nevertheless the colonists did not hesitate to throw themselves into the
midst of the troop, and their first shots vividly lighting up the darkness made
their assailants draw back.

The chief thing was to hinder these plunderers from reaching the plateau, for
the garden and the poultry-yard would then have been at their mercy, and
immense, perhaps irreparable mischief, would inevitably be the result, especially
with regard to the cornfield. But as the invasion of the plateau could only be
made by the left bank of the Mercy, it was sufficient to oppose the colpeos on the
narrow bank between the river and the cliff of granite.

This was plain to all, and, by Cyrus Harding's orders, they reached the spot
indicated by him, while the colpeos rushed fiercely through the gloom. Harding,
Gideon Spilett, Herbert, Pencroft and Neb posted themselves in impregnable
line. Top, his formidable jaws open, preceded the colonists, and he was followed
by Jup, armed with knotty cudgel, which he brandished like a club.

The night was extremely dark, it was only by the flashes from the revolvers
as each person fired that they could see their assailants, who were at least a
hundred in number, and whose eyes were glowing like hot coals.

"They must not pass!" shouted Pencroft.

"They shall not pass!" returned the engineer.

But if they did not pass it was not for want of having attempted it. Those in
the rear pushed on the foremost assailants, and it was an incessant struggle with
revolvers and hatchets. Several colpeos already lay dead on the ground, but their
number did not appear to diminish, and it might have been supposed that
reinforcements were continually arriving over the bridge.

The colonists were soon obliged to fight at close quarters, not without
receiving some wounds, though happily very slight ones. Herbert had, with a
shot from his revolver, rescued Neb, on whose back a colpeo had sprung like a


tiger cat. Top fought with actual fury, flying at the throats of the foxes and
strangling them instantaneously. Jup wielded his weapon valiantly, and it was in
vain that they endeavored to keep him in the rear. Endowed doubtless with sight
which enabled him to pierce the obscurity, he was always in the thick of the fight
uttering from time to time--a sharp hissing sound, which was with him the sign
of great rejoicing.

At one moment he advanced so far, that by the light from a revolver he was
seen surrounded by five or six large colpeos, with whom he was coping with
great coolness.

However, the struggle was ended at last, and victory was on the side of the
settlers, but not until they had fought for two long hours! The first signs of the
approach of day doubtless determined the retreat of their assailants, who
scampered away towards the North, passing over the bridge, which Neb ran
immediately to raise. When day had sufficiently lighted up the field of battle, the
settlers counted as many as fifty dead bodies scattered about on the shore.

"And Jup!" cried Pencroft; "where is Jup?" Jup had disappeared. His friend
Neb called him, and for the first time Jup did not reply to his friend's call.

Everyone set out in search of Jup, trembling lest he should be found among
the slain; they cleared the place of the bodies which stained the snow with their
blood. Jup was found in the midst of a heap of colpeos whose broken jaws and
crushed bodies showed that they had to do with the terrible club of the intrepid
animal.

Poor Jup still held in his hand the stump of his broken cudgel, but deprived
of his weapon he had been overpowered by numbers, and his chest was covered
with severe wounds.

"He is living," cried Neb, who was bending over him.

"And we will save him," replied the sailor. "We will nurse him as if he was
one of ourselves."

It appeared as if Jup understood, for he leaned his head on Pencroft's
shoulder as if to thank him. The sailor was wounded himself, but his wound was
insignificant, as were those of his companions; for thanks to their firearms they
had been almost always able to keep their assailants at a distance. It was
therefore only the orang whose condition was serious.

Jup, carried by Neb and Pencroft, was placed in the lift, and only a slight
moan now and then escaped his lips. He was gently drawn up to Granite House.
There he was laid on a mattress taken from one of the beds, and his wounds were
bathed with the greatest care. It did not appear that any vital part had been
reached, but Jup was very weak from loss of blood, and a high fever soon set in
after his wounds had been dressed. He was laid down, strict diet was imposed,


"just like a real person," as Neb said, and they made him swallow several cups of
a cooling drink, for which the ingredients were supplied from the vegetable
medicine chest of Granite House. Jup was at first restless, but his breathing
gradually became more regular, and he was left sleeping quietly. From time to
time Top, walking on tip-toe, as one might say, came to visit his friend, and
seemed to approve of all the care that had been taken of him. One of Jup's hands
hung over the side of his bed, and Top licked it with a sympathizing air.

They employed the day in interring the dead, who were dragged to the forest
of the Far West, and there buried deep.

This attack, which might have had such serious consequences, was a lesson
to the settlers, who from this time never went to bed until one of their number
had made sure that all the bridges were raised, and that no invasion was possible.

However, Jup, after having given them serious anxiety for several days,
began to recover. His constitution brought him through, the fever gradually
subsided, and Gideon Spilett, who was a bit of a doctor, pronounced him quite
out of danger. On the 16th of August, Jup began to eat. Neb made him nice little
sweet dishes, which the invalid devoured with great relish, for if he had a pet
failing it was that of being somewhat of a gourmend, and Neb had never done
anything to cure him of this fault.

"What would you have?" said he to Gideon Spilett, who sometimes
expostulated with him for spoiling the ape. "Poor Jup has no other pleasure than
that of the palate, and I am only too glad to be able to reward his services in this
way!"

Ten days after taking to his bed, on the 21st of August, Master Jup arose. His
wounds were healed, and it was evident that he would not be long in regaining
his usual strength and agility. Like all convalescents, he was tremendously
hungry, and the reporter allowed him to eat as much as he liked, for he trusted to
that instinct, which is too often wanting in reasoning beings, to keep the orang
from any excess. Neb was delighted to see his pupil's appetite returning.

"Eat away, my Jup," said he, "and don't spare anything; you have shed your
blood for us, and it is the least I can do to make you strong again!"

On the 25th of August Neb's voice was heard calling to his companions.

"Captain, Mr. Spilett, Mr. Herbert, Pencroft, come! come!"

The colonists, who were together in the diningroom, rose at Neb's call, who
was then in Jup's room.

"What's the matter?" asked the reporter.

"Look," replied Neb, with a shout of laughter. And what did they see? Master
Jup smoking calmly and seriously, sitting crosslegged like a Turk at the entrance
to Granite House!


"My pipe," cried Pencroft. "He has taken my pipe! Hello, my honest Jup, I
make you a present of it! Smoke away, old boy, smoke away!"

And Jup gravely puffed out clouds of smoke which seemed to give him great
satisfaction. Harding did not appear to be much astonished at this incident, and
he cited several examples of tame apes, to whom the use of tobacco had become
quite familiar.

But from this day Master Jup had a pipe of his own, the sailor's ex-pipe,
which was hung in his room near his store of tobacco. He filled it himself,
lighted it with a glowing coal, and appeared to be the happiest of quadrumana. It
may readily be understood that this similarity of tastes of Jup and Pencroft
served to tighten the bonds of friendship which already existed between the
honest ape and the worthy sailor.

"Perhaps he is really a man," said Pencroft sometimes to Neb. "Should you
be surprised to hear him beginning to speak to us some day?"

"My word, no," replied Neb. "What astonishes me is that he hasn't spoken to
us before, for now he wants nothing but speech!"

"It would amuse me all the same," resumed the sailor, "if some fine day he
said to me, 'Suppose we change pipes, Pencroft.""

"Yes," replied Neb, "what a pity he was born dumb!"

With the month of September the winter ended, and the works were again
eagerly commenced. The building of the vessel advanced rapidly, she was
already completely decked over, and all the inside parts of the hull were firmly
united with ribs bent by means of steam, which answered all the purposes of a
mold.

As there was no want of wood, Pencroft proposed to the engineer to give a
double lining to the hull, to insure the strength of the vessel.

Harding, not knowing what the future might have in store for them, approved
the sailor's idea of making the craft as strong as possible. The interior and deck
of the vessel was entirely finished towards the 15th of September. For calking
the seams they made oakum of dry seaweed, which was hammered in between
the planks; then these seams were covered with boiling tar, which was obtained
in great abundance from the pines in the forest.

The management of the vessel was very simple. She had from the first been
ballasted with heavy blocks of granite walled up, in a bed of lime, twelve
thousand pounds of which they stowed away.

A deck was placed over this ballast, and the interior was divided into two
cabins; two benches extended along them and served also as lockers. The foot of
the mast supported the partition which separated the two cabins, which were
reached by two hatchways let into the deck.


Pencroft had no trouble in finding a tree suitable for the mast. He chose a
straight young fir, with no knots, and which he had only to square at the step,
and round off at the top. The ironwork of the mast, the rudder and the hull had
been roughly but strongly forged at the Chimneys. Lastly, yards, masts, boom,
Spars, oars, etc., were all furnished by the first week in October, and it was
agreed that a trial trip should be taken round the island, so as to ascertain how
the vessel would behave at sea, and how far they might depend upon her.

During all this time the necessary works had not been neglected. The corral
was enlarged, for the flock of musmons and goats had been increased by a
number of young ones, who had to be housed and fed. The colonists had paid
visits also to the oyster bed, the warren, the coal and iron mines, and to the till
then unexplored districts of the Far West forest, which abounded in game.
Certain indigenous plants were discovered, and those fit for immediate use
contributed to vary the vegetable stores of Granite House.

They were a species of ficoide, some similar to those of the Cape, with
eatable fleshy leaves, others bearing seeds containing a sort of flour.

On the 10th of October the vessel was launched. Pencroft was radiant with
joy, the operation was perfectly successful; the boat completely rigged, having
been pushed on rollers to the water's edge, was floated by the rising tide, amid
the cheers of the colonists, particularly of Pencroft, who showed no modesty on
this occasion. Besides his importance was to last beyond the finishing of the
vessel, since, after having built her, he was to command her. The grade of
captain was bestowed upon him with the approbation of all. To satisfy Captain
Pencroft, it was now necessary to give a name to the vessel, and, after many
propositions had been discussed, the votes were all in favor of the
"Bonadventure." As soon as the "Bonadventure" had been lifted by the rising
tide, it was seen that she lay evenly in the water, and would be easily navigated.
However, the trial trip was to be made that very day, by an excursion off the
coast. The weather was fine, the breeze fresh, and the sea smooth, especially
towards the south coast, for the wind was blowing from the northwest.

"All hands on board," shouted Pencroft; but breakfast was first necessary,
and it was thought best to take provisions on board, in the event of their
excursion being prolonged until the evening.

Cyrus Harding was equally anxious to try the vessel, the model of which had
originated with him, although on the sailor's advice he had altered some parts of
it, but he did not share Pencroft's confidence in her, and as the latter had not
again spoken of the voyage to Tabor Island, Harding hoped he had given it up.
He would have indeed great reluctance in letting two or three of his companions
venture so far in so small a boat, which was not of more than fifteen tons'


burden.

At half-past ten everybody was on board, even Top and Jup, and Herbert
weighed the anchor, which was fast in the sand near the mouth of the Mercy. The
sail was hoisted, the Lincolnian flag floated from the masthead, and the
"Bonadventure," steered by Pencroft, stood out to sea.

The wind blowing out of Union Bay she ran before it, and thus showed her
owners, much to their satisfaction, that she possessed a remarkably fast pair of
heels, according to Pencroft's mode of speaking. After having doubled Flotsam
Point and Claw Cape, the captain kept her close hauled, so as to sail along the
southern coast of the island, when it was found she sailed admirably within five
points of the wind. All hands were enchanted, they had a good vessel, which, in
case of need, would be of great service to them, and with fine weather and a
fresh breeze the voyage promised to be charming.

Pencroft now stood off the shore, three or four miles across from Port
Balloon. The island then appeared in all its extent and under a new aspect, with
the varied panorama of its shore from Claw Cape to Reptile End, the forests in
which dark firs contrasted with the young foliage of other trees and overlooked
the whole, and Mount Franklin whose lofty head was still whitened with snow.

"How beautiful it is!" cried Herbert.

"Yes, our island is beautiful and good," replied Pencroft. "I love it as I loved
my poor mother. It received us poor and destitute, and now what is wanting to us
five fellows who fell on it from the sky?"

"Nothing," replied Neb; "nothing, captain."

And the two brave men gave three tremendous cheers in honor of their
island!

During all this time Gideon Spilett, leaning against the mast, sketched the
panorama which was developed before his eyes.

Cyrus Harding gazed on it in silence.

"Well, Captain Harding," asked Pencroft, "what do you think of our vessel?"

"She appears to behave well," replied the engineer.

"Good! And do you think now that she could undertake a voyage of some
extent?"

"What voyage, Pencroft?"

"One to Tabor Island, for instance."

"My friend,” replied Harding, "I think that in any pressing emergency we
need not hesitate to trust ourselves to the 'Bonadventure’ even for a longer
voyage; but you know I should see you set off to Tabor Island with great
uneasiness, since nothing obliges you to go there."

"One likes to know one's neighbors," returned the sailor, who was obstinate


in his idea. "Tabor Island is our neighbor, and the only one! Politeness requires
us to go at least to pay a visit."

"By Jove," said Spilett, "our friend Pencroft has become very particular
about the proprieties all at once!"

"T am not particular about anything at all," retorted the sailor, who was rather
vexed by the engineer's opposition, but who did not wish to cause him anxiety.

"Consider, Pencroft," resumed Harding, "you cannot go alone to Tabor
Island."

"One companion will be enough for me."

"Even so," replied the engineer, "you will risk depriving the colony of
Lincoln Island of two settlers out of five."

"Out of six,” answered Pencroft; "you forget Jup."

"Out of seven," added Neb; "Top is quite worth another."

"There is no risk at all in it, captain,” replied Pencroft.

"That is possible, Pencroft; but I repeat it is to expose ourselves uselessly."

The obstinate sailor did not reply, and let the conversation drop, quite
determined to resume it again. But he did not suspect that an incident would
come to his aid and change into an act of humanity that which was at first only a
doubtful whim.

After standing off the shore the "Bonadventure" again approached it in the
direction of Port Balloon. It was important to ascertain the channels between the
sandbanks and reefs, that buoys might be laid down since this little creek was to
be the harbor.

They were not more than half a mile from the coast, and it was necessary to
tack to beat against the wind. The "Bonadventure" was then going at a very
moderate rate, as the breeze, partly intercepted by the high land, scarcely swelled
her sails, and the sea, smooth as glass, was only rippled now and then by passing
gusts.

Herbert had stationed himself in the bows that he might indicate the course
to be followed among the channels, when all at once he shouted,--

"Luff, Pencroft, luff!"

"What's the matter," replied the sailor; "a rock?"

"No--wait," said Herbert; "I don't quite see. Luff again--right--now."

So saying, Herbert, leaning over the side, plunged his arm into the water, and
pulled it out, exclaiming,--

"A bottle!"

He held in his hand a corked bottle which he had just seized a few cables'
length from the shore.

Cyrus Harding took the bottle. Without uttering a single word he drew the


cork, and took from it a damp paper, on which were written these words:--
"Castaway.... Tabor island: 153deg W. long., 37deg 11'S. lat."


Chapter 13


"A castaway!" exclaimed Pencroft; "left on this Tabor Island not two hundred
miles from us! Ah, Captain Harding, you won't now oppose my going."

"No, Pencroft," replied Cyrus Harding; "and you shall set out as soon as
possible."

"To-morrow?"

"To-morrow!"

The engineer still held in his hand the paper which he had taken from the
bottle. He contemplated it for some instants, then resumed,

"From this document, my friends, from the way in which it is worded, we
may conclude this: first, that the castaway on Tabor Island is a man possessing a
considerable knowledge of navigation, since he gives the latitude and longitude
of the island exactly as we ourselves found it, and to a second of approximation;
secondly, that he is either English or American, as the document is written in the
English language."

"That is perfectly logical," answered Spilett; "and the presence of this
castaway explains the arrival of the case on the shores of our island. There must
have been a wreck, since there is a castaway. As to the latter, whoever he may
be, it is lucky for him that Pencroft thought of building this boat and of trying
her this very day, for a day later and this bottle might have been broken on the
rocks."

"Indeed," said Herbert, "it is a fortunate chance that the 'Bonadventure'
passed exactly where the bottle was still floating!"

"Does not this appear strange to you?" asked Harding of Pencroft.

"It appears fortunate, that's all," answered the sailor. "Do you see anything
extraordinary in it, captain? The bottle must go somewhere, and why not here as
well as anywhere else?"

"Perhaps you are right, Pencroft," replied the engineer; "and yet--"

"But," observed Herbert, "there's nothing to prove that this bottle has been
floating long in the sea."

"Nothing," replied Gideon Spilett, "and the document appears even to have
been recently written. What do you think about it, Cyrus?"

During this conversation Pencroft had not remained inactive. He had put the
vessel about, and the "Bonadventure," all sails set, was running rapidly towards
Claw Cape.

Every one was thinking of the castaway on Tabor Island. Should they be in


time to save him? This was a great event in the life of the colonists! They
themselves were but castaways, but it was to be feared that another might not
have been so fortunate, and their duty was to go to his succor.

Claw Cape was doubled, and about four o'clock the "Bonadventure" dropped
her anchor at the mouth of the Mercy.

That same evening the arrangements for the new expedition were made. It
appeared best that Pencroft and Herbert, who knew how to work the vessel,
should undertake the voyage alone. By setting out the next day, the 10th of
October, they would arrive on the 13th, for with the present wind it would not
take more than forty-eight hours to make this passage of a hundred and fifty
miles. One day in the island, three or four to return, they might hope therefore
that on the 17th they would again reach Lincoln Island. The weather was fine,
the barometer was rising, the wind appeared settled, everything then was in favor
of these brave men whom an act of humanity was taking far from their island.

Thus it had been agreed that Cyrus Harding, Neb, and Gideon Spilett should
remain at Granite House, but an objection was raised, and Spilett, who had not
forgotten his business as reporter to the New York Herald, having declared that
he would go by swimming rather than lose such an opportunity, he was admitted
to take a part in the voyage.

The evening was occupied in transporting on board the "Bonadventure,"
articles of bedding, utensils, arms, ammunition, a compass, provisions for a
week; this being rapidly done, the colonists ascended to Granite House.

The next day, at five o'clock in the moming, the farewells were said, not
without some emotion on both sides, and Pencroft setting sail made towards
Claw Cape, which had to be doubled in order to proceed to the southwest.

The "Bonadventure" was already a quarter of a mile from the coast when the
passengers perceived on the heights of Granite House two men waving their
farewells; they were Cyrus Harding and Neb.

"Our friends," exclaimed Spilett, "this is our first separation in fifteen
months."

Pencroft, the reporter and Herbert waved in return, and Granite House soon
disappeared behind the high rocks of the Cape.

During the first part of the day the "Bonadventure" was still in sight of the
southern coast of Lincoln Island, which soon appeared just like a green basket,
with Mount Franklin rising from the center. The heights, diminished by distance,
did not present an appearance likely to tempt vessels to touch there. Reptile End
was passed in about an hour, though at a distance of about ten miles.

At this distance it was no longer possible to distinguish anything of the
Western Coast, which stretched away to the ridges of Mount Franklin, and three


hours after the last of Lincoln Island sank below the horizon.

The "Bonadventure" behaved capitally. Bounding over the waves she
proceeded rapidly on her course. Pencroft had hoisted the foresail, and steering
by the compass followed a rectilinear direction. From time to time Herbert
relieved him at the helm, and the lad's hand was so firm that the sailor had not a
point to find fault with.

Gideon Spilett chatted sometimes with one, sometimes with the other, if
wanted he lent a hand with the ropes, and Captain Pencroft was perfectly
satisfied with his crew.

In the evening the crescent moon, which would not be in its first quarter until
the 16th, appeared in the twilight and soon set again. The night was dark but
starry, and the next day again promised to be fine.

Pencroft prudently lowered the foresail, not wishing to be caught by a
sudden gust while carrying too much canvas; it was perhaps an unnecessary
precaution on such a calm night, but Pencroft was a prudent sailor and cannot be
blamed for it.

The reporter slept part of the night. Pencroft and Herbert took turns for a
spell of two hours each at the helm. The sailor trusted Herbert as he would
himself, and his confidence was justified by the coolness and judgment of the
lad. Pencroft gave him his directions as a commander to his steersman, and
Herbert never allowed the "Bonadventure" to swerve even a point. The night
passed quickly, as did the day of the 12th of October. A southeasterly direction
was Strictly maintained. Unless the "Bonadventure" fell in with some unknown
current she would come exactly within sight of Tabor Island.

As to the sea over which the vessel was then sailing, it was absolutely
deserted. Now and then a great albatross or frigate bird passed within gunshot,
and Gideon Spilett wondered if it was to one of them that he had confided his
last letter addressed to the New York Herald. These birds were the only beings
that appeared to frequent this part of the ocean between Tabor and Lincoln
Islands.

"And yet," observed Herbert, "this is the time that whalers usually proceed
towards the southern part of the Pacific. Indeed I do not think there could be a
more deserted sea than this."

"It is not quite so deserted as all that," replied Pencroft.

"What do you mean?" asked the reporter.

"We are on it. Do you take our vessel for a wreck and us for porpoises?"

And Pencroft laughed at his joke.

By the evening, according to calculation, it was thought that the
"Bonadventure" had accomplished a distance of a hundred and twenty miles


since her departure from Lincoln Island, that is to say in thirty-six hours, which
would give her a speed of between three and four knots an hour. The breeze was
very slight and might soon drop altogether. However, it was hoped that the next
morning by break of day, if the calculation had been correct and the course true,
they would sight Tabor Island.

Neither Gideon Spilett, Herbert, nor Pencroft slept that night. In the
expectation of the next day they could not but feel some emotion. There was so
much uncertainty in their enterprise! Were they near Tabor Island? Was the
island still inhabited by the castaway to whose succor they had come? Who was
this man? Would not his presence disturb the little colony till then so united?
Besides, would he be content to exchange his prison for another? All these
questions, which would no doubt be answered the next day, kept them in
suspense, and at the dawn of day they all fixed their gaze on the western horizon.

"Land!" shouted Pencroft at about six o'clock in the morning.

And it was impossible that Pencroft should be mistaken, it was evident that
land was there. Imagine the joy of the little crew of the "Bonadventure." In a few
hours they would land on the beach of the island!

The low coast of Tabor Island, scarcely emerging from the sea, was not more
than fifteen miles distant.

The head of the "Bonadventure," which was a little to the south of the island,
was Set directly towards it, and as the sun mounted in the east, its rays fell upon
one or two headlands.

"This is a much less important isle than Lincoln Island," observed Herbert,
"and is probably due like ours to some submarine convulsion."

At eleven o'clock the "Bonadventure" was not more than two miles off, and
Pencroft, while looking for a suitable place at which to land, proceeded very
cautiously through the unknown waters. The whole of the island could now be
surveyed, and on it could be seen groups of gum and other large trees, of the
same species as those growing on Lincoln Island. But the astonishing thing was
that no smoke arose to show that the island was inhabited, no signal whatever
appeared on the shore!

And yet the document was clear enough; there was a castaway, and this
castaway should have been on the watch.

In the meanwhile the "Bonadventure" entered the winding channels among
the reefs, and Pencroft observed every turn with extreme care. He had put
Herbert at the helm, posting himself in the bows, inspecting the water, while he
held the halliard in his hand, ready to lower the sail at a moment's notice. Gideon
Spilett with his glass eagerly scanned the shore, though without perceiving
anything.


However, at about twelve o'clock the keel of the "Bonadventure" grated on
the bottom. The anchor was let go, the sails furled, and the crew of the little
vessel landed.

And there was no reason to doubt that this was Tabor Island, since according
to the most recent charts there was no island in this part of the Pacific between
New Zealand and the American Coast.

The vessel was securely moored, so that there should be no danger of her
being carried away by the receding tide; then Pencroft and his companions, well
armed, ascended the shore, so as to gain an elevation of about two hundred and
fifty or three hundred feet which rose at a distance of half a mile.

"From the summit of that hill," said Spilett, "we can no doubt obtain a
complete view of the island, which will greatly facilitate our search."

"So as to do here," replied Herbert, "that which Captain Harding did the very
first thing on Lincoln Island, by climbing Mount Franklin."

"Exactly so," answered the reporter, "and it is the best plan."

While thus talking the explorers had advanced along a clearing which
terminated at the foot of the hill. Flocks of rock-pigeons and sea-swallows,
similar to those of Lincoln Island, fluttered around them. Under the woods which
skirted the glade on the left they could hear the bushes rustling and see the grass
waving, which indicated the presence of timid animals, but still nothing to show
that the island was inhabited.

Arrived at the foot of the hill, Pencroft, Spilett, and Herbert climbed it in a
few minutes, and gazed anxiously round the horizon.

They were on an islet, which did not measure more than six miles in
circumference, its shape not much bordered by capes or promontories, bays or
creeks, being a lengthened oval. All around, the lonely sea extended to the limits
of the horizon. No land nor even a sail was in sight.

This woody islet did not offer the varied aspects of Lincoln Island, arid and
wild in one part, but fertile and rich in the other. On the contrary this was a
uniform mass of verdure, out of which rose two or three hills of no great height.
Obliquely to the oval of the island ran a stream through a wide meadow falling
into the sea on the west by a narrow mouth.

"The domain is limited," said Herbert.

"Yes," rejoined Pencroft: "It would have been too small for us."

"And moreover," said the reporter, "it appears to be uninhabited."

"Indeed," answered Herbert, "nothing here betrays the presence of man."

"Let us go down," said Pencroft, "and search."

The sailor and his two companions returned to the shore, to the place where
they had left the "Bonadventure."


They had decided to make the tour of the island on foot, before exploring the
interior; so that not a spot should escape their investigations. The beach was easy
to follow, and only in some places was their way barred by large rocks, which,
however, they easily passed round. The explorers proceeded towards the south,
disturbing numerous flocks of sea-birds and herds of seals, which threw
themselves into the sea as soon as they saw the strangers at a distance.

"Those beasts yonder," observed the reporter, "do not see men for the first
time. They fear them, therefore they must know them."

An hour after their departure they arrived on the southern point of the islet,
terminated by a sharp cape, and proceeded towards the north along the western
coast, equally formed by sand and rocks, the background bordered with thick
woods.

There was not a trace of a habitation in any part, not the print of a human
foot on the shore of the island, which after four hours' walking had been gone
completely round.

It was to say the least very extraordinary, and they were compelled to believe
that Tabor Island was not or was no longer inhabited. Perhaps, after all the
document was already several months or several years old, and it was possible in
this case, either that the castaway had been enabled to return to his country, or
that he had died of misery.

Pencroft, Spilett, and Herbert, forming more or less probable conjectures,
dined rapidly on board the "Bonadventure" so as to be able to continue their
excursion until nightfall. This was done at five o'clock in the evening, at which
hour they entered the wood.

Numerous animals fled at their approach, being principally, one might say,
only goats and pigs, which were obviously European species.

Doubtless some whaler had landed them on the island, where they had
rapidly increased. Herbert resolved to catch one or two living, and take them
back to Lincoln Island.

It was no longer doubtful that men at some period or other had visited this
islet, and this became still more evident when paths appeared trodden through
the forest, felled trees, and everywhere traces of the hand of man; but the trees
were becoming rotten, and had been felled many years ago; the marks of the axe
were velveted with moss, and the grass grew long and thick on the paths, so that
it was difficult to find them.

"But," observed Gideon Spilett, "this not only proves that men have landed
on the island, but also that they lived on it for some time. Now, who were these
men? How many of them remain?"

"The document," said Herbert, "only spoke of one castaway."


"Well, if he is still on the island," replied Pencroft, "it is impossible but that
we shall find him."

The exploration was continued. The sailor and his companions naturally
followed the route which cut diagonally across the island, and they were thus
obliged to follow the stream which flowed towards the sea.

If the animals of European origin, if works due to a human hand, showed
incontestably that men had already visited the island, several specimens of the
vegetable kingdom did not prove it less. In some places, in the midst of
clearings, it was evident that the soil had been planted with culinary plants, at
probably the same distant period.

What, then, was Herbert's joy, when he recognized potatoes, chicory, sorrel,
carrots, cabbages, and turnips, of which it was sufficient to collect the seed to
enrich the soil of Lincoln Island.

"Capital, jolly!" exclaimed Pencroft. "That will suit Neb as well as us. Even
if we do not find the castaway, at least our voyage will not have been useless,
and God will have rewarded us."

"Doubtless," replied Gideon Spilett, "but to see the state in which we find
these plantations, it is to be feared that the island has not been inhabited for some
time."

"Indeed," answered Herbert, "an inhabitant, whoever he was, could not have
neglected such an important culture!"

"Yes," said Pencroft, "the castaway has gone."

"We must suppose so."

"Tt must then be admitted that the document has already a distant date?"

"Evidently."

"And that the bottle only arrived at Lincoln Island after having floated in the
sea a long time."

"Why not?" returned Pencroft. "But night is coming on," added he, "and I
think that it will be best to give up the search for the present."

"Let us go on board, and to-morrow we will begin again," said the reporter.

This was the wisest course, and it was about to be followed when Herbert,
pointing to a confused mass among the trees, exclaimed,--

"A hut!"

All three immediately ran towards the dwelling. In the twilight it was just
possible to see that it was built of planks and covered with a thick tarpaulin.

The half-closed door was pushed open by Pencroft, who entered with a rapid
step.

The hut was empty!


Chapter 14


Pencroft, Herbert, and Gideon Spilett remained silent in the midst of the
darkness.

Pencroft shouted loudly.

No reply was made.

The sailor then struck a light and set fire to a twig. This lighted for a minute
a small room, which appeared perfectly empty. At the back was a rude fireplace,
with a few cold cinders, supporting an armful of dry wood. Pencroft threw the
blazing twig on it, the wood crackled and gave forth a bright light.

The sailor and his two companions then perceived a disordered bed, of which
the damp and yellow coverlets proved that it had not been used for a long time.
In the corner of the fireplace were two kettles, covered with rust, and an
overthrown pot. A cupboard, with a few moldy sailor's clothes; on the table a tin
plate and a Bible, eaten away by damp; in a corner a few tools, a spade, pickaxe,
two fowling-pieces, one of which was broken; on a plank, forming a shelf, stood
a barrel of powder, still untouched, a barrel of shot, and several boxes of caps, all
thickly covered with dust, accumulated, perhaps, by many long years.

"There is no one here," said the reporter.

"No one," replied Pencroft.

"It is a long time since this room has been inhabited," observed Herbert.

"Yes, a very long time!" answered the reporter.

"Mr. Spilett," then said Pencroft, "instead of returning on board, I think that
it would be well to pass the night in this hut."

"You are right, Pencroft," answered Gideon Spilett, "and if its owner returns,
well! perhaps he will not be sorry to find the place taken possession of."

"He will not return," said the sailor, shaking his head.

"You think that he has quitted the island?" asked the reporter.

"If he had quitted the island he would have taken away his weapons and his
tools," replied Pencroft. "You know the value which castaways set on such
articles as these the last remains of a wreck. No! no!" repeated the sailor, in a
tone of conviction; "no, he has not left the island! If he had escaped in a boat
made by himself, he would still less have left these indispensable and necessary
articles. No! he is on the island!"

"Living?" asked Herbert.

"Living or dead. But if he is dead, I suppose he has not buried himself, and
so we Shall at least find his remains!"


It was then agreed that the night should be passed in the deserted dwelling,
and a store of wood found in a corner was sufficient to warm it. The door closed,
Pencroft, Herbert and Spilett remained there, seated on a bench, talking little but
wondering much. They were in a frame of mind to imagine anything or expect
anything. They listened eagerly for sounds outside. The door might have opened
suddenly, and a man presented himself to them without their being in the least
surprised, notwithstanding all that the hut revealed of abandonment, and they
had their hands ready to press the hands of this man, this castaway, this unknown
friend, for whom friends were waiting.

But no voice was heard, the door did not open. The hours thus passed away.

How long the night appeared to the sailor and his companions! Herbert alone
slept for two hours, for at his age sleep is a necessity. They were all three
anxious to continue their exploration of the day before, and to search the most
secret recesses of the islet! The inferences deduced by Pencroft were perfectly
reasonable, and it was nearly certain that, as the hut was deserted, and the tools,
utensils, and weapons were still there, the owner had succumbed. It was agreed,
therefore, that they should search for his remains, and give them at least
Christian burial.

Day dawned; Pencroft and his companions immediately proceeded to survey
the dwelling. It had certainly been built in a favorable situation, at the back of a
little hill, sheltered by five or six magnificent gum-trees. Before its front and
through the trees the axe had prepared a wide clearing, which allowed the view
to extend to the sea. Beyond a lawn, surrounded by a wooden fence falling to
pieces, was the shore, on the left of which was the mouth of the stream.

The hut had been built of planks, and it was easy to see that these planks had
been obtained from the hull or deck of a ship. It was probable that a disabled
vessel had been cast on the coast of the island, that one at least of the crew had
been saved, and that by means of the wreck this man, having tools at his
disposal, had built the dwelling.

And this became still more evident when Gideon Spilett, after having walked
around the hut, saw on a plank, probably one of those which had formed the
armor of the wrecked vessel, these letters already half effaced:

BR--TAN--A

"Britannia," exclaimed Pencroft, whom the reporter had called; "it is a
common name for ships, and I could not say if she was English or American!"

"Tt matters very little, Pencroft!"

"Very little indeed," answered the sailor, "and we will save the survivor of
her crew if he is still living, to whatever country he may belong. But before


roi


beginning our search again let us go on board the 'Bonadventure'.


A sort of uneasiness had seized Pencroft upon the subject of his vessel.
Should the island be inhabited after all, and should some one have taken
possession of her? But he shrugged his shoulders at such an unreasonable
supposition. At any rate the sailor was not sorry to go to breakfast on board. The
road already trodden was not long, scarcely a mile. They set out on their walk,
gazing into the wood and thickets through which goats and pigs fled in hundreds.

Twenty minutes after leaving the hut Pencroft and his companions reached
the western coast of the island, and saw the "Bonadventure" held fast by her
anchor, which was buried deep in the sand.

Pencroft could not restrain a sigh of satisfaction. After all this vessel was his
child, and it is the right of fathers to be often uneasy when there is no occasion
for it.

They returned on board, breakfasted, so that it should not be necessary to
dine until very late; then the repast being ended, the exploration was continued
and conducted with the most minute care. Indeed, it was very probable that the
only inhabitant of the island had perished. It was therefore more for the traces of
a dead than of a living man that Pencroft and his companions searched. But their
searches were vain, and during the half of that day they sought to no purpose
among the thickets of trees which covered the islet. There was then scarcely any
doubt that, if the castaway was dead, no trace of his body now remained, but that
some wild beast had probably devoured it to the last bone.

"We will set off to-morrow at daybreak," said Pencroft to his two
companions, as about two o'clock they were resting for a few minutes under the
shade of a clump of firs.

"I should think that we might without scruple take the utensils which
belonged to the castaway," added Herbert.

"I think so, too," returned Gideon Spilett, "and these arms and tools will
make up the stores of Granite House. The supply of powder and shot is also most
important."

"Yes," replied Pencroft, "but we must not forget to capture a couple or two of
those pigs, of which Lincoln Island is destitute."

"Nor to gather those seeds," added Herbert, "which will give us all the
vegetables of the Old and the New Worlds."

"Then perhaps it would be best," said the reporter, "to remain a day longer on
Tabor Island, so as to collect all that may be useful to us."

"No, Mr. Spilett," answered Pencroft, "I will ask you to set off to-morrow at
daybreak. The wind seems to me to be likely to shift to the west, and after
having had a fair wind for coming we shall have a fair wind for going back."

"Then do not let us lose time," said Herbert, rising.


"We won't waste time," returned Pencroft. "You, Herbert, go and gather the
seeds, which you know better than we do. While you do that, Mr. Spilett and I
will go and have a pig hunt, and even without Top I hope we shall manage to
catch a few!"

Herbert accordingly took the path which led towards the cultivated part of
the islet, while the sailor and the reporter entered the forest.

Many specimens of the porcine race fled before them, and these animals,
which were singularly active, did not appear to be in a humor to allow
themselves to be approached.

However, after an hour's chase, the hunters had just managed to get hold of a
couple lying in a thicket, when cries were heard resounding from the north part
of the island, With the cries were mingled terrible yells, in which there was
nothing human.

Pencroft and Gideon Spilett were at once on their feet, and the pigs by this
movement began to run away, at the moment when the sailor was getting ready
the rope to bind them.

"That's Herbert's voice," said the reporter.

"Run!" exclaimed Pencroft.

And the sailor and Spilett immediately ran at full speed towards the spot
from whence the cries proceeded.

They did well to hasten, for at a turn of the path near a clearing they saw the
lad thrown on the ground and in the grasp of a savage being, apparently a
gigantic ape, who was about to do him some great harm.

To rush on this monster, throw him on the ground in his turn, snatch Herbert
from him, then bind him securely, was the work of a minute for Pencroft and
Gideon Spilett. The sailor was of Herculean strength, the reporter also very
powerful, and in spite of the monster's resistance he was firmly tied so that he
could not even move.

"You are not hurt, Herbert?" asked Spilett.

"No, no!"

"Oh, if this ape had wounded him!" exclaimed Pencroft.

"But he is not an ape," answered Herbert.

At these words Pencroft and Gideon Spilett looked at the singular being who
lay on the ground. Indeed it was not an ape; it was a human being, a man. But
what a man! A savage in all the horrible acceptation of the word, and so much
the more frightful that he seemed fallen to the lowest degree of brutishness!

Shaggy hair, untrimmed beard descending to the chest, the body almost
naked except a rag round the waist, wild eyes, enormous hands with immensely
long nails, skin the color of mahogany, feet as hard as if made of horn, such was


the miserable creature who yet had a claim to be called a man. But it might justly
be asked if there were yet a soul in this body, or if the brute instinct alone
survived in it!

"Are you quite sure that this is a man, or that he has ever been one?" said
Pencroft to the reporter.

"Alas! there is no doubt about it," replied Spilett.

"Then this must be the castaway?" asked Herbert.

"Yes," replied Gideon Spilett, "but the unfortunate man has no longer
anything human about him!"

The reporter spoke the truth. It was evident that if the castaway had ever
been a civilized being, solitude had made him a savage, or worse, perhaps a
regular man of the woods. Hoarse sounds issued from his throat between his
teeth, which were sharp as the teeth of a wild beast made to tear raw flesh.

Memory must have deserted him long before, and for a long time also he had
forgotten how to use his gun and tools, and he no longer knew how to make a
fire! It could be seen that he was active and powerful, but the physical qualities
had been developed in him to the injury of the moral qualities. Gideon Spilett
spoke to him. He did not appear to understand or even to hear. And yet on
looking into his eyes, the reporter thought he could see that all reason was not
extinguished in him. However, the prisoner did not struggle, nor even attempt to
break his bonds. Was he overwhelmed by the presence of men whose fellow he
had once been? Had he found in some corner of his brain a fleeting
remembrance which recalled him to humanity? If free, would he attempt to fly,
or would he remain? They could not tell, but they did not make the experiment;
and after gazing attentively at the miserable creature,--

"Whoever he may be," remarked Gideon Spilett, "whoever he may have
been, and whatever he may become, it is our duty to take him with us to Lincoln
Island."

"Yes, yes!" replied Herbert, "and perhaps with care we may arouse in him
same gleam of intelligence."

"The soul does not die," said the reporter, "and it would be a great
satisfaction to rescue one of God's creatures from brutishness."

Pencroft shook his head doubtfully.

"We must try at any rate," returned the reporter; "humanity commands us."

It was indeed their duty as Christians and civilized beings. All three felt this,
and they well knew that Cyrus Harding would approve of their acting thus.

"Shall we leave him bound?" asked the sailor.

"Perhaps he would walk if his feet were unfastened," said Herbert.

"Let us try," replied Pencroft.


The cords which shackled the prisoner's feet were cut off, but his arms
remained securely fastened. He got up by himself and did not manifest any
desire to run away. His hard eyes darted a piercing glance at the three men, who
walked near him, but nothing denoted that he recollected being their fellow, or at
least having been so. A continual hissing sound issued from his lips, his aspect
was wild, but he did not attempt to resist.

By the reporter's advice the unfortunate man was taken to the hut. Perhaps
the sight of the things that belonged to him would make some impression on
him! Perhaps a spark would be sufficient to revive his obscured intellect, to
rekindle his dulled soul. The dwelling was not far off. In a few minutes they
arrived there, but the prisoner remembered nothing, and it appeared that he had
lost consciousness of everything.

What could they think of the degree of brutishness into which this miserable
being had fallen, unless that his imprisonment on the islet dated from a very
distant period and after having arrived there a rational being solitude had
reduced him to this condition.

The reporter then thought that perhaps the sight of fire would have some
effect on him, and in a moment one of those beautiful flames, that attract even
animals, blazed up on the hearth. The sight of the flame seemed at first to fix the
attention of the unhappy object, but soon he tured away and the look of
intelligence faded. Evidently there was nothing to be done, for the time at least,
but to take him on board the "Bonadventure." This was done, and he remained
there in Pencroft's charge.

Herbert and Spilett returned to finish their work; and some hours after they
came back to the shore, carrying the utensils and guns, a store of vegetables, of
seeds, some game, and two couple of pigs.

All was embarked, and the "Bonadventure" was ready to weigh anchor and
sail with the morning tide.

The prisoner had been placed in the fore-cabin, where he remained quiet,
silent, apparently deaf and dumb.

Pencroft offered him something to eat, but he pushed away the cooked meat
that was presented to him and which doubtless did not suit him. But on the sailor
showing him one of the ducks which Herbert had killed, he pounced on it like a
wild beast, and devoured it greedily.

"You think that he will recover his senses?" asked Pencroft. "It is not
impossible that our care will have an effect upon him, for it is solitude that has
made him what he is, and from this time forward he will be no longer alone."

"The poor man must no doubt have been in this state for a long time," said
Herbert.


"Perhaps," answered Gideon Spilett.

"About what age is he?" asked the lad.

"It is difficult to say," replied the reporter, "for it is impossible to see his
features under the thick beard which covers his face, but he is no longer young,
and I suppose he might be about fifty."

"Have you noticed, Mr. Spilett, how deeply sunk his eyes are?" asked
Herbert.

"Yes, Herbert, but I must add that they are more human than one could
expect from his appearance."

"However, we shall see," replied Pencroft, "and I am anxious to know what
opinion Captain Harding will have of our savage. We went to look for a human
creature, and we are bringing back a monster! After all, we did what we could."

The night passed, and whether the prisoner slept or not could not be known,
but at any rate, although he had been unbound, he did not move. He was like a
wild animal, which appears stunned at first by its capture, and becomes wild
again afterwards.

At daybreak the next morning, the 15th of October, the change of weather
predicted by Pencroft occurred. The wind having shifted to the northwest
favored the return of the "Bonadventure," but at the same time it freshened,
which might render navigation more difficult.

At five o'clock in the morning the anchor was weighed. Pencroft took a reef
in the mainsail, and steered towards the northeast, so as to sail straight for
Lincoln Island.

The first day of the voyage was not marked by any incident. The prisoner
remained quiet in the fore-cabin, and as he had been a sailor it appeared that the
motion of the vessel might produce on him a salutary reaction. Did some
recollection of his former calling return to him? However that might be, he
remained tranquil, astonished rather than depressed.

The next day the wind increased, blowing more from the north, consequently
in a less favorable direction for the "Bonadventure." Pencroft was soon obliged
to sail close-hauled, and without saying anything about it he began to be uneasy
at the state of the sea, which frequently broke over the bows. Certainly, if the
wind did not moderate, it would take a longer time to reach Lincoln Island than
it had taken to make Tabor Island.


Indeed, on the morning of the 17th, the "Bonadventure" had been forty-eight
hours at sea, and nothing showed that she was near the island. It was impossible,
besides, to estimate the distance traversed, or to trust to the reckoning for the
direction, as the speed had been very irregular.

Twenty-four hours after there was yet no land in sight. The wind was right
ahead and the sea very heavy. The sails were close-reefed, and they tacked
frequently. On the 18th, a wave swept completely over the "Bonadventure"; and
if the crew had not taken the precaution of lashing themselves to the deck, they
would have been carried away.

On this occasion Pencroft and his companions, who were occupied with
loosing themselves, received unexpected aid from the prisoner, who emerged
from the hatchway as if his sailor's instinct had suddenly returned, broke a piece
out of the bulwarks with a spar so as to let the water which filled the deck
escape. Then the vessel being clear, he descended to his cabin without having
uttered a word. Pencroft, Gideon Spilett, and Herbert, greatly astonished, let him
proceed.

Their situation was truly serious, and the sailor had reason to fear that he was
lost on the wide sea without any possibility of recovering his course.

The night was dark and cold. However, about eleven o'clock, the wind fell,
the sea went down, and the speed of the vessel, as she labored less, greatly
increased.

Neither Pencroft, Spilett, nor Herbert thought of taking an hour's sleep. They
kept a sharp lookout, for either Lincoln Island could not be far distant and would
be sighted at daybreak, or the "Bonadventure," carried away by currents, had
drifted so much that it would be impossible to rectify her course. Pencroft,
uneasy to the last degree, yet did not despair, for he had a gallant heart, and
grasping the tiller he anxiously endeavored to pierce the darkness which
surrounded them.

About two o'clock in the morning he started forward,--

"A light! a light!" he shouted.

Indeed, a bright light appeared twenty miles to the northeast. Lincoln Island
was there, and this fire, evidently lighted by Cyrus Harding, showed them the
course to be followed. Pencroft, who was bearing too much to the north, altered
his course and steered towards the fire, which burned brightly above the horizon
like a star of the first magnitude.


Chapter 15


The next day, the 20th of October, at seven o'clock in the morning, after a
voyage of four days, the "Bonadventure" gently glided up to the beach at the
mouth of the Mercy.

Cyrus Harding and Neb, who had become very uneasy at the bad weather
and the prolonged absence of their companions, had climbed at daybreak to the
plateau of Prospect Heights, and they had at last caught sight of the vessel which
had been so long in returning.

"God be praised! there they are!" exclaimed Cyrus Harding.

As to Neb in his joy, he began to dance, to twirl round, clapping his hands
and shouting, "Oh! my master!" A more touching pantomime than the finest
discourse.

The engineer's first idea, on counting the people on the deck of the
"Bonadventure," was that Pencroft had not found the castaway of Tabor Island,
or at any rate that the unfortunate man had refused to leave his island and change
one prison for another.

Indeed Pencroft, Gideon Spilett, and Herbert were alone on the deck of the
"Bonadventure."

The moment the vessel touched, the engineer and Neb were waiting on the
beach, and before the passengers had time to leap on to the sand, Harding said:
"We have been very uneasy at your delay, my friends! Did you meet with any
accident?"

"No," replied Gideon Spilett; "on the contrary, everything went wonderfully
well. We will tell you all about it."

"However," returned the engineer, "your search has been unsuccessful, since
you are only three, just as you went!"

"Excuse me, captain," replied the sailor, "we are four."

"You have found the castaway?"

"Yes."

"And you have brought him?"

"Yes."

"Living?"

"Yes."

"Where is he? Who is he?"

"He is," replied the reporter, "or rather he was a man! There, Cyrus, that is all
we can tell you!"


The engineer was then informed of all that had passed during the voyage,
and under what conditions the search had been conducted; how the only
dwelling in the island had long been abandoned; how at last a castaway had been
captured, who appeared no longer to belong to the human species.

"And that's just the point," added Pencroft, "I don't know if we have done
right to bring him here."

"Certainly you have, Pencroft," replied the engineer quickly.

"But the wretched creature has no sense!"

"That is possible at present," replied Cyrus Harding, "but only a few months
ago the wretched creature was a man like you and me. And who knows what will
become of the survivor of us after a long solitude on this island? It is a great
misfortune to be alone, my friends; and it must be believed that solitude can
quickly destroy reason, since you have found this poor creature in such a state!"

"But, captain," asked Herbert, "what leads you to think that the brutishness
of the unfortunate man began only a few months back?"

"Because the document we found had been recently written," answered the
engineer, "and the castaway alone can have written it."

"Always supposing,” observed Gideon Spilett, "that it had not been written
by a companion of this man, since dead."

"That is impossible, my dear Spilett."

"Why so?" asked the reporter.

"Because the document would then have spoken of two castaways," replied
Harding, "and it mentioned only one."

Herbert then in a few words related the incidents of the voyage, and dwelt on
the curious fact of the sort of passing gleam in the prisoner's mind, when for an
instant in the height of the storm he had become a sailor.

"Well, Herbert," replied the engineer, "you are right to attach great
importance to this fact. The unfortunate man cannot be incurable, and despair
has made him what he is; but here he will find his fellow-men, and since there is
still a soul in him, this soul we shall save!"

The castaway of Tabor Island, to the great pity of the engineer and the great
astonishment of Neb, was then brought from the cabin which he occupied in the
fore part of the "Bonadventure"; when once on land he manifested a wish to run
away.

But Cyrus Harding approaching, placed his hand on his shoulder with a
gesture full of authority, and looked at him with infinite tenderness. Immediately
the unhappy man, submitting to a superior will, gradually became calm, his eyes
fell, his head bent, and he made no more resistance.

"Poor fellow!" murmured the engineer.


Cyrus Harding had attentively observed him. To judge by his appearance this
miserable being had no longer anything human about him, and yet Harding, as
had the reporter already, observed in his look an indefinable trace of intelligence.

It was decided that the castaway, or rather the stranger as he was thenceforth
termed by his companions, should live in one of the rooms of Granite House,
from which, however, he could not escape. He was led there without difficulty,
and with careful attention, it might, perhaps, be hoped that some day he would
be a companion to the settlers in Lincoln Island.

Cyrus Harding, during breakfast, which Neb had hastened to prepare, as the
reporter, Herbert, and Pencroft were dying of hunger, heard in detail all the
incidents which had marked the voyage of exploration to the islet. He agreed
with his friends on this point, that the stranger must be either English or
American, the name Britannia leading them to suppose this, and, besides,
through the bushy beard, and under the shaggy, matted hair, the engineer thought
he could recognize the characteristic features of the Anglo-Saxon.

"But, by the bye," said Gideon Spilett, addressing Herbert, "you never told us
how you met this savage, and we know nothing, except that you would have
been strangled, if we had not happened to come up in time to help you!"

"Upon my word," answered Herbert, "it is rather difficult to say how it
happened. I was, I think, occupied in collecting my plants, when I heard a noise
like an avalanche falling from a very tall tree. I scarcely had time to look round.
This unfortunate man, who was without doubt concealed in a tree, rushed upon
me in less time than I take to tell you about it, and unless Mr. Spilett and
Pencroft--"

"My boy!" said Cyrus Harding, "you ran a great danger, but, perhaps,
without that, the poor creature would have still hidden himself from your search,
and we should not have had a new companion."

"You hope, then, Cyrus, to succeed in reforming the man?" asked the
reporter.

"Yes," replied the engineer.

Breakfast over, Harding and his companions left Granite House and returned
to the beach. They there occupied themselves in unloading the "Bonadventure,"
and the engineer, having examined the arms and tools, saw nothing which could
help them to establish the identity of the stranger.

The capture of pigs, made on the islet, was looked upon as being very
profitable to Lincoln Island, and the animals were led to the sty, where they soon
became at home.

The two barrels, containing the powder and shot, as well as the box of caps,
were very welcome. It was agreed to establish a small powder-magazine, either


outside Granite House or in the Upper Cavern, where there would be no fear of
explosion. However, the use of pyroxyle was to be continued, for this substance
giving excellent results, there was no reason for substituting ordinary powder.

When the unloading of the vessel was finished,--

"Captain," said Pencroft, "I think it would be prudent to put our
‘Bonadventure' in a safe place."

"Is she not safe at the mouth of the Mercy?" asked Cyrus Harding.

"No, captain," replied the sailor. "Half of the time she is stranded on the
sand, and that works her. She is a famous craft, you see, and she behaved
admirably during the squall which struck us on our return."

"Could she not float in the river?"

"No doubt, captain, she could; but there is no shelter there, and in the east
winds, I think that the 'Bonadventure' would suffer much from the surf."

"Well, where would you put her, Pencroft?"

"In Port Balloon," replied the sailor. "That little creek, shut in by rocks,
seems to me to be just the harbor we want."

"Is it not rather far?"

"Pooh! it is not more than three miles from Granite House, and we have a
fine straight road to take us there!"

"Do it then, Pencroft, and take your 'Bonadventure’ there," replied the
engineer, "and yet I would rather have her under our more immediate protection.
When we have time, we must make a little harbor for her."

"Famous!" exclaimed Pencroft. "A harbor with a lighthouse, a pier, and
dock! Ah! really with you, captain, everything becomes easy."

"Yes, my brave Pencroft," answered the engineer, "but on condition,
however, that you help me, for you do as much as three men in all our work."

Herbert and the sailor then re-embarked on board the "Bonadventure," the
anchor was weighed, the sail hoisted, and the wind drove her rapidly towards
Claw Cape. Two hours after, she was reposing on the tranquil waters of Port
Balloon.

During the first days passed by the stranger in Granite House, had he already
given them reason to think that his savage nature was becoming tamed? Did a
brighter light burn in the depths of that obscured mind? In short, was the soul
returning to the body?

Yes, to a certainty, and to such a degree, that Cyrus Harding and the reporter
wondered if the reason of the unfortunate man had ever been totally
extinguished. At first, accustomed to the open air, to the unrestrained liberty
which he had enjoyed on Tabor Island, the stranger manifested a sullen fury, and
it was feared that he might throw himself onto the beach, out of one of the


windows of Granite House. But gradually he became calmer, and more freedom
was allowed to his movements.

They had reason to hope, and to hope much. Already, forgetting his
carnivorous instincts, the stranger accepted a less bestial nourishment than that
on which he fed on the islet, and cooked meat did not produce in him the same
sentiment of repulsion which he had showed on board the "Bonadventure."
Cyrus Harding had profited by a moment when he was sleeping, to cut his hair
and matted beard, which formed a sort of mane and gave him such a savage
aspect. He had also been clothed more suitably, after having got rid of the rag
which covered him. The result was that, thanks to these attentions, the stranger
resumed a more human appearance, and it even seemed as if his eyes had
become milder. Certainly, when formerly lighted up by intelligence, this man's
face must have had a sort of beauty.

Every day, Harding imposed on himself the task of passing some hours in his
company. He came and worked near him, and occupied himself in different
things, so as to fix his attention. A spark, indeed, would be sufficient to
reillumine that soul, a recollection crossing that brain to recall reason. That had
been seen, during the storm, on board the "Bonadventure!" The engineer did not
neglect either to speak aloud, so as to penetrate at the same time by the organs of
hearing and sight the depths of that torpid intelligence. Sometimes one of his
companions, sometimes another, sometimes all joined him. They spoke most
often of things belonging to the navy, which must interest a sailor.

At times, the stranger gave some slight attention to what was said, and the
settlers were soon convinced that he partly understood them. Sometimes the
expression of his countenance was deeply sorrowful, a proof that he suffered
mentally, for his face could not be mistaken; but he did not speak, although at
different times, however, they almost thought that words were about to issue
from his lips. At all events, the poor creature was quite quiet and sad!

But was not his calm only apparent? Was not his sadness only the result of
his seclusion? Nothing could yet be ascertained. Seeing only certain objects and
in a limited space, always in contact with the colonists, to whom he would soon
become accustomed, having no desires to satisfy, better fed, better clothed, it
was natural that his physical nature should gradually improve; but was he
penetrated with the sense of a new life? or rather, to employ a word which would
be exactly applicable to him, was he not becoming tamed, like an animal in
company with his master? This was an important question, which Cyrus Harding
was anxious to answer, and yet he did not wish to treat his invalid roughly!
Would he ever be a convalescent?

How the engineer observed him every moment! How he was on the watch


for his soul, if one may use the expression! How he was ready to grasp it! The
settlers followed with real sympathy all the phases of the cure undertaken by
Harding. They aided him also in this work of humanity, and all, except perhaps
the incredulous Pencroft, soon shared both his hope and his faith.

The calm of the stranger was deep, as has been said, and he even showed a
sort of attachment for the engineer, whose influence he evidently felt. Cyrus
Harding resolved then to try him, by transporting him to another scene, from that
ocean which formerly his eyes had been accustomed to contemplate, to the
border of the forest, which might perhaps recall those where so many years of
his life had been passed!

"But," said Gideon Spilett, "can we hope that he will not escape, if once set
at liberty?"

"The experiment must be tried," replied the engineer.

"Well!" said Pencroft. ''When that fellow is outside, and feels the fresh air, he
will be off as fast as his legs can carry him!"

"IT do not think so," returned Harding.

"Let us try," said Spilett.

"We will try," replied the engineer.

This was on the 30th of October, and consequently the castaway of Tabor
Island had been a prisoner in Granite House for nine days. It was warm, and a
bright sun darted its rays on the island. Cyrus Harding and Pencroft went to the
room occupied by the stranger, who was found lying near the window and
gazing at the sky.

"Come, my friend,” said the engineer to him.

The stranger rose immediately. His eyes were fixed on Cyrus Harding, and
he followed him, while the sailor marched behind them, little confident as to the
result of the experiment.

Arrived at the door, Harding and Pencroft made him take his place in the lift,
while Neb, Herbert, and Gideon Spilett waited for them before Granite House.
The lift descended, and in a few moments all were united on the beach.

The settlers went a short distance from the stranger, so as to leave him at
liberty.

He then made a few steps toward the sea, and his look brightened with
extreme animation, but he did not make the slightest attempt to escape. He was
gazing at the little waves which, broken by the islet, rippled on the sand.

"This is only the sea," observed Gideon Spilett, "and possibly it does not
inspire him with any wish to escape!"

"Yes," replied Harding, "we must take him to the plateau, on the border of
the forest. There the experiment will be more conclusive."


"Besides, he could not run away," said Neb, "since the bridge is raised."

"Oh!" said Pencroft, "that isn't a man to be troubled by a stream like Creek
Glycerine! He could cross it directly, at a single bound!"

"We shall soon see," Harding contented himself with replying, his eyes not
quitting those of his patient.

The latter was then led towards the mouth of the Mercy, and all climbing the
left bank of the river, reached Prospect Heights.

Arrived at the spot on which grew the first beautiful trees of the forest, their
foliage slightly agitated by the breeze, the stranger appeared greedily to drink in
the penetrating odor which filled the atmosphere, and a long sigh escaped from
his chest.

The settlers kept behind him, ready to seize him if he made any movement to
escape!

And, indeed, the poor creature was on the point of springing into the creek
which separated him from the forest, and his legs were bent for an instant as if
for a spring, but almost immediately he stepped back, half sank down, and a
large tear fell from his eyes.

"Ah!" exclaimed Cyrus Harding, "you have become a man again, for you can
weep!"


Chapter 16


Yes! the unfortunate man had wept! Some recollection doubtless had flashed
across his brain, and to use Cyrus Harding's expression, by those tears he was
once more a man.

The colonists left him for some time on the plateau, and withdrew
themselves to a short distance, so that he might feel himself free; but he did not
think of profiting by this liberty, and Harding soon brought him back to Granite
House. Two days after this occurrence, the stranger appeared to wish gradually
to mingle with their common life. He evidently heard and understood, but no
less evidently was he strangely determined not to speak to the colonists; for one
evening, Pencroft, listening at the door of his room, heard these words escape
from his lips:--

"No! here! I! never!"

The sailor reported these words to his companions.

"There is some painful mystery there!" said Harding.

The stranger had begun to use the laboring tools, and he worked in the
garden. When he stopped in his work, as was often the case, he remained retired
within himself, but on the engineer's recommendation, they respected the reserve
which he apparently wished to keep. If one of the settlers approached him, he
drew back, and his chest heaved with sobs, as if overburdened!

Was it remorse that overwhelmed him thus? They were compelled to believe
so, and Gideon Spilett could not help one day making this observation,--

"If he does not speak it is because he has, I fear, things too serious to be
told!"

They must be patient and wait.

A few days later, on the 3rd of November, the stranger, working on the
plateau, had stopped, letting his spade drop to the ground, and Harding, who was
observing him from a little distance, saw that tears were again flowing from his
eyes. A sort of irresistible pity led him towards the unfortunate man, and he
touched his arm lightly.

"My friend!" said he.

The stranger tried to avoid his look, and Cyrus Harding having endeavored
to take his hand, he drew back quickly.

"My friend," said Harding in a firmer voice, "look at me, I wish it!"

The stranger looked at the engineer, and seemed to be under his power, as a
subject under the influence of a mesmerist. He wished to run away. But then his


countenance suddenly underwent a transformation. His eyes flashed. Words
struggled to escape from his lips. He could no longer contain himself! At last he
folded his arms; then, in a hollow voice,--"Who are you?" he asked Cyrus
Harding.

"Castaways, like you," replied the engineer, whose emotion was deep. "We
have brought you here, among your fellow-men."

"My fellow-men!.... I have none!"

"You are in the midst of friends."

"Friends!--for me! friends!" exclaimed the stranger, hiding his face in his
hands. "No--never--leave me! leave me!"

Then he rushed to the side of the plateau which overlooked the sea, and
remained there a long time motionless.

Harding rejoined his companions and related to them what had just
happened.

"Yes! there is some mystery in that man's life," said Gideon Spilett, "and it
appears as if he had only re-entered society by the path of remorse."

"I don't know what sort of a man we have brought here," said the sailor. "He
has secrets--"

"Which we will respect," interrupted Cyrus Harding quickly. "If he has
committed any crime, he has most fearfully expiated it, and in our eyes he is
absolved."

For two hours the stranger remained alone on the shore, evidently under the
influence of recollections which recalled all his past life--a melancholy life
doubtless--and the colonists, without losing sight of him, did not attempt to
disturb his solitude. However, after two hours, appearing to have formed a
resolution, he came to find Cyrus Harding. His eyes were red with the tears he
had shed, but he wept no longer. His countenance expressed deep humility. He
appeared anxious, timorous, ashamed, and his eyes were constantly fixed on the
ground.

"Sir," said he to Harding, "your companions and you, are you English?"

"No," answered the engineer, "we are Americans."

"Ah!" said the stranger, and he murmured, "I prefer that!"

"And you, my friend?" asked the engineer.

"English," replied he hastily.

And as if these few words had been difficult to say, he retreated to the beach,
where he walked up and down between the cascade and the mouth of the Mercy,
in a state of extreme agitation.

Then, passing one moment close to Herbert, he stopped and in a stifled
voice,--


"What month?" he asked.

"December," replied Herbert.

"What year?"

"1866."

"Twelve years! twelve years!" he exclaimed.

Then he left him abruptly.

Herbert reported to the colonists the questions and answers which had been
made.

"This unfortunate man," observed Gideon Spilett, "was no longer acquainted
with either months or years!"

"Yes!" added Herbert, "and he had been twelve years already on the islet
when we found him there!"

"Twelve years!" rejoined Harding. "Ah! twelve years of solitude, after a
wicked life, perhaps, may well impair a man's reason!"

"T am induced to think," said Pencroft, "that this man was not wrecked on
Tabor Island, but that in consequence of some crime he was left there."

"You must be right, Pencroft," replied the reporter, "and if it is so it is not
impossible that those who left him on the island may return to fetch him some
day!"

"And they will no longer find him," said Herbert.

"But then,” added Pencroft, "they must return, and--"

"My friends," said Cyrus Harding, "do not let us discuss this question until
we know more about it. I believe that the unhappy man has suffered, that he has
severely expiated his faults, whatever they may have been, and that the wish to
unburden himself stifles him. Do not let us press him to tell us his history! He
will tell it to us doubtless, and when we know it, we shall see what course it will
be best to follow. He alone besides can tell us, if he has more than a hope, a
certainty, of returning some day to his country, but I doubt it!"

"And why?" asked the reporter.

"Because that, in the event of his being sure of being delivered at a certain
time, he would have waited the hour of his deliverance and would not have
thrown this document into the sea. No, it is more probable that he was
condemned to die on that islet, and that he never expected to see his fellow-
creatures again!"

"But," observed the sailor, "there is one thing which I cannot explain."

"What is it?”

"If this man had been left for twelve years on Tabor Island, one may well
suppose that he had been several years already in the wild state in which we
found him!"


"That is probable," replied Cyrus Harding.

"Tt must then be many years since he wrote that document!"

"No doubt," and yet the document appears to have been recently written!

"Besides, how do you know that the bottle which enclosed the document
may not have taken several years to come from Tabor Island to Lincoln Island?"

"That is not absolutely impossible," replied the reporter.

"Might it not have been a long time already on the coast of the island?"

"No," answered Pencroft, "for it was still floating. We could not even
suppose that after it had stayed for any length of time on the shore, it would have
been swept off by the sea, for the south coast is all rocks, and it would certainly
have been smashed to pieces there!"

"That is true," rejoined Cyrus Harding thoughtfully.

"And then," continued the sailor, "if the document was several years old, if it
had been shut up in that bottle for several years, it would have been injured by
damp. Now, there is nothing of the kind, and it was found in a perfect state of
preservation."

The sailor's reasoning was very just, and pointed out an incomprehensible
fact, for the document appeared to have been recently written, when the colonists
found it in the bottle. Moreover, it gave the latitude and longitude of Tabor
Island correctly, which implied that its author had a more complete knowledge of
hydrography than could be expected of a common sailor.

"There is in this, again, something unaccountable," said the engineer, "but we
will not urge our companions to speak. When he likes, my friends, then we shall
be ready to hear him!"

During the following days the stranger did not speak a word, and did not
once leave the precincts of the plateau. He worked away, without losing a
moment, without taking a minute's rest, but always in a retired place. At meal
times he never came to Granite House, although invited several times to do so,
but contented himself with eating a few raw vegetables. At nightfall he did not
return to the room assigned to him, but remained under some clump of trees, or
when the weather was bad crouched in some cleft of the rocks. Thus he lived in
the same manner as when he had no other shelter than the forests of Tabor
Island, and as all persuasion to induce him to improve his life was in vain, the
colonists waited patiently. And the time was near, when, as it seemed, almost
involuntarily urged by his conscience, a terrible confession escaped him.

On the 10th of November, about eight o'clock in the evening, as night was
coming on, the stranger appeared unexpectedly before the settlers, who were
assembled under the veranda. His eyes burned strangely, and he had quite
resumed the wild aspect of his worst days.


Cyrus Harding and his companions were astounded on seeing that, overcome
by some terrible emotion, his teeth chattered like those of a person in a fever.
What was the matter with him? Was the sight of his fellow-creatures
insupportable to him? Was he weary of this return to a civilized mode of
existence? Was he pining for his former savage life? It appeared so, as soon he
was heard to express himself in these incoherent sentences:--

"Why am I here?.... By what right have you dragged me from my islet?.... Do
you think there could be any tie between you and me?.... Do you know who I
am--what I have done--why I was there--alone? And who told you that I was not
abandoned there--that I was not condemned to die there?.... Do you know my
past?.... How do you know that I have not stolen, murdered--that I am not a
wretch--an accursed being--only fit to live like a wild beast, far from all--speak--
do you know it?"

The colonists listened without interrupting the miserable creature, from
whom these broken confessions escaped, as it were, in spite of himself. Harding
wishing to calm him, approached him, but he hastily drew back.

"No! no!" he exclaimed; "one word only--am I free?"

"You are free," answered the engineer.

"Farewell, then!" he cried, and fled like a madman.

Neb, Pencroft, and Herbert ran also towards the edge of the wood--but they
returned alone.

"We must let him alone!" said Cyrus Harding.

"He will never come back!" exclaimed Pencroft.

"He will come back," replied the engineer.

Many days passed; but Harding--was it a sort of presentiment?--presentiment
in the fixed idea that sooner or later the unhappy man would return.

"Tt is the last revolt of his wild nature," said he, "which remorse has touched,
and which renewed solitude will terrify."

In the meanwhile, works of all sorts were continued, as well on Prospect
Heights as at the corral, where Harding intended to build a farm. It is
unnecessary to say that the seeds collected by Herbert on Tabor Island had been
carefully sown. The plateau thus formed one immense kitchen-garden, well laid
out and carefully tended, so that the arms of the settlers were never in want of
work. There was always something to be done. As the esculents increased in
number, it became necessary to enlarge the simple beds, which threatened to
grow into regular fields and replace the meadows. But grass abounded in other
parts of the island, and there was no fear of the onagers being obliged to go on
short allowance. It was well worth while, besides, to turn Prospect Heights into a
kitchen-garden, defended by its deep belt of creeks, and to remove them to the


meadows, which had no need of protection against the depredations of
quadrumana and quadrapeds.

On the 15th of November, the third harvest was gathered in. How
wonderfully had the field increased in extent, since eighteen months ago, when
the first grain of wheat was sown! The second crop of six hundred thousand
grains produced this time four thousand bushels, or five hundred millions of
grains!

The colony was rich in corn, for ten bushels alone were sufficient for sowing
every year to produce an ample crop for the food both of men and beasts. The
harvest was completed, and the last fortnight of the month of November was
devoted to the work of converting it into food for man. In fact, they had corn, but
not flour, and the establishment of a mill was necessary. Cyrus Harding could
have utilized the second fall which flowed into the Mercy to establish his motive
power, the first being already occupied with moving the felting mill, but, after
some consultation, it was decided that a simple windmill should be built on
Prospect Heights. The building of this presented no more difficulty than the
building of the former, and it was moreover certain that there would be no want
of wind on the plateau, exposed as it was to the sea breezes.

"Not to mention,” said Pencroft, "that the windmill will be more lively and
will have a good effect in the landscape!"

They set to work by choosing timber for the frame and machinery of the
mill. Some large stones, found at the north of the lake, could be easily
transformed into millstones, and as to the sails, the inexhaustible case of the
balloon furnished the necessary material.

Cyrus Harding made his model, and the site of the mill was chosen a little to
the right of the poultry-yard, near the shore of the lake. The frame was to rest on
a pivot supported with strong timbers, so that it could turn with all the machinery
it contained according as the wind required it. The work advanced rapidly. Neb
and Pencroft had become very skilful carpenters, and had nothing to do but to
copy the models provided by the engineer.

Soon a sort of cylindrical box, in shape like a pepper-pot, with a pointed
roof, rose on the spot chosen. The four frames which formed the sails had been
firmly fixed in the center beam, so as to form a certain angle with it, and secured
with iron clamps. As to the different parts of the internal mechanism, the box
destined to contain the two millstones, the fixed stone and the moving stone, the
hopper, a sort of large square trough, wide at the top, narrow at the bottom,
which would allow the grain to fall on the stones, the oscillating spout intended
to regulate the passing of the grain, and lastly the bolting machine, which by the
operation of sifting, separates the bran from the flour, were made without


difficulty. The tools were good, and the work not difficult, for in reality, the
machinery of a mill is very simple. This was only a question of time.

Every one had worked at the construction of the mill, and on the 1st of
December it was finished. As usual, Pencroft was delighted with his work, and
had no doubt that the apparatus was perfect.

"Now for a good wind," said he, "and we shall grind our first harvest
splendidly!"

"A good wind, certainly," answered the engineer, "but not too much,
Pencroft."

"Pooh! our mill would only go the faster!"

"There is no need for it to go so very fast," replied Cyrus Harding. "It is
known by experience that the greatest quantity of work is performed by a mill
when the number of turns made by the sails in a minute is six times the number
of feet traversed by the wind in a second. A moderate breeze, which passes over
twenty-four feet to the second, will give sixteen turns to the sails during a
minute, and there is no need of more."

"Exactly!" cried Herbert, "a fine breeze is blowing from the northeast, which
will soon do our business for us."

There was no reason for delaying the inauguration of the mill, for the settlers
were eager to taste the first piece of bread in Lincoln Island. On this morning
two or three bushels of wheat were ground, and the next day at breakfast a
magnificent loaf, a little heavy perhaps, although raised with yeast, appeared on
the table at Granite House. Every one munched away at it with a pleasure which
may be easily understood.

In the meanwhile, the stranger had not reappeared. Several times Gideon
Spilett and Herbert searched the forest in the neighborhood of Granite House,
without meeting or finding any trace of him. They became seriously uneasy at
this prolonged absence. Certainly, the former savage of Tabor island could not be
perplexed how to live in the forest, abounding in game, but was it not to be
feared that he had resumed his habits, and that this freedom would revive in him
his wild instincts? However, Harding, by a sort of presentiment, doubtless,
always persisted in saying that the fugitive would return.

"Yes, he will return!" he repeated with a confidence which his companions
could not share. "When this unfortunate man was on Tabor Island, he knew
himself to be alone! Here, he knows that fellow-men are awaiting him! Since he
has partially spoken of his past life, the poor penitent will return to tell the
whole, and from that day he will belong to us!"

The event justified Cyrus Harding's predictions. On the 3rd of December,
Herbert had left the plateau to go and fish on the southern bank of the lake. He


was unarmed, and till then had never taken any precautions for defense, as
dangerous animals had not shown themselves on that part of the island.

Meanwhile, Pencroft and Neb were working in the poultry-yard, while
Harding and the reporter were occupied at the Chimneys in making soda, the
store of soap being exhausted.

Suddenly cries resounded,--

"Help! help!"

Cyrus Harding and the reporter, being at too great a distance, had not been
able to hear the shouts. Pencroft and Neb, leaving the poultry-yard in all haste,
rushed towards the lake.

But before then, the stranger, whose presence at this place no one had
suspected, crossed Creek Glycerine, which separated the plateau from the forest,
and bounded up the opposite bank.

Herbert was there face to face with a fierce jaguar, similar to the one which
had been killed on Reptile End. Suddenly surprised, he was standing with his
back against a tree, while the animal gathering itself together was about to
spring.

But the stranger, with no other weapon than a knife, rushed on the
formidable animal, who turned to meet this new adversary.

The struggle was short. The stranger possessed immense strength and
activity. He seized the jaguar's throat with one powerful hand, holding it as in a
vise, without heeding the beast's claws which tore his flesh, and with the other he
plunged his knife into its heart.

The jaguar fell. The stranger kicked away the body, and was about to fly at
the moment when the settlers arrived on the field of battle, but Herbert, clinging
to him, cried,--

"No, no! you shall not go!"

Harding advanced towards the stranger, who frowned when he saw him
approaching. The blood flowed from his shoulder under his torn shirt, but he
took no notice of it.

"My friend," said Cyrus Harding, "we have just contracted a debt of gratitude
to you. To save our boy you have risked your life!"

"My life!" murmured the stranger. "What is that worth? Less than nothing!"

"You are wounded?"

"It is no matter."

"Will you give me your hand?"

And as Herbert endeavored to seize the hand which had just saved him, the
stranger folded his arms, his chest heaved, his look darkened, and he appeared to
wish to escape, but making a violent effort over himself, and in an abrupt tone,--


"Who are you?" he asked, "and what do you claim to be to me?"

It was the colonists' history which he thus demanded, and for the first time.
Perhaps this history recounted, he would tell his own.

In a few words Harding related all that had happened since their departure
from Richmond; how they had managed, and what resources they now had at
their disposal.

The stranger listened with extreme attention.

Then the engineer told who they all were, Gideon Spilett, Herbert, Pencroft,
Neb, himself, and, he added, that the greatest happiness they had felt since their
arrival in Lincoln Island was on the return of the vessel from Tabor Island, when
they had been able to include among them a new companion.

At these words the stranger's face flushed, his head sunk on his breast, and
confusion was depicted on his countenance.

"And now that you know us," added Cyrus Harding, "will you give us your
hand?"

"No," replied the stranger in a hoarse voice; "no! You are honest men! And I-


W


Chapter 17


These last words justified the colonists' presentiment. There had been some
mournful past, perhaps expiated in the sight of men, but from which his
conscience had not yet absolved him. At any rate the guilty man felt remorse, he
repented, and his new friends would have cordially pressed the hand which they
sought; but he did not feel himself worthy to extend it to honest men! However,
after the scene with the jaguar, he did not return to the forest, and from that day
did not go beyond the enclosure of Granite House.

What was the mystery of his life? Would the stranger one day speak of it?
Time alone could show. At any rate, it was agreed that his secret should never be
asked from him, and that they would live with him as if they suspected nothing.

For some days their life continued as before. Cyrus Harding and Gideon
Spilett worked together, sometimes chemists, sometimes experimentalists. The
reporter never left the engineer except to hunt with Herbert, for it would not
have been prudent to allow the lad to ramble alone in the forest; and it was very
necessary to be on their guard. As to Neb and Pencroft, one day at the stables
and poultry-yard, another at the corral, without reckoning work in Granite
House, they were never in want of employment.

The stranger worked alone, and he had resumed his usual life, never
appearing at meals, sleeping under the trees in the plateau, never mingling with
his companions. It really seemed as if the society of those who had saved him
was insupportable to him!

"But then," observed Pencroft, "why did he entreat the help of his fellow-
creatures? Why did he throw that paper into the sea?"

"He will tell us why," invariably replied Cyrus Harding.

"When?"

"Perhaps sooner than you think, Pencroft."

And, indeed, the day of confession was near.

On the 10th of December, a week after his return to Granite House, Harding
saw the stranger approaching, who, in a calm voice and humble tone, said to
him: "Sir, I have a request to make of you."

"Speak," answered the engineer, "but first let me ask you a question."

At these words the stranger reddened, and was on the point of withdrawing.
Cyrus Harding understood what was passing in the mind of the guilty man, who
doubtless feared that the engineer would interrogate him on his past life.

Harding held him back.


"Comrade," said he, "we are not only your companions but your friends. I
wish you to believe that, and now I will listen to you."

The stranger pressed his hand over his eyes. He was seized with a sort of
trembling, and remained a few moments without being able to articulate a word.

"Sir," said he at last, "I have come to beg you to grant me a favor."

"What is it?"

"You have, four or five miles from here, a corral for your domesticated
animals. These animals need to be taken care of. Will you allow me to live there
with them?"

Cyrus Harding gazed at the unfortunate man for a few moments with a
feeling of deep commiseration; then,--

"My friend," said he, "the corral has only stables hardly fit for animals."

"It will be good enough for me, sir."

"My friend," answered Harding, "we will not constrain you in anything. You
wish to live at the corral, so be it. You will, however, be always welcome at
Granite House. But since you wish to live at the corral we will make the
necessary arrangements for your being comfortably established there."

"Never mind that, I shall do very well."

"My friend," answered Harding, who always intentionally made use of this
cordial appellation, “you must let us judge what it will be best to do in this
respect."

"Thank you, sir," replied the stranger as he withdrew.

The engineer then made known to his companions the proposal which had
been made to him, and it was agreed that they should build a wooden house at
the corral, which they would make as comfortable as possible.

That very day the colonists repaired to the corral with the necessary tools,
and a week had not passed before the house was ready to receive its tenant. It
was built about twenty feet from the sheds, and from there it was easy to
overlook the flock of sheep, which then numbered more than eighty. Some
furniture, a bed, table, bench, cupboard, and chest were manufactured, and a
gun, ammunition, and tools were carried to the corral.

The stranger, however, had seen nothing of his new dwelling, and he had
allowed the settlers to work there without him, while he occupied himself on the
plateau, wishing, doubtless, to put the finishing stroke to his work. Indeed,
thanks to him, all the ground was dug up and ready to he sowed when the time
came.

It was on the 20th of December that all the arrangements at the corral were
completed. The engineer announced to the stranger that his dwelling was ready
to receive him, and the latter replied that he would go and sleep there that very


evening.

On this evening the colonists were gathered in the diningroom of Granite
House. It was then eight o'clock, the hour at which their companion was to leave
them. Not wishing to trouble him by their presence, and thus imposing on him
the necessity of saying farewells which might perhaps be painful to him, they
had left him alone and ascended to Granite House.

Now, they had been talking in the room for a few minutes, when a light
knock was heard at the door. Almost immediately the stranger entered, and
without any preamble,--

"Gentlemen," said he, "before I leave you, it is right that you should know
my history. I will tell it you."

These simple words profoundly impressed Cyrus Harding and _ his
companions. The engineer rose.

"We ask you nothing, my friend," said he; "it is your right to be silent."

"It is my duty to speak."

"Sit down, then."

"No, I will stand."

"We are ready to hear you," replied Harding.

The stranger remained standing in a corner of the room, a little in the shade.
He was bareheaded, his arms folded across his chest, and it was in this posture
that in a hoarse voice, speaking like some one who obliges himself to speak, he
gave the following recital, which his auditors did not once interrupt:--

"On the 20th of December, 1854, a steam-yacht, belonging to a Scotch
nobleman, Lord Glenarvan, anchored off Cape Bernouilli, on the western coast
of Australia, in the thirty-seventh parallel. On board this yacht were Lord
Glenarvan and his wife, a major in the English army, a French geographer, a
young girl, and a young boy. These two last were the children of Captain Grant,
whose ship, the 'Britannia,' had been lost, crew and cargo, a year before. The
‘Duncan' was commanded by Captain John Mangles, and manned by a crew of
fifteen men.

"This is the reason the yacht at this time lay off the coast of Australia. Six
months before, a bottle, enclosing a document written in English, German, and
French, had been found in the Irish Sea, and picked up by the 'Duncan.' This
document stated in substance that there still existed three survivors from the
wreck of the 'Britannia,'’ that these survivors were Captain Grant and two of his
men, and that they had found refuge on some land, of which the document gave
the latitude, but of which the longitude, effaced by the sea, was no longer
legible.

"This latitude was 37deg 11' south; therefore, the longitude being unknown,


if they followed the thirty-seventh parallel over continents and seas, they would
be certain to reach the spot inhabited by Captain Grant and his two companions.
The English Admiralty having hesitated to undertake this search, Lord
Glenarvan resolved to attempt everything to find the captain. He communicated
with Mary and Robert Grant, who joined him. The 'Duncan' yacht was equipped
for the distant voyage, in which the nobleman's family and the captain's children
wished to take part, and the 'Duncan,' leaving Glasgow, proceeded towards the
Atlantic, passed through the Straits of Magellan, and ascended the Pacific as far
as Patagonia, where, according to a previous interpretation of the document, they
supposed that Captain Grant was a prisoner among the Indians.

"The ‘Duncan’ disembarked her passengers on the western coast of
Patagonia, and sailed to pick them up again on the eastern coast at Cape
Corrientes. Lord Glenarvan traversed Patagonia, following the thirty-seventh
parallel, and having found no trace of the captain, he re-embarked on the 13th of
November, so as to pursue his search through the Ocean.

"After having unsuccessfully visited the islands of Tristan d'Acunha and
Amsterdam, situated in her course, the 'Duncan,' as I have said, arrived at Cape
Bernouilli, on the Australian coast, on the 20th of December, 1854.

"It was Lord Glenarvan's intention to traverse Australia as he had traversed
America, and he disembarked. A few miles from the coast was established a
farm, belonging to an Irishman, who offered hospitality to the travelers. Lord
Glenarvan made known to the Irishman the cause which had brought him to
these parts, and asked if he knew whether a three-masted English vessel, the
‘Britannia,’ had been lost less than two years before on the west coast of
Australia.

"The Irishman had never heard of this wreck, but, to the great surprise of the
bystanders, one of his servants came forward and said,--

My lord, praise and thank God! If Captain Grant is still living, he is living
on the Australian shores.’

"Who are you?’ asked Lord Glenarvan.

"A Scotchman like yourself, my lord,’ replied the man; 'I am one of Captain
Grant's crew--one of the castaways of the "Britannia."

"This man was called Ayrton. He was, in fact, the boatswain's mate of the
‘Britannia,’ as his papers showed. But, separated from Captain Grant at the
moment when the ship struck upon the rocks, he had till then believed that the
captain with all his crew had perished, and that he, Ayrton, was the sole survivor
of the ‘Britannia.’

Only,’ he added, ‘it was not on the west coast, but on the east coast of
Australia that the vessel was lost, and if Captain Grant is still living, as his


document indicates, he is a prisoner among the natives, and it is on the other
coast that he must be looked for.’

"This man spoke in a frank voice and with a confident look; his words could
not be doubted. The irishman, in whose service he had been for more than a year,
answered for his trustworthiness. Lord Glenarvan, therefore, believed in the
fidelity of this man and, by his advice, resolved to cross Australia, following the
thirty-seventh parallel. Lord Glenarvan, his wife, the two children, the major, the
Frenchman, Captain Mangles, and a few sailors composed the little band under
the command of Ayrton, while the 'Duncan,' under charge of the mate, Tom
Austin, proceeded to Melbourne, there to await Lord Glenarvan's instructions.

"They set out on the 23rd of December, 1854.

"It is time to say that Ayrton was a traitor. He was, indeed, the boatswain's
mate of the 'Britannia,’ but, after some dispute with his captain, he endeavored to
incite the crew to mutiny and seize the ship, and Captain Grant had landed him,
on the 8th of April, 1852, on the west coast of Australia, and then sailed, leaving
him there, as was only just.

"Therefore this wretched man knew nothing of the wreck of the 'Britannia’;
he had just heard of it from Glenarvan's account. Since his abandonment, he had
become, under the name of Ben Joyce, the leader of the escaped convicts; and if
he boldly maintained that the wreck had taken place on the east coast, and led
Lord Glenarvan to proceed in that direction, it was that he hoped to separate him
from his ship, seize the 'Duncan,' and make the yacht a pirate in the Pacific."

Here the stranger stopped for a moment. His voice trembled, but he
continued,--

"The expedition set out and proceeded across Australia. It was inevitably
unfortunate, since Ayrton, or Ben Joyce, as he may be called, guided it,
sometimes preceded, sometimes followed by his band of convicts, who had been
told what they had to do.

"Meanwhile, the 'Duncan' had been sent to Melbourne for repairs. It was
necessary, then, to get Lord Glenarvan to order her to leave Melbourne and go to
the east coast of Australia, where it would be easy to seize her. After having led
the expedition near enough to the coast, in the midst of vast forests with no
resources, Ayrton obtained a letter, which he was charged to carry to the mate of
the 'Duncan'--a letter which ordered the yacht to repair immediately to the east
coast, to Twofold Bay, that is to say a few days' journey from the place where the
expedition had stopped. It was there that Ayrton had agreed to meet his
accomplices, and two days after gaining possession of the letter, he arrived at
Melbourne.

"So far the villain had succeeded in his wicked design. He would be able to


take the 'Duncan' into Twofold Bay, where it would be easy for the convicts to
seize her, and her crew massacred, Ben Joyce would become master of the seas.
But it pleased God to prevent the accomplishment of these terrible projects.

"Ayrton, arrived at Melbourne, delivered the letter to the mate, Tom Austin,
who read it and immediately set sail, but judge of Ayrton's rage and
disappointment, when the next day he found that the mate was taking the vessel,
not to the east coast of Australia, to Twofold Bay, but to the east coast of New
Zealand. He wished to stop him, but Austin showed him the letter!... And
indeed, by a providential error of the French geographer, who had written the
letter, the east coast of New Zealand was mentioned as the place of destination.

"All Ayrton's plans were frustrated! He became outrageous. They put him in
irons. He was then taken to the coast of New Zealand, not knowing what would
become of his accomplices, or what would become of Lord Glenarvan.

"The 'Duncan' cruised about on this coast until the 3rd of March. On that day
Ayrton heard the report of guns. The guns on the 'Duncan' were being fired, and
soon Lord Glenarvan and his companions came on board.

"This is what had happened.

"After a thousand hardships, a thousand dangers, Lord Glenarvan had
accomplished his journey, and arrived on the east coast of Australia, at Twofold
Bay. 'Not "Duncan!' He telegraphed to Melbourne. They answered, "Duncan"
sailed on the 18th instant. Destination unknown.’

"Lord Glenarvan could only arrive at one conclusion; that his honest yacht
had fallen into the hands of Ben Joyce, and had become a pirate vessel!

"However, Lord Glenarvan would not give up. He was a bold and generous
man. He embarked in a merchant vessel, sailed to the west coast of New
Zealand, traversed it along the thirty-seventh parallel, without finding any trace
of Captain Grant; but on the other side, to his great surprise, and by the will of
Heaven, he found the 'Duncan,' under command of the mate, who had been
waiting for him for five weeks!

"This was on the 3rd of March, 1855. Lord Glenarvan was now on board the
‘Duncan,’ but Ayrton was there also. He appeared before the nobleman, who
wished to extract from him all that the villain knew about Captain Grant. Ayrton
refused to speak. Lord Glenarvan then told him, that at the first port they put
into, he would be delivered up to the English authorities. Ayrton remained mute.

"The 'Duncan' continued her voyage along the thirty-seventh parallel. In the
meanwhile, Lady Glenarvan undertook to vanquish the resistance of the ruffian.

"At last, her influence prevailed, and Ayrton, in exchange for what he could
tell, proposed that Lord Glenarvan should leave him on some island in the
Pacific, instead of giving him up to the English authorities. Lord Glenarvan,


resolving to do anything to obtain information about Captain Grant, consented.

"Ayrton then related all his life, and it was certain that he knew nothing from
the day on which Captain Grant had landed him on the Australian coast.

"Nevertheless, Lord Glenarvan kept the promise which he had given. The
‘Duncan’ continued her voyage and arrived at Tabor Island. It was there that
Ayrton was to be landed, and it was there also that, by a veritable miracle, they
found Captain Grant and two men, exactly on the thirty-seventh parallel.

"The convict, then, went to take their place on this desert islet, and at the
moment he left the yacht these words were pronounced by Lord Glenarvan:--

Here, Ayrton, you will be far from any land, and without any possible
communication with your fellow-creatures. You can-not escape from this islet on
which the 'Duncan' leaves you. You will be alone, under the eye of a God who
reads the depths of the heart, but you will be neither lost nor forgotten, as was
Captain Grant. Unworthy as you are to be remembered by men, men will
remember you. I know where you are Ayrton, and I know where to find you. I
will never forget it!

"And the ‘Duncan,’ making sail, soon disappeared. This was 18th of March,
1855.

(The events which have just been briefly related are taken from a work
which some of our readers have no doubt read, and which is entitled, "Captain
Grant's children." They will remark on this occasion, as well as later, some
discrepancy in the dates; but later again, they will understand why the real dates
were not at first given.)

"Ayrton was alone, but he had no want of either ammunition, weapons, tools,
or seeds.

"At his, the convict's disposal, was the house built by honest Captain Grant.
He had only to live and expiate in solitude the crimes which he had committed.

"Gentlemen, he repented, he was ashamed of his crimes and was very
miserable! He said to himself, that if men came some day to take him from that
islet, he must be worthy to return among them! How he suffered, that wretched
man! How he labored to recover himself by work! How he prayed to be
reformed by prayer! For two years, three years, this went on, but Ayrton,
humbled by solitude, always looking for some ship to appear on the horizon,
asking himself if the time of expiation would soon be complete, suffered as none
other suffered! Oh! how dreadful was this solitude, to a heart tormented by
remorse!

"But doubtless Heaven had not sufficiently punished this unhappy man, for
he felt that he was gradually becoming a savage! He felt that brutishness was
gradually gaining on him!


"He could not say if it was after two or three years of solitude, but at last he
became the miserable creature you found!

"I have no need to tell you, gentlemen, that Ayrton, Ben Joyce, and I, are the
same."

Cyrus Harding and his companions rose at the end of this account. It is
impossible to say how much they were moved! What misery, grief, and despair
lay revealed before them!

"Ayrton," said Harding, rising, "you have been a great criminal, but Heaven
must certainly think that you have expiated your crimes! That has been proved
by your having been brought again among your fellow-creatures. Ayrton, you are
forgiven! And now you will be our companion?"

Ayrton drew back.

"Here is my hand!" said the engineer.

Ayrton grasped the hand which Harding extended to him, and great tears fell
from his eyes.

"Will you live with us?" asked Cyrus Harding.

"Captain Harding, leave me some time longer," replied Ayrton, "leave me
alone in the hut in the corral!"

"As you like, Ayrton," answered Cyrus Harding. Ayrton was going to
withdraw, when the engineer addressed one more question to him:--

"One word more, my friend. Since it was your intention to live alone, why
did you throw into the sea the document which put us on your track?"

"A document?" repeated Ayrton, who did not appear to know what he meant.

"Yes, the document which we found enclosed in a bottle, giving us the exact
position of Tabor Island!"

Ayrton passed his hand over his brow, then after having thought, "I never
threw any document into the sea!" he answered.

"Never?" exclaimed Pencroft.

"Never!"

And Ayrton, bowing, reached the door and departed.


Chapter 18


"Poor man!" said Herbert, who had rushed to the door, but returned, having
seen Ayrton slide down the rope on the lift and disappear in the darkness.

"He will come back," said Cyrus Harding.

"Come, now, captain,” exclaimed Pencroft, "what does that mean? What!
wasn't it Ayrton who threw that bottle into the sea? Who was it then?"

Certainly, if ever a question was necessary to be made, it was that one!

"Tt was he," answered Neb, "only the unhappy man was half-mad."

"Yes!" said Herbert, "and he was no longer conscious of what he was doing."

"It can only be explained in that way, my friends," replied Harding quickly,
"and I understand now how Ayrton was able to point out exactly the situation of
Tabor Island, since the events which had preceded his being left on the island
had made it known to him."

"However," observed Pencroft, "if he was not yet a brute when he wrote that
document, and if he threw it into the sea seven or eight years ago, how is it that
the paper has not been injured by damp?"

"That proves,” answered Cyrus Harding, "that Ayrton was deprived of
intelligence at a more recent time than he thinks."

"Of course it must be so," replied Pencroft, "without that the fact would be
unaccountable."

"Unaccountable indeed," answered the engineer, who did not appear desirous
to prolong the conversation.

"But has Ayrton told the truth?" asked the sailor.

"Yes," replied the reporter. "The story which he has told is true in every
point. I remember quite well the account in the newspapers of the yacht
expedition undertaken by Lord Glenarvan, and its result."

"Ayrton has told the truth," added Harding. "Do not doubt it, Pencroft, for it
was painful to him. People tell the truth when they accuse themselves like that!"

The next day--the 21st of December--the colonists descended to the beach,
and having climbed the plateau they found nothing of Ayrton. He had reached
his house in the corral during the night and the settlers judged it best not to
agitate him by their presence. Time would doubtless perform what sympathy had
been unable to accomplish.

Herbert, Pencroft, and Neb resumed their ordinary occupations. On this day
the same work brought Harding and the reporter to the workshop at the
Chimneys.


"Do you know, my dear Cyrus," said Gideon Spilett, "that the explanation
you gave yesterday on the subject of the bottle has not satisfied me at all! How
can it be supposed that the unfortunate man was able to write that document and
throw the bottle into the sea without having the slightest recollection of it?"

"Nor was it he who threw it in, my dear Spilett."

"You think then--"

"I think nothing, I know nothing!" interrupted Cyrus Harding. "I am content
to rank this incident among those which I have not been able to explain to this
day!"

"Indeed, Cyrus," said Spilett, "these things are incredible! Your rescue, the
case stranded on the sand, Top's adventure, and lastly this bottle... Shall we never
have the answer to these enigmas?"

"Yes!" replied the engineer quickly, "yes, even if I have to penetrate into the
bowels of this island!"

"Chance will perhaps give us the key to this mystery!"

"Chance! Spilett! I do not believe in chance, any more than I believe in
mysteries in this world. There is a reason for everything unaccountable which
has happened here, and that reason I shall discover. But in the meantime we must
work and observe."

The month of January arrived. The year 1867 commenced. The summer
occupations were assiduously continued. During the days which followed,
Herbert and Spilett having gone in the direction of the corral, ascertained that
Ayrton had taken possession of the habitation which had been prepared for him.
He busied himself with the numerous flock confided to his care, and spared his
companions the trouble of coming every two or three days to visit the corral.
Nevertheless, in order not to leave Ayrton in solitude for too long a time, the
settlers often paid him a visit.

It was not unimportant either, in consequence of some suspicions entertained
by the engineer and Gideon Spilett, that this part of the island should be subject
to a surveillance of some sort, and that Ayrton, if any incident occurred
unexpectedly, should not neglect to inform the inhabitants of Granite House of it.

Nevertheless it might happen that something would occur which it would be
necessary to bring rapidly to the engineer's knowledge. Independently of facts
bearing on the mystery of Lincoln Island, many others might happen, which
would call for the prompt interference of the colonists,--such as the sighting of a
vessel, a wreck on the western coast, the possible arrival of pirates, etc.

Therefore Cyrus Harding resolved to put the corral in instantaneous
communication with Granite House.

It was on the 10th of January that he made known his project to his


companions.

"Why! how are you going to manage that, captain?" asked Pencroft. "Do you
by chance happen to think of establishing a telegraph?"

"Exactly so," answered the engineer.

"Electric?" cried Herbert.

"Electric," replied Cyrus Harding. "We have all the necessary materials for
making a battery, and the most difficult thing will be to stretch the wires, but by
means of a drawplate I think we shall manage it."

"Well, after that," returned the sailor, "I shall never despair of seeing
ourselves some day rolling along on a railway!"

They then set to work, beginning with the most difficult thing, for, if they
failed in that, it would be useless to manufacture the battery and other
accessories.

The iron of Lincoln Island, as has been said, was of excellent quality, and
consequently very fit for being drawn out. Harding commenced by
manufacturing a drawplate, that is to say, a plate of steel, pierced with conical
holes of different sizes, which would successively bring the wire to the wished-
for tenacity. This piece of steel, after having been tempered, was fixed in as firm
a way as possible in a solid framework planted in the ground, only a few feet
from the great fall, the motive power of which the engineer intended to utilize. In
fact as the fulling-mill was there, although not then in use, its beam moved with
extreme power would serve to stretch out the wire by rolling it round itself. It
was a delicate operation, and required much care. The iron, prepared previously
in long thin rods, the ends of which were sharpened with the file, having been
introduced into the largest hole of the drawplate, was drawn out by the beam
which wound it round itself, to a length of twenty-five or thirty feet, then
unrolled, and the same operation was performed successively through the holes
of a less size. Finally, the engineer obtained wires from forty to fifty feet long,
which could be easily fastened together and stretched over the distance of five
miles, which separated the corral from the bounds of Granite House.

It did not take more than a few days to perform this work, and indeed as soon
as the machine had been commenced, Cyrus Harding left his companions to
follow the trade of wiredrawers, and occupied himself with manufacturing his
battery.

It was necessary to obtain a battery with a constant current. It is known that
the elements of modern batteries are generally composed of retort coal, zinc, and
copper. Copper was absolutely wanting to the engineer, who, notwithstanding all
his researches, had never been able to find any trace of it in Lincoln Island, and
was therefore obliged to do without it. Retort coal, that is to say, the hard


graphite which is found in the retorts of gas manufactories, after the coal has
been dehydrogenized, could have been obtained, but it would have been
necessary to establish a special apparatus, involving great labor. As to zinc, it
may be remembered that the case found at Flotsam Point was lined with this
metal, which could not be better utilized than for this purpose.

Cyrus Harding, after mature consideration, decided to manufacture a very
simple battery, resembling as nearly as possible that invented by Becquerel in
1820, and in which zinc only is employed. The other substances, azotic acid and
potash, were all at his disposal.

The way in which the battery was composed was as follows, and the results
were to be attained by the reaction of acid and potash on each other. A number of
glass bottles were made and filled with azotic acid. The engineer corked them by
means of a stopper through which passed a glass tube, bored at its lower
extremity, and intended to be plunged into the acid by means of a clay stopper
secured by a rag. Into this tube, through its upper extremity, he poured a solution
of potash, previously obtained by burning and reducing to ashes various plants,
and in this way the acid and potash could act on each other through the clay.

Cyrus Harding then took two slips of zinc, one of which was plunged into
azotic acid, the other into a solution of potash. A current was immediately
produced, which was transmitted from the slip of zinc in the bottle to that in the
tube, and the two slips having been connected by a metallic wire the slip in the
tube became the positive pole, and that in the bottle the negative pole of the
apparatus. Each bottle, therefore, produced as many currents as united would be
sufficient to produce all the phenomena of the electric telegraph. Such was the
ingenious and very simple apparatus constructed by Cyrus Harding, an apparatus
which would allow them to establish a telegraphic communication between
Granite House and the corral.

On the 6th of February was commenced the planting along the road to the
corral, of posts furnished with glass insulators, and intended to support the wire.
A few days after, the wire was extended, ready to produce the electric current at
a rate of twenty thousand miles a second.

Two batteries had been manufactured, one for Granite House, the other for
the corral; for if it was necessary the corral should be able to communicate with
Granite House it might also be useful that Granite House should be able to
communicate with the corral.

As to the receiver and manipulator, they were very simple. At the two
stations the wire was wound round a magnet, that is to say, round a piece of soft
iron surrounded with a wire. The communication was thus established between
the two poles; the current, starting from the positive pole, traversed the wire,


passed through the magnet which was temporarily magnetized, and returned
through the earth to the negative pole. If the current was interrupted, the magnet
immediately became unmagnetized. It was sufficient to place a plate of soft iron
before the magnet, which, attracted during the passage of the current, would fall
back when the current was interrupted. This movement of the plate thus
obtained, Harding could easily fasten to it a needle arranged on a dial, bearing
the letters of the alphabet, and in this way communicate from one station to the
other.

All was completely arranged by the 12th of February. On this day, Harding,
having sent the current through the wire, asked if all was going on well at the
corral, and received in a few moments a satisfactory reply from Ayrton. Pencroft
was wild with joy, and every morning and evening he sent a telegram to the
corral, which always received an answer.

This mode of communication presented two very real advantages: firstly,
because it enabled them to ascertain that Ayrton was at the corral; and secondly,
that he was thus not left completely isolated. Besides, Cyrus Harding never
allowed a week to pass without going to see him, and Ayrton came from time to
time to Granite House, where he always found a cordial welcome.

The fine season passed away in the midst of the usual work. The resources of
the colony, particularly in vegetables and corn, increased from day to day, and
the plants brought from Tabor Island had succeeded perfectly.

The plateau of Prospect Heights presented an encouraging aspect. The fourth
harvest had been admirable and it may be supposed that no one thought of
counting whether the four hundred thousand millions of grains duly appeared in
the crop. However, Pencroft had thought of doing so, but Cyrus Harding having
told him that even if he managed to count three hundred grains a minute, or nine
thousand an hour, it would take him nearly five thousand five-hundred years to
finish his task, the honest sailor considered it best to give up the idea.

The weather was splendid, the temperature very warm in the day time, but in
the evening the sea-breezes tempered the heat of the atmosphere and procured
cool nights for the inhabitants of Granite House. There were, however, a few
storms, which, although they were not of long duration, swept over Lincoln
Island with extraordinary fury. The lightning blazed and the thunder continued to
roll for some hours.

At this period the little colony was extremely prosperous.

The tenants of the poultry-yard swarmed, and they lived on the surplus, but it
became necessary to reduce the population to a more moderate number. The pigs
had already produced young, and it may be understood that their care for these
animals absorbed a great part of Neb and Pencroft's time. The onagers, who had


two pretty colts, were most often mounted by Gideon Spilett and Herbert, who
had become an excellent rider under the reporter's instruction, and they also
harnessed them to the cart either for carrying wood and coal to Granite House, or
different mineral productions required by the engineer.

Several expeditions were made about this time into the depths of the Far
West Forests. The explorers could venture there without having anything to fear
from the heat, for the sun's rays scarcely penetrated through the thick foliage
spreading above their heads. They thus visited all the left bank of the Mercy,
along which ran the road from the corral to the mouth of Falls River.

But in these excursions the settlers took care to be well armed, for they met
with savage wild boars, with which they often had a tussle. They also, during
this season, made fierce war against the jaguars. Gideon Spilett had vowed a
special hatred against them, and his pupil Herbert seconded him well. Armed as
they were, they no longer feared to meet one of those beasts. Herbert's courage
was superb, and the reporter's sang-froid astonishing. Already twenty
magnificent skins ornamented the diningroom of Granite House, and if this
continued, the jaguar race would soon be extinct in the island, the object aimed
at by the hunters.

The engineer sometimes took part in the expeditions made to the unknown
parts of the island, which he surveyed with great attention. It was for other traces
than those of animals that he searched the thickets of the vast forest, but nothing
suspicious ever appeared. Neither Top nor Jup, who accompanied him, ever
betrayed by their behavior that there was anything strange there, and yet more
than once again the dog barked at the mouth of the well, which the engineer had
before explored without result.

At this time Gideon Spilett, aided by Herbert, took several views of the most
picturesque parts of the island, by means of the photographic apparatus found in
the cases, and of which they had not as yet made any use.

This apparatus, provided with a powerful object-glass, was very complete.
Substances necessary for the photographic reproduction, collodion for preparing
the glass plate, nitrate of silver to render it sensitive, hyposulfate of soda to fix
the prints obtained, chloride of ammonium in which to soak the paper destined to
give the positive proof, acetate of soda and chloride of gold in which to immerse
the paper, nothing was wanting. Even the papers were there, all prepared, and
before laying in the printing-frame upon the negatives, it was sufficient to soak
them for a few minutes in the solution of nitrate of silver.

The reporter and his assistant became in a short time very skilful operators,
and they obtained fine views of the country, such as the island, taken from
Prospect Heights with Mount Franklin in the distance, the mouth of the Mercy,


so picturesquely framed in high rocks, the glade and the corral, with the spurs of
the mountain in the background, the curious development of Claw Cape,
Flotsam Point, etc.

Nor did the photographers forget to take the portraits of all the inhabitants of
the island, leaving out no one.

"Tt multiplies us," said Pencroft.

And the sailor was enchanted to see his own countenance, faithfully
reproduced, ornamenting the walls of Granite House, and he stopped as willingly
before this exhibition as he would have done before the richest shop-windows in
Broadway.

But it must be acknowledged that the most successful portrait was
incontestably that of Master Jup. Master Jup had sat with a gravity not to be
described, and his portrait was lifelike!

"He looks as if he was just going to grin!" exclaimed Pencroft.

And if Master Jup had not been satisfied, he would have been very difficult
to please; but he was quite contented and contemplated his own countenance
with a sentimental air which expressed some small amount of conceit.

The summer heat ended with the month of March. The weather was
sometimes rainy, but still warm. The month of March, which corresponds to the
September of northern latitudes, was not so fine as might have been hoped.
Perhaps it announced an early and rigorous winter.

It might have been supposed one morning--the 21 st--that the first snow had
already made its appearance. In fact Herbert looking early from one of the
windows of Granite House, exclaimed,--

"Hallo! the islet is covered with snow!"

"Snow at this time?" answered the reporter, joining the boy.

Their companions were soon beside them, but could only ascertain one thing,
that not only the islet but all the beach below Granite House was covered with
one uniform sheet of white.

"Tt must be snow!" said Pencroft.

"Or rather it's very like it!" replied Neb.

"But the thermometer marks fifty-eight degrees!" observed Gideon Spilett.

Cyrus Harding gazed at the sheet of white without saying anything, for he
really did not know how to explain this phenomenon, at this time of year and in
such a temperature.

"By Jove!" exclaimed Pencroft, "all our plants will be frozen!"

And the sailor was about to descend, when he was preceded by the nimble
Jup, who slid down to the sand.

But the orang had not touched the ground, when the snowy sheet arose and


dispersed in the air in such innumerable flakes that the light of the sun was
obscured for some minutes.

"Birds!" cried Herbert.

They were indeed swarms of seabirds, with dazzling white plumage. They
had perched by thousands on the islet and on the shore, and they disappeared in
the distance, leaving the colonists amazed as if they had been present at some
transformation scene, in which summer succeeded winter at the touch of a fairy's
wand. Unfortunately the change had been so sudden, that neither the reporter nor
the lad had been able to bring down one of these birds, of which they could not
recognize the species.

A few days after came the 26th of March, the day on which, two years
before, the castaways from the air had been thrown upon Lincoln Island.


Chapter 19


Two years already! and for two years the colonists had had no
communication with their fellow-creatures! They were without news from the
civilized world, lost on this island, as completely as if they had been on the most
minute star of the celestial hemisphere!

What was now happening in their country? The picture of their native land
was always before their eyes, the land torn by civil war at the time they left it,
and which the Southern rebellion was perhaps still staining with blood! It was a
great sorrow to them, and they often talked together of these things, without ever
doubting however that the cause of the North must triumph, for the honor of the
American Confederation.

During these two years not a vessel had passed in sight of the island; or, at
least, not a sail had been seen. It was evident that Lincoln Island was out of the
usual track, and also that it was unknown,--as was besides proved by the maps,--
for though there was no port, vessels might have visited it for the purpose of
renewing their store of water. But the surrounding ocean was deserted as far as
the eye could reach, and the colonists must rely on themselves for regaining their
native land.

However, one chance of rescue existed, and this chance was discussed one
day on the first week of April, when the colonists were gathered together in the
diningroom of Granite House.

They had been talking of America, of their native country, which they had so
little hope of ever seeing again.

"Decidedly we have only one way," said Spilett, "one single way for leaving
Lincoln Island, and that is, to build a vessel large enough to sail several hundred
miles. It appears to me, that when one has built a boat it is just as easy to build a
ship!"

"And in which we might go to the Pomoutous," added Herbert, "just as easily
as we went to Tabor Island."

"I do not say no," replied Pencroft, who had always the casting vote in
maritime questions; "I do not say no, although it is not exactly the same thing to
make a long as a short voyage! If our little craft had been caught in any heavy
gale of wind during the voyage to Tabor Island, we should have known that land
was at no great distance either way; but twelve hundred miles is a pretty long
way, and the nearest land is at least that distance!"

"Would you not, in that case, Pencroft, attempt the adventure?" asked the


reporter.

"I will attempt anything that is desired, Mr. Spilett," answered the sailor,
"and you know well that I am not a man to flinch!"

"Remember, besides, that we number another sailor amongst us now,"
remarked Neb.

"Who is that?" asked Pencroft.

"Ayrton."

"Tf he will consent to come," said Pencroft.

"Nonsense!" returned the reporter; "do you think that if Lord Glenarvan's
yacht had appeared at Tabor Island, while he was still living there, Ayrton would
have refused to depart?"

"You forget, my friends," then said Cyrus Harding, "that Ayrton was not in
possession of his reason during the last years of his stay there. But that is not the
question. The point is to know if we may count among our chances of being
rescued, the return of the Scotch vessel. Now, Lord Glenarvan promised Ayrton
that he would return to take him off from Tabor Island when he considered that
his crimes were expiated, and I believe that he will return."

"Yes," said the reporter, "and I will add that he will return soon, for it is
twelve years since Ayrton was abandoned."

"Well!" answered Pencroft, "I agree with you that the nobleman will return,
and soon too. But where will he touch? At Tabor Island, and not at Lincoln
Island."

"That is the more certain," replied Herbert, "as Lincoln Island is not even
marked on the map."

"Therefore, my friends," said the engineer, "we ought to take the necessary
precautions for making our presence and that of Ayrton on Lincoln Island known
at Tabor Island."

"Certainly," answered the reporter, "and nothing is easier than to place in the
hut, which was Captain Grant's and Ayrton's dwelling, a notice which Lord
Glenarvan and his crew cannot help finding, giving the position of our island."

"It is a pity," remarked the sailor, "that we forgot to take that precaution on
our first visit to Tabor Island."

"And why should we have done it?" asked Herbert. "At that time we did not
know Ayrton's history; we did not know that any one was likely to come some
day to fetch him, and when we did know his history, the season was too
advanced to allow us to return then to Tabor Island."

"Yes," replied Harding, "it was too late, and we must put off the voyage until
next spring.”

"But suppose the Scotch yacht comes before that," said Pencroft.


"That is not probable," replied the engineer, "for Lord Glenarvan would not
choose the winter season to venture into these seas. Either he has already
returned to Tabor Island, since Ayrton has been with us, that is to say, during the
last five months and has left again; or he will not come till later, and it will be
time enough in the first fine October days to go to Tabor Island, and leave a
notice there."

"We must allow," said Neb, "that it will be very unfortunate if the "Duncan'
has returned to these parts only a few months ago!"

"I hope that it is not so," replied Cyrus Harding, "and that Heaven has not
deprived us of the best chance which remains to us."

"T think," observed the reporter, "that at any rate we shall know what we have
to depend on when we have been to Tabor Island, for if the yacht has returned
there, they will necessarily have left some traces of their visit."

"That is evident," answered the engineer. "So then, my friends, since we have
this chance of returning to our country, we must wait patiently, and if it is taken
from us we shall see what will be best to do."

"At any rate," remarked Pencroft, "it is well understood that if we do leave
Lincoln Island, it will not be because we were uncomfortable there!"

"No, Pencroft," replied the engineer, "it will be because we are far from all
that a man holds dearest in the world, his family, his friends, his native land!"

Matters being thus decided, the building of a vessel large enough to sail
either to the Archipelagoes in the north, or to New Zealand in the west, was no
longer talked of, and they busied themselves in their accustomed occupations,
with a view to wintering a third time in Granite House.

However, it was agreed that before the stormy weather came on, their little
vessel should be employed in making a voyage round the island. A complete
survey of the coast had not yet been made, and the colonists had but an imperfect
idea of the shore to the west and north, from the mouth of Falls River to the
Mandible Capes, as well as of the narrow bay between them, which opened like
a shark's jaws.

The plan of this excursion was proposed by Pencroft, and Cyrus Harding
fully acquiesced in it, for he himself wished to see this part of his domain.

The weather was variable, but the barometer did not fluctuate by sudden
movements, and they could therefore count on tolerable weather. However,
during the first week of April, after a sudden barometrical fall, a renewed rise
was marked by a heavy gale of wind, lasting five or six days; then the needle of
the instrument remained stationary at a height of twenty-nine inches and nine-
tenths, and the weather appeared propitious for an excursion.

The departure was fixed for the 16th of April, and the "Bonadventure,"


anchored in Port Balloon, was provisioned for a voyage which might be of some
duration.

Cyrus Harding informed Ayrton of the projected expedition, and proposed
that he should take part in it, but Ayrton preferring to remain on shore, it was
decided that he should come to Granite House during the absence of his
companions. Master Jup was ordered to keep him company, and made no
remonstrance.

On the morning of the 16th of April all the colonists, including Top,
embarked. A fine breeze blew from the southwest, and the "Bonadventure"
tacked on leaving Port Balloon so as to reach Reptile End. Of the ninety miles
which the perimeter of the island measured, twenty included the south coast
between the port and the promontory. The wind being right ahead it was
necessary to hug the shore.

It took the whole day to reach the promontory, for the vessel on leaving port
had only two hours of ebb tide and had therefore to make way for six hours
against the flood. It was nightfall before the promontory was doubled.

The sailor then proposed to the engineer that they should continue sailing
slowly with two reefs in the sail. But Harding preferred to anchor a few cable-
lengths from the shore, so as to survey that part of the coast during the day. It
was agreed also that as they were anxious for a minute exploration of the coast
they should not sail during the night, but would always, when the weather
permitted it, be at anchor near the shore.

The night was passed under the promontory, and the wind having fallen,
nothing disturbed the silence. The passengers, with the exception of the sailor,
scarcely slept as well on board the "Bonadventure" as they would have done in
their rooms at Granite House, but they did sleep however. Pencroft set sail at
break of day, and by going on the larboard tack they could keep close to the
shore.

The colonists knew this beautiful wooded coast, since they had already
explored it on foot, and yet it again excited their admiration. They coasted along
as close in as possible, so as to notice everything, avoiding always the trunks of
trees which floated here and there. Several times also they anchored, and Gideon
Spilett took photographs of the superb scenery.

About noon the "Bonadventure" arrived at the mouth of Falls River. Beyond,
on the left bank, a few scattered trees appeared, and three miles further even
these dwindled into solitary groups among the western spurs of the mountain,
whose arid ridge sloped down to the shore.

What a contrast between the northern and southern part of the coast! In
proportion as one was woody and fertile so was the other rugged and barren! It


might have been designated as one of those iron coasts, as they are called in
some countries, and its wild confusion appeared to indicate that a sudden
crystallization had been produced in the yet liquid basalt of some distant
geological sea. These stupendous masses would have terrified the settlers if they
had been cast at first on this part of the island! They had not been able to
perceive the sinister aspect of this shore from the summit of Mount Franklin, for
they overlooked it from too great a height, but viewed from the sea it presented a
wild appearance which could not perhaps be equaled in any corner of the globe.

The "Bonadventure" sailed along this coast for the distance of half a mile. It
was easy to see that it was composed of blocks of all sizes, from twenty to three
hundred feet in height, and of all shapes, round like towers, prismatic like
steeples, pyramidal like obelisks, conical like factory chimneys. An iceberg of
the Polar seas could not have been more capricious in its terrible sublimity!
Here, bridges were thrown from one rock to another; there, arches like those of a
wave, into the depths of which the eye could not penetrate; in one place, large
vaulted excavations presented a monumental aspect; in another, a crowd of
columns, spires, and arches, such as no Gothic cathedral ever possessed. Every
caprice of nature, still more varied than those of the imagination, appeared on
this grand coast, which extended over a length of eight or nine miles.

Cyrus Harding and his companions gazed, with a feeling of surprise
bordering on stupefaction. But, although they remained silent, Top, not being
troubled with feelings of this sort, uttered barks which were repeated by the
thousand echoes of the basaltic cliff. The engineer even observed that these
barks had something strange in them, like those which the dog had uttered at the
mouth of the well in Granite House.

"Let us go close in," said he.

And the "Bonadventure" sailed as near as possible to the rocky shore.
Perhaps some cave, which it would be advisable to explore, existed there? But
Harding saw nothing, not a cavern, not a cleft which could serve as a retreat to
any being whatever, for the foot of the cliff was washed by the surf. Soon Top's
barks ceased, and the vessel continued her course at a few cables-length from the
coast.

In the northwest part of the island the shore became again flat and sandy. A
few trees here and there rose above a low, marshy ground, which the colonists
had already surveyed, and in violent contrast to the other desert shore, life was
again manifested by the presence of myriads of water-fowl. That evening the
"Bonadventure" anchored in a small bay to the north of the island, near the land,
such was the depth of water there. The night passed quietly, for the breeze died
away with the last light of day, and only rose again with the first streaks of dawn.


As it was easy to land, the usual hunters of the colony, that is to say, Herbert
and Gideon Spilett, went for a ramble of two hours or so, and returned with
several strings of wild duck and snipe. Top had done wonders, and not a bird had
been lost, thanks to his zeal and cleverness.

At eight o'clock in the morning the "Bonadventure" set sail, and ran rapidly
towards North Mandible Cape, for the wind was right astern and freshening
rapidly.

"However," observed Pencroft, "I should not be surprised if a gale came up
from the west. Yesterday the sun set in a very red-looking horizon, and now, this
morning, those mares-tails don't forbode anything good."

These mares-tails are cirrus clouds, scattered in the zenith, their height from
the sea being less than five thousand feet. They look like light pieces of cotton
wool, and their presence usually announces some sudden change in the weather.

"Well," said Harding, "let us carry as much sail as possible, and run for
shelter into Shark Gulf. I think that the "Bonadventure' will be safe there."

"Perfectly," replied Pencroft, "and besides, the north coast is merely sand,
very uninteresting to look at."

"T shall not be sorry," resumed the engineer, "to pass not only to-night but to-
morrow in that bay, which is worth being carefully explored."

"I think that we shall be obliged to do so, whether we like it or not,"
answered Pencroft, "for the sky looks very threatening towards the west. Dirty
weather is coming on!"

"At any rate we have a favorable wind for reaching Cape Mandible,"
observed the reporter.

"A very fine wind," replied the sailor; "but we must tack to enter the gulf,
and I should like to see my way clear in these unknown quarters."

"Quarters which appear to be filled with rocks," added Herbert, "if we judge
by what we saw on the south coast of Shark Gulf."

"Pencroft," said Cyrus Harding, "do as you think best, we will leave it to
you."

"Don't make your mind uneasy, captain," replied the sailor, "I shall not
expose myself needlessly! I would rather a knife were run into my ribs than a
sharp rock into those of my 'Bonadventure!""

That which Pencroft called ribs was the pan of his vessel under water, and he
valued it more than his own skin.

"What o'clock is it?" asked Pencroft.

"Ten o'clock," replied Gideon Spilett.

"And what distance is it to the Cape, captain?"

"About fifteen miles," replied the engineer.


"That's a matter of two hours and a half," said the sailor, "and we shall be off
the Cape between twelve and one o'clock. Unluckily, the tide will be turning at
that moment, and will be ebbing out of the gulf. I am afraid that it will be very
difficult to get in, having both wind and tide against us."

"And the more so that it is a full moon to-day," remarked Herbert, "and these
April tides are very strong."

"Well, Pencroft," asked Harding, "can you not anchor off the Cape?"

"Anchor near land, with bad weather coming on!" exclaimed the sailor.
"What are you thinking of, captain? We should run aground, of a certainty!"

"What will you do then?"

"I shall try to keep in the offing until the flood, that is to say, till about seven
in the evening, and if there is still light enough I will try to enter the gulf; if not,
we must stand off and on during the night, and we will enter to-morrow at
sunrise."

"As I told you, Pencroft, we will leave it to you," answered Harding.

"Ah!" said Pencroft, "if there was only a lighthouse on the coast, it would be
much more convenient for sailors."

"Yes," replied Herbert, "and this time we shall have no obliging engineer to
light a fire to guide us into port!"

"Why, indeed, my dear Cyrus," said Spilett, "we have never thanked you; but
frankly, without that fire we should never have been able--"

"A fire?" asked Harding, much astonished at the reporter's words.

"We mean, captain," answered Pencroft, "that on board the 'Bonadventure'
we were very anxious during the few hours before our return, and we should
have passed to windward of the island, if it had not been for the precaution you
took of lighting a fire the night of the 19th of October, on Prospect Heights."

"Yes, yes! That was a lucky idea of mine!" replied the engineer.

"And this time," continued the sailor, "unless the idea occurs to Ayrton, there
will be no one to do us that little service!"

"No! No one!" answered Cyrus Harding.

A few minutes after, finding himself alone in the bows of the vessel, with the
reporter, the engineer bent down and whispered,--

"If there is one thing certain in this world, Spilett, it is that I never lighted
any fire during the night of the 19th of October, neither on Prospect Heights nor
on any other part of the island!"


Chapter 20


Things happened as Pencroft had predicted, he being seldom mistaken in his
prognostications. The wind rose, and from a fresh breeze it soon increased to a
regular gale; that is to say, it acquired a speed of from forty to forty-five miles an
hour, before which a ship in the open sea would have run under close-reefed
topsails. Now, as it was nearly six o'clock when the "Bonadventure" reached the
gulf, and as at that moment the tide turned, it was impossible to enter. They were
therefore compelled to stand off, for even if he had wished to do so, Pencroft
could not have gained the mouth of the Mercy. Hoisting the jib to the mainmast
by way of a storm-sail, he hove to, putting the head of the vessel towards the
land.

Fortunately, although the wind was strong the sea, being sheltered by the
land, did not run very high. They had then little to fear from the waves, which
always endanger small craft. The "Bonadventure" would doubtlessly not have
capsized, for she was well ballasted, but enormous masses of water falling on the
deck might injure her if her timbers could not sustain them. Pencroft, as a good
sailor, was prepared for anything. Certainly, he had great confidence in his
vessel, but nevertheless he awaited the return of day with some anxiety.

During the night, Cyrus Harding and Gideon Spilett had no opportunity for
talking together, and yet the words pronounced in the reporter's ear by the
engineer were well worth being discussed, together with the mysterious
influence which appeared to reign over Lincoln Island. Gideon Spilett did not
cease from pondering over this new and inexplicable incident, the appearance of
a fire on the coast of the island. The fire had actually been seen! His
companions, Herbert and Pencroft, had seen it with him! The fire had served to
signalize the position of the island during that dark night, and they had not
doubted that it was lighted by the engineer's hand; and here was Cyrus Harding
expressly declaring that he had never done anything of the sort! Spilett resolved
to recur to this incident as soon as the "Bonadventure" returned, and to urge
Cyrus Harding to acquaint their companions with these strange facts. Perhaps it
would be decided to make in common a complete investigation of every part of
Lincoln Island.

However that might be, on this evening no fire was lighted on these yet
unknown shores, which formed the entrance to the gulf, and the little vessel
stood off during the night.

When the first streaks of dawn appeared in the western horizon, the wind,


which had slightly fallen, shifted two points, and enabled Pencroft to enter the
narrow gulf with greater ease. Towards seven o'clock in the morning, the
"Bonadventure," weathering the North Mandible Cape, entered the strait and
glided on to the waters, so strangely enclosed in the frame of lava.

"Well," said Pencroft, "this bay would make admirable roads, in which a
whole fleet could lie at their ease!"

"What is especially curious," observed Harding, "is that the gulf has been
formed by two rivers of lava, thrown out by the volcano, and accumulated by
successive eruptions. The result is that the gulf is completely sheltered on all
sides, and I believe that even in the stormiest weather, the sea here must be as
calm as a lake."

"No doubt," returned the sailor, "since the wind has only that narrow
entrance between the two capes to get in by, and, besides, the north cape protects
that of the south in a way which would make the entrance of gusts very difficult.
I declare our 'Bonadventure’ could stay here from one end of the year to the
other, without even dragging at her anchor!"

"Tt is rather large for her!" observed the reporter.

"Well! Mr. Spilett," replied the sailor, "I agree that it is too large for the
'Bonadventure,' but if the fleets of the Union were in want of a harbor in the
Pacific, I don't think they would ever find a better place than this!"

"We are in the shark's mouth," remarked Nab, alluding to the form of the
gulf.

"Right into its mouth, my honest Nab!" replied Herbert, "but you are not
afraid that it will shut upon us, are you?"

"No, Mr. Herbert," answered Neb, "and yet this gulf here doesn't please me
much! It has a wicked look!"

"Hallo!" cried Pencroft, "here is Neb turning up his nose at my gulf, just as I
was thinking of presenting it to America!"

"But, at any rate, is the water deep enough?" asked the engineer, "for a depth
sufficient for the keel of the 'Bonadventure' would not be enough for those of our
ironclads."

"That is easily found out," replied Pencroft.

And the sailor sounded with a long cord, which served him as a lead-line,
and to which was fastened a lump of iron. This cord measured nearly fifty
fathoms, and its entire length was unrolled without finding any bottom.

"There," exclaimed Pencroft, "our ironclads can come here after all! They
would not run aground!"

"Indeed," said Gideon Spilett, "this gulf is a regular abyss, but, taking into
consideration the volcanic origin of the island, it is not astonishing that the sea


should offer similar depressions."

"One would say too," observed Herbert, "that these cliffs were perfectly
perpendicular; and I believe that at their foot, even with a line five or six times
longer, Pencroft would not find bottom."

"That is all very well," then said the reporter, "but I must point out to
Pencroft that his harbor is wanting in one very important respect!"

"And what is that, Mr. Spilett?"

"An opening, a cutting of some sort, to give access to the interior of the
island. I do not see a spot on which we could land." And, in fact, the steep lava
cliffs did not afford a single place suitable for landing. They formed an
insuperable barrier, recalling, but with more wildness, the fiords of Norway. The
"Bonadventure," coasting as close as possible along the cliffs, did not discover
even a projection which would allow the passengers to leave the deck.

Pencroft consoled himself by saying that with the help of a mine they could
soon open out the cliff when that was necessary, and then, as there was evidently
nothing to be done in the gulf, he steered his vessel towards the strait and passed
out at about two o'clock in the afternoon.

"Ah!" said Nab, uttering a sigh of satisfaction.

One might really say that the honest Negro did not feel at his ease in those
enormous jaws.

The distance from Mandible Cape to the mouth of the Mercy was not more
than eight miles. The head of the "Bonadventure" was put towards Granite
House, and a fair wind filling her sails, she ran rapidly along the coast.

To the enormous lava rocks succeeded soon those capricious sand dunes,
among which the engineer had been so singularly recovered, and which seabirds
frequented in thousands.

About four o'clock, Pencroft leaving the point of the islet on his left, entered
the channel which separated it from the coast, and at five o'clock the anchor of
the "Bonadventure" was buried in the sand at the mouth of the Mercy.

The colonists had been absent three days from their dwelling. Ayrton was
waiting for them on the beach, and Jup came joyously to meet them, giving vent
to deep grunts of satisfaction.

A complete exploration of the coast of the island had now been made, and no
suspicious appearances had been observed. If any mysterious being resided on it,
it could only be under cover of the impenetrable forest of the Serpentine
Peninsula, to which the colonists had not yet directed their investigations.

Gideon Spilett discussed these things with the engineer, and it was agreed
that they should direct the attention of their companions to the strange character
of certain incidents which had occurred on the island, and of which the last was


the most unaccountable.

However, Harding, returning to the fact of a fire having been kindled on the
shore by an unknown hand, could not refrain from repeating for the twentieth
time to the reporter,--

"But are you quite sure of having seen it? Was it not a partial eruption of the
volcano, or perhaps some meteor?"

"No, Cyrus," answered the reporter, "it was certainly a fire lighted by the
hand of man. Besides; question Pencroft and Herbert. They saw it as I saw it
myself, and they will confirm my words."

In consequence, therefore, a few days after, on the 25th of April, in the
evening, when the settlers were all collected on Prospect Heights, Cyrus Harding
began by saying,--

"My friends, I think it my duty to call your attention to certain incidents
which have occurred in the island, on the subject of which I shall be happy to
have your advice. These incidents are, so to speak, supernatural--"

"Supernatural!" exclaimed the sailor, emitting a volume of smoke from his
mouth. "Can it be possible that our island is supernatural?"

"No, Pencroft, but mysterious, most certainly," replied the engineer; "unless
you can explain that which Spilett and I have until now failed to understand."

"Speak away, captain,” answered the sailor.

"Well, have you understood," then said the engineer, "how was it that after
falling into the sea, I was found a quarter of a mile into the interior of the island,
and that, without my having any consciousness of my removal there?"

"Unless, being unconscious--" said Pencroft.

"That is not admissible," replied the engineer. "But to continue. Have you
understood how Top was able to discover your retreat five miles from the cave in
which I was lying?"

"The dog's instinct--" observed Herbert.

"Singular instinct!" returned the reporter, "since notwithstanding the storm of
rain and wind which was raging during that night, Top arrived at the Chimneys,
dry and without a speck of mud!"

"Let us continue,” resumed the engineer. "Have you understood how our dog
was so strangely thrown up out of the water of the lake, after his struggle with
the dugong?"”

"No! I confess, not at all," replied Pencroft, "and the wound which the
dugong had in its side, a wound which seemed to have been made with a sharp
instrument; that can't be understood, either."

"Let us continue again,” said Harding. "Have you understood, my friends,
how that bullet got into the body of the young peccary; how that case happened


to be so fortunately stranded, without there being any trace of a wreck; how that
bottle containing the document presented itself so opportunely, during our first
sea-excursion; how our canoe, having broken its moorings, floated down the
current of the Mercy and rejoined us at the very moment we needed it; how after
the ape invasion the ladder was so obligingly thrown down from Granite House;
and lastly, how the document, which Ayrton asserts was never written by him,
fell into our hands?"

As Cyrus Harding thus enumerated, without forgetting one, the singular
incidents which had occurred in the island, Herbert, Neb, and Pencroft stared at
each other, not knowing what to reply, for this succession of incidents, grouped
thus for the first time, could not but excite their surprise to the highest degree.

Pon my word," said Pencroft at last, "you are right, captain, and it is
difficult to explain all these things!"

"Well, my friends," resumed the engineer, "a last fact has just been added to
these, and it is no less incomprehensible than the others!"

"What is it, captain?” asked Herbert quickly.

"When you were returning from Tabor Island, Pencroft," continued the
engineer, "you said that a fire appeared on Lincoln Island?"

"Certainly," answered the sailor.

"And you are quite certain of having seen this fire?"

"As sure as I see you now."

"You also, Herbert?"

"Why, captain," cried Herbert, "that fire was blazing like a star of the first
magnitude!"

"But was it not a star?" urged the engineer.

"No," replied Pencroft, "for the sky was covered with thick clouds, and at
any rate a star would not have been so low on the horizon. But Mr. Spilett saw it
as well as we, and he will confirm our words."

"IT will add," said the reporter, "that the fire was very bright, and that it shot
up like a sheet of lightning."

"Yes, yes! exactly," added Herbert, "and it was certainly placed on the
heights of Granite House."

"Well, my friends," replied Cyrus Harding, "during the night of the 19th of
October, neither Neb nor I lighted any fire on the coast."

"You did not!" exclaimed Pencroft, in the height of his astonishment, not
being able to finish his sentence.

"We did not leave Granite House," answered Cyrus Harding, "and if a fire
appeared on the coast, it was lighted by another hand than ours!"

Pencroft, Herbert, and Neb were stupefied. No illusion could be possible,


and a fire had actually met their eyes during the night of the 19th of October.
Yes! they had to acknowledge it, a mystery existed! An inexplicable influence,
evidently favorable to the colonists, but very irritating to their curiosity, was
executed always in the nick of time on Lincoln Island. Could there be some
being hidden in its profoundest recesses? It was necessary at any cost to
ascertain this.

Harding also reminded his companions of the singular behavior of Top and
Jup when they prowled round the mouth of the well, which placed Granite
House in communication with the sea, and he told them that he had explored the
well, without discovering anything suspicious. The final resolve taken, in
consequence of this conversation, by all the members of the colony, was that as
soon as the fine season returned they would thoroughly search the whole of the
island.

But from that day Pencroft appeared to be anxious. He felt as if the island
which he had made his own personal property belonged to him entirely no
longer, and that he shared it with another master, to whom, willing or not, he felt
subject. Neb and he often talked of those unaccountable things, and both, their
natures inclining them to the marvelous, were not far from believing that Lincoln
Island was under the dominion of some supernatural power.

In the meanwhile, the bad weather came with the month of May, the
November of the northern zones. It appeared that the winter would be severe and
forward. The preparations for the winter season were therefore commenced
without delay.

Nevertheless, the colonists were well prepared to meet the winter, however
hard it might be. They had plenty of felt clothing, and the musmons, very
numerous by this time, had furnished an abundance of wool necessary for the
manufacture of this warm material.

It is unnecessary to say that Ayrton had been provided with this comfortable
clothing. Cyrus Harding proposed that he should come to spend the bad season
with them in Granite House, where he would be better lodged than at the corral,
and Ayrton promised to do so, as soon as the last work at the corral was finished.
He did this towards the middle of April. From that time Ayrton shared the
common life, and made himself useful on all occasions; but still humble and sad,
he never took part in the pleasures of his companions.

For the greater part of this, the third winter which the settlers passed in
Lincoln Island, they were confined to Granite House. There were many violent
storms and frightful tempests, which appeared to shake the rocks to their very
foundations. Immense waves threatened to overwhelm the island, and certainly
any vessel anchored near the shore would have been dashed to pieces. Twice,


during one of these hurricanes, the Mercy swelled to such a degree as to give
reason to fear that the bridges would be swept away, and it was necessary to
strengthen those on the shore, which disappeared under the foaming waters,
when the sea beat against the beach.

It may well be supposed that such storms, comparable to waterspouts in
which were mingled rain and snow, would cause great havoc on the plateau of
Prospect Heights. The mill and the poultry-yard particularly suffered. The
colonists were often obliged to make immediate repairs, without which the
safety of the birds would have been seriously threatened.

During the worst weather, several jaguars and troops of quadrumana
ventured to the edge of the plateau, and it was always to be feared that the most
active and audacious would, urged by hunger, manage to cross the stream, which
besides, when frozen, offered them an easy passage. Plantations and domestic
animals would then have been infallibly destroyed, without a constant watch,
and it was often necessary to make use of the guns to keep those dangerous
visitors at a respectful distance. Occupation was not wanting to the colonists, for
without reckoning their out-door cares, they had always a thousand plans for the
fitting up of Granite House.

They had also some fine sporting excursions, which were made during the
frost in the vast Tadorn Marsh. Gideon Spilett and Herbert, aided by Jup and
Top, did not miss a shot in the midst of myriads of wild-duck, snipe, teal, and
others. The access to these hunting-grounds was easy; besides, whether they
reached them by the road to Port Balloon, after having passed the Mercy Bridge,
or by turning the rocks from Flotsam Point, the hunters were never distant from
Granite House more than two or three miles.

Thus passed the four winter months, which were really rigorous, that is to
say, June, July, August, and September. But, in short, Granite House did not
suffer much from the inclemency of the weather, and it was the same with the
corral, which, less exposed than the plateau, and sheltered partly by Mount
Franklin, only received the remains of the hurricanes, already broken by the
forests and the high rocks of the shore. The damages there were consequently of
small importance, and the activity and skill of Ayrton promptly repaired them,
when some time in October he returned to pass a few days in the corral.

During this winter, no fresh inexplicable incident occurred. Nothing strange
happened, although Pencroft and Neb were on the watch for the most
insignificant facts to which they attached any mysterious cause. Top and Jup
themselves no longer growled round the well or gave any signs of uneasiness. It
appeared, therefore, as if the series of supernatural incidents was interrupted,
although they often talked of them during the evenings in Granite House, and


they remained thoroughly resolved that the island should be searched, even in
those parts the most difficult to explore. But an event of the highest importance,
and of which the consequences might be terrible, momentarily diverted from
their projects Cyrus Harding and his companions.

It was the month of October. The fine season was swiftly returning. Nature
was reviving; and among the evergreen foliage of the coniferae which formed
the border of the wood, already appeared the young leaves of the banksias,
deodars, and other trees.

It may be remembered that Gideon Spilett and Herbert had, at different
times, taken photographic views of Lincoln Island.

Now, on the 17th of this month of October, towards three o'clock in the
afternoon, Herbert, enticed by the charms of the sky, thought of reproducing
Union Bay, which was opposite to Prospect Heights, from Cape Mandible to
Claw Cape.

The horizon was beautifully clear, and the sea, undulating under a soft
breeze, was as calm as the waters of a lake, sparkling here and there under the
sun's rays.

The apparatus had been placed at one of the windows of the diningroom at
Granite House, and consequently overlooked the shore and the bay. Herbert
proceeded as he was accustomed to do, and the negative obtained, he went away
to fix it by means of the chemicals deposited in a dark nook of Granite House.

Returning to the bright light, and examining it well, Herbert perceived on his
negative an almost imperceptible little spot on the sea horizon. He endeavored to
make it disappear by reiterated washing, but could not accomplish it.

"Tt is a flaw in the glass," he thought.

And then he had the curiosity to examine this flaw with a strong magnifier
which he unscrewed from one of the telescopes.

But he had scarcely looked at it, when he uttered a cry, and the glass almost
fell from his hands.

Immediately running to the room in which Cyrus Harding then was, he
extended the negative and magnifier towards the engineer, pointing out the little
spot.

Harding examined it; then seizing his telescope he rushed to the window.

The telescope, after having slowly swept the horizon, at last stopped on the
looked-for spot, and Cyrus Harding, lowering it, pronounced one word only,--

"A vessel!"

And in fact a vessel was in sight, off Lincoln Island!


THE SECRET OF THE ISLAND


Chapter 1


It was now two years and a half since the castaways from the balloon had
been thrown on Lincoln Island, and during that period there had been no
communication between them and their fellow-creatures. Once the reporter had
attempted to communicate with the inhabited world by confiding to a bird a
letter which contained the secret of their situation, but that was a chance on
which it was impossible to reckon seriously. Ayrton, alone, under the
circumstances which have been related, had come to join the little colony. Now,
suddenly, on this day, the 17th of October, other men had unexpectedly appeared
in sight of the island, on that deserted sea!

There could be no doubt about it! A vessel was there! But would she pass on,
or would she put into port? In a few hours the colonists would definitely know
what to expect.

Cyrus Harding and Herbert having immediately called Gideon Spilett,
Pencroft, and Neb into the diningroom of Granite House, told them what had
happened. Pencroft, seizing the telescope, rapidly swept the horizon, and
stopping on the indicated point, that is to say, on that which had made the almost
imperceptible spot on the photographic negative,--

"I'm blessed but it is really a vessel!" he exclaimed, in a voice which did not
express any great amount of satisfaction.

"Is she coming here?" asked Gideon Spilett.

"Impossible to say anything yet," answered Pencroft, "for her rigging alone
is above the horizon, and not a bit of her hull can be seen."

"What is to be done?" asked the lad.

"Wait," replied Harding.

And for a considerable time the settlers remained silent, given up to all the
thoughts, and the emotions, all the fears, all the hopes, which were aroused by
this incident--the most important which had occurred since their arrival in
Lincoln Island. Certainly, the colonists were not in the situation of castaways
abandoned on a sterile islet, constantly contending against a cruel nature for their
miserable existence, and incessantly tormented by the longing to return to
inhabited countries. Pencroft and Neb, especially, who felt themselves at once so
happy and so rich, would not have left their island without regret. They were
accustomed, besides, to this new life in the midst of the domain which their
intelligence had as it were civilized. But at any rate this ship brought news from
the world, perhaps even from their native land. It was bringing fellow-creatures


to them, and it may be conceived how deeply their hearts were moved at the
sight!

From time to time Pencroft took the glass and rested himself at the window.
From thence he very attentively examined the vessel, which was at a distance of
twenty miles to the east. The colonists had as yet, therefore, no means of
signalizing their presence. A flag would not have been perceived; a gun would
not have been heard; a fire would not have been visible. However, it was certain
that the island, overtopped by Mount Franklin, could not escape the notice of the
vessel's lookout. But why was the ship coming there? Was it simple chance
which brought it to that part of the Pacific, where the maps mentioned no land
except Tabor Island, which itself was out of the route usually followed by
vessels from the Polynesian Archipelagoes, from New Zealand, and from the
American coast? To this question, which each one asked himself, a reply was
suddenly made by Herbert.

"Can it be the 'Duncan'?" he cried.

The "Duncan," as has been said, was Lord Glenarvan's yacht, which had left
Ayrton on the islet, and which was to return there someday to fetch him. Now,
the islet was not so far distant from Lincoln Island, but that a vessel, standing for
the one, could pass in sight of the other. A hundred and fifty miles only separated
them in longitude, and seventy in latitude.

"We must tell Ayrton," said Gideon Spilett, "and send for him immediately.
He alone can say if it is the Duncan."

This was the opinion of all, and the reporter, going to the telegraphic
apparatus which placed the corral in communication with Granite House, sent
this telegram:--"Come with all possible speed."

In a few minutes the bell sounded.

"IT am coming," replied Ayrton.

Then the settlers continued to watch the vessel.

"If it is the 'Duncan,'" said Herbert, "Ayrton will recognize her without
difficulty, since he sailed on board her for some time."

"And if he recognizes her," added Pencroft, "it will agitate him exceedingly!"

"Yes," answered Cyrus Harding; "but now Ayrton is worthy to return on
board the "Duncan,' and pray Heaven that it is indeed Lord Glenarvan's yacht, for
I should be suspicious of any other vessel. These are ill-famed seas, and I have
always feared a visit from Malay pirates to our island."

"We could defend it,', cried Herbert.

"No doubt, my boy," answered the engineer smiling, "but it would be better
not to have to defend it."

"A useless observation," said Spilett. "Lincoln Island is unknown to


navigators, since it is not marked even on the most recent maps. Do you think,
Cyrus, that that is a sufficient motive for a ship, finding herself unexpectedly in
sight of new land, to try and visit rather than avoid it?"

"Certainly," replied Pencroft.

"T think so too," added the engineer. "It may even be said that it is the duty of
a captain to come and survey any land or island not yet known, and Lincoln
Island is in this position."

"Well," said Pencroft, "suppose this vessel comes and anchors there a few
cables-lengths from our island, what shall we do?"

This sudden question remained at first without any reply. But Cyrus Harding,
after some moments’ thought, replied in the calm tone which was usual to him,--

"What we shall do, my friends? What we ought to do is this:--we will
communicate with the ship, we will take our passage on board her, and we will
leave our island, after having taken possession of it in the name of the United
States. Then we will return with any who may wish to follow us to colonize it
definitely, and endow the American Republic with a useful station in this part of
the Pacific Ocean!"

"Hurrah!" exclaimed Pencroft, "and that will be no small present which we
shall make to our country! The colonization is already almost finished; names
are given to every part of the island; there is a natural port, fresh water, roads, a
telegraph, a dockyard, and manufactories; and there will be nothing to be done
but to inscribe Lincoln Island on the maps!"

"But if anyone seizes it in our absence?" observed Gideon Spilett.

"Hang it!" cried the sailor. "I would rather remain all alone to guard it: and
trust to Pencroft, they shouldn't steal it from him, like a watch from the pocket of
a swell!"

For an hour it was impossible to say with any certainty whether the vessel
was or was not standing towards Lincoln Island. She was nearer, but in what
direction was she sailing? This Pencroft could not determine. However, as the
wind was blowing from the northeast, in all probability the vessel was sailing on
the starboard tack. Besides, the wind was favorable for bringing her towards the
island, and, the sea being calm, she would not be afraid to approach although the
shallows were not marked on the chart.

Towards four o'clock--an hour after he had been sent for--Ayrton arrived at
Granite House. He entered the diningroom saying,--

"At your service, gentlemen."

Cyrus Harding gave him his hand, as was his custom to do, and, leading him
to the window,--

"Ayrton," said he, "we have begged you to come here for an important


reason. A ship is in sight of the island."

Ayrton at first paled slightly, and for a moment his eyes became dim; then,
leaning out the window, he surveyed the horizon, but could see nothing.

"Take this telescope," said Spilett, "and look carefully, Ayrton, for it is
possible that this ship may be the 'Duncan' come to these seas for the purpose of
taking you home again."

"The 'Duncan!"" murmured Ayrton. "Already?" This last word escaped
Ayrton's lips as if involuntarily, and his head drooped upon his hands.

Did not twelve years' solitude on a desert island appear to him a sufficient
expiation? Did not the penitent yet feel himself pardoned, either in his own eyes
or in the eyes of others?

"No," said he, "no! it cannot be the 'Duncan'!"

"Look, Ayrton," then said the engineer, "for it is necessary that we should
know beforehand what to expect."

Ayrton took the glass and pointed it in the direction indicated. During some
minutes he examined the horizon without moving, without uttering a word.
Then,--

"Tt is indeed a vessel," said he, "but I do not think she is the 'Duncan.""

"Why do you not think so?" asked Gideon Spilett.

"Because the 'Duncan' is a steam-yacht, and I cannot perceive any trace of
smoke either above or near that vessel."

"Perhaps she is simply sailing," observed Pencroft. "The wind is favorable
for the direction which she appears to be taking, and she may be anxious to
economize her coal, being so far from land."

"It is possible that you may be right, Mr. Pencroft," answered Ayrton, "and
that the vessel has extinguished her fires. We must wait until she is nearer, and
then we shall soon know what to expect."

So saying, Ayrton sat down in a comer of the room and remained silent. The
colonists again discussed the strange ship, but Ayrton took no part in the
conversation. All were in such a mood that they found it impossible to continue
their work. Gideon Spilett and Pencroft were particularly nervous, going,
coming, not able to remain still in one place. Herbert felt more curiosity. Neb
alone maintained his usual calm manner. Was not his country that where his
master was? As to the engineer, he remained plunged in deep thought, and in his
heart feared rather than desired the arrival of the ship. In the meanwhile, the
vessel was a little nearer the island. With the aid of the glass, it was ascertained
that she was a brig, and not one of those Malay proas, which are generally used
by the pirates of the Pacific. It was, therefore, reasonable to believe that the
engineer's apprehensions would not be justified, and that the presence of this


vessel in the vicinity of the island was fraught with no danger.

Pencroft, after a minute examination, was able positively to affirm that the
vessel was rigged as a brig, and that she was standing obliquely towards the
coast, on the starboard tack, under her topsails and top-gallant-sails. This was
confirmed by Ayrton. But by continuing in this direction she must soon
disappear behind Claw Cape, as the wind was from the southwest, and to watch
her it would be then necessary to ascend the height of Washington Bay, near Port
Balloon--a provoking circumstance, for it was already five o'clock in the
evening, and the twilight would soon make any observation extremely difficult.

"What shall we do when night comes on?" asked Gideon Spilett. "Shall we
light a fire, so as to signal our presence on the coast?"

This was a serious question, and yet, although the engineer still retained
some of his presentiments, it was answered in the affirmative. During the night
the ship might disappear and leave for ever, and, this ship gone, would another
ever return to the waters of Lincoln Island? Who could foresee what the future
would then have in store for the colonists?

"Yes," said the reporter, "we ought to make known to that vessel, whoever
she may be, that the island is inhabited. To neglect the opportunity which is
offered to us might be to create everlasting regrets."

It was therefore decided that Neb and Pencroft should go to Port Balloon,
and that there, at nightfall, they should light an immense fire, the blaze of which
would necessarily attract the attention of the brig.

But at the moment when Neb and the sailor were preparing to leave Granite
House, the vessel suddenly altered her course, and stood directly for Union Bay.
The brig was a good sailer, for she approached rapidly. Neb and Pencroft put off
their departure, therefore, and the glass was put into Ayrton's hands, that he
might ascertain for certain whether the ship was or was not the "Duncan." The
Scotch yacht was also rigged as a brig. The question was, whether a chimney
could be discerned between the two masts of the vessel, which was now at a
distance of only five miles.

The horizon was still very clear. The examination was easy, and Ayrton soon
let the glass fall again, saying--

"It is not the Duncan"! It could not be!"

Pencroft again brought the brig within the range of the telescope, and could
see that she was of between three and four hundred tons burden, wonderfully
narrow, well-masted, admirably built, and must be a very rapid sailer. But to
what nation did she belong? That was difficult to say.

"And yet," added the sailor, "a flag is floating from her peak, but I cannot
distinguish the colors of it."


"In half an hour we shall be certain about that," answered the reporter.
"Besides, it is very evident that the intention of the captain of this ship is to land,
and, consequently, if not today, to-morrow at the latest, we shall make his
acquaintance."

"Never mind!" said Pencroft. "It is best to know whom we have to deal with,
and I shall not be sorry to recognize that fellow's colors!"

And, while thus speaking, the sailor never left the glass. The day began to
fade, and with the day the breeze fell also. The brig's ensign hung in folds, and it
became more and more difficult to observe it.

"It is not the American flag," said Pencroft from time to time, "nor the
English, the red of which could be easily seen, nor the French or German colors,
nor the white flag of Russia, nor the yellow of Spain. One would say it was all
one color. Let's see: in these seas, what do we generally meet with? The Chilean
flag>?--but that is tri-color. Brazilian?--it is green. Japanese?--it is yellow and
black, while this--"

At that moment the breeze blew out the unknown flag. Ayrton seizing the
telescope which the sailor had put down, put it to his eye, and in a hoarse voice,-

"The black flag!" he exclaimed.

And indeed the somber bunting was floating from the mast of the brig, and
they had now good reason for considering her to be a suspicious vessel!

Had the engineer, then, been right in his presentiments? Was this a pirate
vessel? Did she scour the Pacific, competing with the Malay proas which still
infest it? For what had she come to look at the shores of Lincoln Island? Was it
to them an unknown island, ready to become a magazine for stolen cargoes? Had
she come to find on the coast a sheltered port for the winter months? Was the
settlers' honest domain destined to be transformed into an infamous refuge--the
headquarters of the piracy of the Pacific?

All these ideas instinctively presented themselves to the colonists’
imaginations. There was no doubt, besides, of the signification which must be
attached to the color of the hoisted flag. It was that of pirates! It was that which
the "Duncan" would have carried, had the convicts succeeded in their criminal
design! No time was lost before discussing it.

"My friends," said Cyrus Harding, "perhaps this vessel only wishes to survey
the coast of the island. Perhaps her crew will not land. There is a chance of it.
However that may be, we ought to do everything we can to hide our presence
here. The windmill on Prospect Heights is too easily seen. Let Ayrton and Neb
go and take down the sails. We must also conceal the windows of Granite House
with thick branches. All the fires must be extinguished, so that nothing may


betray the presence of men on the island."

"And our vessel?" said Herbert.

"Oh," answered Pencroft, "she is sheltered in Port Balloon, and I defy any of
those rascals there to find her!"

The engineer's orders were immediately executed. Neb and Ayrton ascended
the plateau, and took the necessary precautions to conceal any indication of a
settlement. While they were thus occupied, their companions went to the border
of Jacamar Wood, and brought back a large quantity of branches and creepers,
which would at some distance appear as natural foliage, and thus disguise the
windows in the granite cliff. At the same time, the ammunition and guns were
placed ready so as to be at hand in case of an unexpected attack.

When all these precautions had been taken,--

"My friends," said Harding, and his voice betrayed some emotion, "if the
wretches endeavor to seize Lincoln Island, we shall defend it--shall we not?"

"Yes, Cyrus," replied the reporter, "and if necessary we will die to defend it!"

The engineer extended his hand to his companions, who pressed it warmly.
Ayrton remained in his corner, not joining the colonists. Perhaps he, the former
convict, still felt himself unworthy to do so!

Cyrus Harding understood what was passing in Ayrton's mind, and going to
him--

"And you, Ayrton," he asked, "what will you do?"

"My duty," answered Ayrton.

He then took up his station near the window and gazed through the foliage.

It was now half-past seven. The sun had disappeared twenty minutes ago
behind Granite House. Consequently the Eastern horizon was becoming
obscured. In the meanwhile the brig continued to advance towards Union Bay.
She was now not more than two miles off, and exactly opposite the plateau of
Prospect Heights, for after having tacked off Claw Cape, she had drifted towards
the north in the current of the rising tide. One might have said that at this
distance she had already entered the vast bay, for a straight line drawn from
Claw Cape to Cape Mandible would have rested on her starboard quarter.

Was the brig about to penetrate far into the bay? That was the first question.
When once in the bay, would she anchor there? That was the second. Would she
not content herself with only surveying the coast, and stand out to sea again
without landing her crew? They would know this in an hour. The colonists could
do nothing but wait.

Cyrus Harding had not seen the suspected vessel hoist the black flag without
deep anxiety. Was it not a direct menace against the work which he and his
companions had till now conducted so successfully? Had these pirates--for the


sailors of the brig could be nothing else--already visited the island, since on
approaching it they had hoisted their colors. Had they formerly invaded it, so
that certain unaccountable peculiarities might be explained in this way? Did
there exist in the as yet unexplored parts some accomplice ready to enter into
communication with them?

To all these questions which he mentally asked himself, Harding knew not
what to reply; but he felt that the safety of the colony could not but be seriously
threatened by the arrival of the brig.

However, he and his companions were determined to fight to the last gasp. It
would have been very important to know if the pirates were numerous and better
armed than the colonists. But how was this information to be obtained?

Night fell. The new moon had disappeared. Profound darkness enveloped the
island and the sea. No light could pierce through the heavy piles of clouds on the
horizon. The wind had died away completely with the twilight. Not a leaf rustled
on the trees, not a ripple murmured on the shore. Nothing could be seen of the
ship, all her lights being extinguished, and if she was still in sight of the island,
her whereabouts could not be discovered.

"Well! who knows?" said Pencroft. "Perhaps that cursed craft will stand off
during the night, and we shall see nothing of her at daybreak."

As if in reply to the sailor's observation, a bright light flashed in the
darkness, and a cannon-shot was heard.

The vessel was still there and had guns on board.

Six seconds elapsed between the flash and the report.

Therefore the brig was about a mile and a quarter from the coast.

At the same time, the chains were heard rattling through the hawse-holes.

The vessel had just anchored in sight of Granite House!


Chapter 2


There was no longer any doubt as to the pirates’ intentions. They had
dropped anchor at a short distance from the island, and it was evident that the
next day by means of their boats they purposed to land on the beach!

Cyrus Harding and his companions were ready to act, but, determined
though they were, they must not forget to be prudent. Perhaps their presence
might still be concealed in the event of the pirates contenting themselves with
landing on the shore without examining the interior of the island. It might be,
indeed, that their only intention was to obtain fresh water from the Mercy, and it
was not impossible that the bridge, thrown across a mile and a half from the
mouth, and the manufactory at the Chimneys might escape their notice.

But why was that flag hoisted at the brig's peak? What was that shot fired
for? Pure bravado doubtless, unless it was a sign of the act of taking possession.
Harding knew now that the vessel was well armed. And what had the colonists
of Lincoln Island to reply to the pirates' guns? A few muskets only.

"However," observed Cyrus Harding, "here we are in an impregnable
position. The enemy cannot discover the mouth of the outlet, now that it is
hidden under reeds and grass, and consequently it would be impossible for them
to penetrate into Granite House."

"But our plantations, our poultry-yard, our corral, all, everything!" exclaimed
Pencroft, stamping his foot. "They may spoil everything, destroy everything in a
few hours!"

"Everything, Pencroft," answered Harding, "and we have no means of
preventing them.”

"Are they numerous? that is the question," said the reporter. "If they are not
more than a dozen, we shall be able to stop them, but forty, fifty, more perhaps!"

"Captain Harding," then said Ayrton, advancing towards the engineer, "will
you give me leave?"

"For what, my friend?"

"To go to that vessel to find out the strength of her crew."

"But Ayrton--" answered the engineer, hesitating, "you will risk your life--"

"Why not, sir?"

"That is more than your duty."

"I have more than my duty to do," replied Ayrton.

"Will you go to the ship in the boat?" asked Gideon Spilett.

"No, sir, but I will swim. A boat would be seen where a man may glide


between wind and water."

"Do you know that the brig is a mile and a quarter from the shore?" said
Herbert.

"IT am a good swimmer, Mr. Herbert."

"T tell you it is risking your life," said the engineer.

"That is no matter,” answered Ayrton. "Captain Harding, I ask this as a favor.
Perhaps it will be a means of raising me in my own eyes!"

"Go, Ayrton," replied the engineer, who felt sure that a refusal would have
deeply wounded the former convict, now become an honest man.

"T will accompany you," said Pencroft.

"You mistrust me!" said Ayrton quickly.

Then more humbly,--

"Alas!"

"No! no!" exclaimed Harding with animation, "no, Ayrton, Pencroft does not
mistrust you. You interpret his words wrongly."

"Indeed," returned the sailor, "I only propose to accompany Ayrton as far as
the islet. It may be, although it is scarcely possible, that one of these villains has
landed, and in that case two men will not be too many to hinder him from giving
the alarm. I will wait for Ayrton on the islet, and he shall go alone to the vessel,
since he has proposed to do so." These things agreed to, Ayrton made
preparations for his departure. His plan was bold, but it might succeed, thanks to
the darkness of the night. Once arrived at the vessel's side, Ayrton, holding on to
the main chains, might reconnoiter the number and perhaps overhear the
intentions of the pirates.

Ayrton and Pencroft, followed by their companions, descended to the beach.
Ayrton undressed and rubbed himself with grease, so as to suffer less from the
temperature of the water, which was still cold. He might, indeed, be obliged to
remain in it for several hours.

Pencroft and Neb, during this time, had gone to fetch the boat, moored a few
hundred feet higher up, on the bank of the Mercy, and by the time they returned,
Ayrton was ready to start. A coat was thrown over his shoulders, and the settlers
all came round him to press his hand.

Ayrton then shoved off with Pencroft in the boat.

It was half-past ten in the evening when the two adventurers disappeared in
the darkness. Their companions returned to wait at the Chimneys.

The channel was easily traversed, and the boat touched the opposite shore of
the islet. This was not done without precaution, for fear lest the pirates might be
roaming about there. But after a careful survey, it was evident that the islet was
deserted. Ayrton then, followed by Pencroft, crossed it with a rapid step, scaring


the birds nestled in the holes of the rocks; then, without hesitating, he plunged
into the sea, and swam noiselessly in the direction of the ship, in which a few
lights had recently appeared, showing her exact situation. As to Pencroft, he
crouched down in a cleft of the rock, and awaited the return of his companion.

In the meanwhile, Ayrton, swimming with a vigorous stroke, glided through
the sheet of water without producing the slightest ripple. His head just emerged
above it and his eyes were fixed on the dark hull of the brig, from which the
lights were reflected in the water. He thought only of the duty which he had
promised to accomplish, and nothing of the danger which he ran, not only on
board the ship, but in the sea, often frequented by sharks. The current bore him
along and he rapidly receded from the shore.

Half an hour afterwards, Ayrton, without having been either seen or heard,
arrived at the ship and caught hold of the main-chains. He took breath, then,
hoisting himself up, he managed to reach the extremity of the cutwater. There
were drying several pairs of sailors' trousers. He put on a pair. Then settling
himself firmly, he listened. They were not sleeping on board the brig. On the
contrary, they were talking, singing, laughing. And these were the sentences,
accompanied with oaths, which principally struck Ayrton:--

"Our brig is a famous acquisition."

"She sails well, and merits her name of the 'Speedy.

"She would show all the navy of Norfolk a clean pair of heels."

"Hurrah for her captain!"

"Hurrah for Bob Harvey!"

What Ayrton felt when he overheard this fragment of conversation may be
understood when it is known that in this Bob Harvey he recognized one of his
old Australian companions, a daring sailor, who had continued his criminal
career. Bob Harvey had seized, on the shores of Norfolk Island this brig, which
was loaded with arms, ammunition, utensils, and tools of all sorts, destined for
one of the Sandwich Islands. All his gang had gone on board, and pirates after
having been convicts, these wretches, more ferocious than the Malays
themselves, scoured the Pacific, destroying vessels, and massacring their crews.

The convicts spoke loudly, they recounted their deeds, drinking deeply at the
same time, and this is what Ayrton gathered. The actual crew of the "Speedy"
was composed solely of English prisoners, escaped from Norfolk Island.

Here it may be well to explain what this island was. In 29deg 2' south
latitude, and 165deg 42' east longitude, to the east of Australia, is found a little
island, six miles in circumference, overlooked by Mount Pitt, which rises to a
height of 1,100 feet above the level of the sea. This is Norfolk Island, once the
seat of an establishment in which were lodged the most intractable convicts from


WY


the English penitentiaries. They numbered 500, under an iron discipline,
threatened with terrible punishments, and were guarded by 150 soldiers, and 150
employed under the orders of the governor. It would be difficult to imagine a
collection of greater ruffians. Sometimes,--although very  rarely,--
notwithstanding the extreme surveillance of which they were the object, many
managed to escape, and seizing vessels which they surprised, they infested the
Polynesian Archipelagoes.

Thus had Bob Harvey and his companions done. Thus had Ayrton formerly
wished to do. Bob Harvey had seized the brig "Speedy," anchored in sight of
Norfolk Island; the crew had been massacred; and for a year this ship had
scoured the Pacific, under the command of Harvey, now a pirate, and well
known to Ayrton!

The convicts were, for the most part, assembled under the poop; but a few,
stretched on the deck, were talking loudly.

The conversation still continued amid shouts and libations. Ayrton learned
that chance alone had brought the "Speedy" in sight of Lincoln Island; Bob
Harvey had never yet set foot on it; but, as Cyrus Harding had conjectured,
finding this unknown land in his course, its position being marked on no chart,
he had formed the project of visiting it, and, if he found it suitable, of making it
the brig's headquarters.

As to the black flag hoisted at the "Speedy's" peak, and the gun which had
been fired, in imitation of men-of-war when they lower their colors, it was pure
piratical bravado. It was in no way a signal, and no communication yet existed
between the convicts and Lincoln Island.

The settlers' domain was now menaced with terrible danger. Evidently the
island, with its water, its harbor, its resources of all kinds so increased in value
by the colonists, and the concealment afforded by Granite House, could not but
be convenient for the convicts; in their hands it would become an excellent place
of refuge, and, being unknown, it would assure them, for a long time perhaps,
impunity and security. Evidently, also, the lives of the settlers would not be
respected, and Bob Harvey and his accomplices’ first care would be to massacre
them without mercy. Harding and his companions had, therefore, not even the
choice of flying and hiding themselves in the island, since the convicts intended
to reside there, and since, in the event of the "Speedy" departing on an
expedition, it was probable that some of the crew would remain on shore, so as
to settle themselves there. Therefore, it would be necessary to fight, to destroy
every one of these scoundrels, unworthy of pity, and against whom any means
would be right. So thought Ayrton, and he well knew that Cyrus Harding would
be of his way of thinking.


But was resistance and, in the last place, victory possible? That would
depend on the equipment of the brig, and the number of men which she carried.

This Ayrton resolved to learn at any cost, and as an hour after his arrival the
vociferations had begun to die away, and as a large number of the convicts were
already buried in a drunken sleep, Ayrton did not hesitate to venture onto the
"Speedy's" deck, which the extinguished lanterns now left in total darkness. He
hoisted himself onto the cutwater, and by the bowsprit arrived at the forecastle.
Then, gliding among the convicts stretched here and there, he made the round of
the ship, and found that the "Speedy" carried four guns, which would throw shot
of from eight to ten pounds in weight. He found also, on touching them that
these guns were breech-loaders. They were therefore, of modern make, easily
used, and of terrible effect.

As to the men lying on the deck, they were about ten in number, but it was to
be supposed that more were sleeping down below. Besides, by listening to them,
Ayrton had understood that there were fifty on board. That was a large number
for the six settlers of Lincoln Island to contend with! But now, thanks to Ayrton's
devotion, Cyrus Harding would not be surprised, he would know the strength of
his adversaries, and would make his arrangements accordingly.

There was nothing more for Ayrton to do but to return, and render to his
companions an account of the mission with which he had charged himself, and
he prepared to regain the bows of the brig, so that he might let himself down into
the water. But to this man, whose wish was, as he had said, to do more than his
duty, there came an heroic thought. This was to sacrifice his own life, but save
the island and the colonists. Cyrus Harding evidently could not resist fifty
ruffians, all well armed, who, either by penetrating by main force into Granite
House, or by starving out the besieged, could obtain from them what they
wanted. And then he thought of his preservers--those who had made him again a
man, and an honest mm, those to whom he owed all--murdered without pity,
their works destroyed, their island turned into a pirates’ den! He said to himself
that he, Ayrton, was the principal cause of so many disasters, since his old
companion, Bob Harvey, had but realized his own plans, and a feeling of horror
took possession of him. Then he was seized with an irresistible desire to blow up
the brig and with her, all whom she had on board. He would perish in the
explosion, but he would have done his duty.

Ayrton did not hesitate. To reach the powder-room, which is always situated
in the after-part of a vessel, was easy. There would be no want of powder in a
vessel which followed such a trade, and a spark would be enough to destroy it in
an instant.

Ayrton stole carefully along the between-decks, strewn with numerous


sleepers, overcome more by drunkenness than sleep. A lantern was lighted at the
foot of the mainmast, round which was hung a gun-rack, furnished with weapons
of all sorts.

Ayrton took a revolver from the rack, and assured himself that it was loaded
and primed. Nothing more was needed to accomplish the work of destruction.
He then glided towards the stern, so as to arrive under the brig's poop at the
powder-magazine.

It was difficult to proceed along the dimly lighted deck without stumbling
over some half-sleeping convict, who retorted by oaths and kicks. Ayrton was,
therefore, more than once obliged to halt. But at last he arrived at the partition
dividing the aftercabin, and found the door opening into the magazine itself.

Ayrton, compelled to force it open, set to work. It was a difficult operation to
perform without noise, for he had to break a padlock. But under his vigorous
hand, the padlock broke, and the door was open.

At that moment a hand was laid on Ayrton's shoulder.

"What are you doing here?" asked a tail man, in a harsh voice, who, standing
in the shadow, quickly threw the light of a lantern in Ayrton's face.

Ayrton drew beck. In the rapid flash of the lantern, he had recognized his
former accomplice, Bob Harvey, who could not have known him, as he must
have thought Ayrton long since dead.

"What are you doing here?" again said Bob Harvey, seizing Ayrton by the
waistband.

But Ayrton, without replying, wrenched himself from his grasp and
attempted to rush into the magazine. A shot fired into the midst of the powder-
casks, and all would be over!

"Help, lads!" shouted Bob Harvey.

At his shout two or three pirates awoke, jumped up, and, rushing on Ayrton,
endeavored to throw him down. He soon extricated himself from their grasp. He
fired his revolver, and two of the convicts fell, but a blow from a knife which he
could not ward off made a gash in his shoulder.

Ayrton perceived that he could no longer hope to carry out his project. Bob
Harvey had reclosed the door of the powder-magazine, and a movement on the
deck indicated a general awakening of the pirates. Ayrton must reserve himself
to fight at the side of Cyrus Harding. There was nothing for him but flight!

But was flight still possible? It was doubtful, yet Ayrton resolved to dare
everything in order to rejoin his companions.

Four barrels of the revolver were still undischarged. Two were fired--one,
aimed at Bob Harvey, did not wound him, or at any rate only slightly, and
Ayrton, profiting by the momentary retreat of his adversaries, rushed towards the


companion-ladder to gain the deck. Passing before the lantern, he smashed it
with a blow from the butt of his revolver. A profound darkness ensued, which
favored his flight. Two or three pirates, awakened by the noise, were descending
the ladder at the same moment.

A fifth shot from Ayrton laid one low, and the others drew back, not
understanding what was going on. Ayrton was on deck in two bounds, and three
seconds later, having discharged his last barrel in the face of a pirate who was
about to seize him by the throat, he leaped over the bulwarks into the sea.

Ayrton had not made six strokes before shots were splashing around him like
hail.

What were Pencroft's feelings, sheltered under a rock on the islet! What were
those of Harding, the reporter, Herbert, and Neb, crouched in the Chimneys,
when they heard the reports on board the brig! They rushed out on to the beach,
and, their guns shouldered, they stood ready to repel any attack.

They had no doubt about it themselves! Ayrton, surprised by the pirates, had
been murdered, and, perhaps, the wretches would profit by the night to make a
descent on the island!

Half an hour was passed in terrible anxiety. The firing had ceased, and yet
neither Ayrton nor Pencroft had reappeared. Was the islet invaded? Ought they
not to fly to the help of Ayrton and Pencroft? But how? The tide being high at
that time, rendered the channel impassable. The boat was not there! We may
imagine the horrible anxiety which took possession of Harding and his
companions!

At last, towards half-past twelve, a boat, carrying two men, touched the
beach. It was Ayrton, slightly wounded in the shoulder, and Pencroft, safe and
sound, whom their friends received with open arms.

All immediately took refuge in the Chimneys. There Ayrton recounted all
that had passed, even to his plan for blowing up the brig, which he had attempted
to put into execution.

All hands were extended to Ayrton, who did not conceal from them that their
situation was serious. The pirates had been alarmed. They knew that Lincoln
Island was inhabited. They would land upon it in numbers and well armed. They
would respect nothing. Should the settlers fall into their hands, they must expect
no mercy!

"Well, we shall know how to die!" said the reporter.

"Let us go in and watch," answered the engineer.

"Have we any chance of escape, captain?" asked the sailor.

"Yes, Pencroft."

"Hum! six against fifty!"


"Yes! six! without counting--"
"Who?" asked Pencroft.
Cyrus did not reply, but pointed upwards.


Chapter 3


The night passed without incident. The colonists were on the qui vive, and
did not leave their post at the Chimneys. The pirates, on their side, did not
appear to have made any attempt to land. Since the last shots fired at Ayrton not
a report, not even a sound, had betrayed the presence of the brig in the
neighborhood of the island. It might have been fancied that she had weighed
anchor, thinking that she had to deal with her match, and had left the coast.

But it was no such thing, and when day began to dawn the settlers could see
a confused mass through the morning mist. It was the "Speedy."

"These, my friends," said the engineer, "are the arrangements which appear
to me best to make before the fog completely clears away. It hides us from the
eyes of the pirates, and we can act without attracting their attention. The most
important thing is, that the convicts should believe that the inhabitants of the
island are numerous, and consequently capable of resisting them. I therefore
propose that we divide into three parties. The first of which shall be posted at the
Chimneys, the second at the mouth of the Mercy. As to the third, I think it would
be best to place it on the islet, so as to prevent, or at all events delay, any attempt
at landing. We have the use of two rifles and four muskets. Each of us will be
armed, and, as we are amply provided with powder and shot, we need not spare
our fire. We have nothing to fear from the muskets nor even from the guns of the
brig. What can they do against these rocks? And, as we shall not fire from the
windows of Granite House, the pirates will not think of causing irreparable
damage by throwing shell against it. What is to be feared is, the necessity of
meeting hand-to-hand, since the convicts have numbers on their side. We must
therefore try to prevent them from landing, but without discovering ourselves.
Therefore, do not economize the ammunition. Fire often, but with a sure aim. We
have each eight or ten enemies to kill, and they must be killed!"

Cyrus Harding had clearly represented their situation, although he spoke in
the calmest voice, as if it was a question of directing a piece of work and not
ordering a battle. His companions approved these arrangements without even
uttering a word. There was nothing more to be done but for each to take his
place before the fog should be completely dissipated. Neb and Pencroft
immediately ascended to Granite House and brought back a sufficient quantity of
ammunition. Gideon Spilett and Ayrton, both very good marksmen, were armed
with the two rifles, which carried nearly a mile. The four other muskets were
divided among Harding, Neb, Pencroft, and Herbert.


The posts were arranged in the following manner:--

Cyrus Harding and Herbert remained in ambush at the Chimneys, thus
commanding the shore to the foot of Granite House.

Gideon Spilett and Neb crouched among the rocks at the mouth of the
Mercy, from which the drawbridges had been raised, so as to prevent any one
from crossing in a boat or landing on the opposite shore.

As to Ayrton and Pencroft, they shoved off in the boat, and prepared to cross
the channel and to take up two separate stations on the islet. In this way, shots
being fired from four different points at once, the convicts would be led to
believe that the island was both largely peopled and strongly defended.

In the event of a landing being effected without their having been able to
prevent it, and also if they saw that they were on the point of being cut off by the
brig's boat, Ayrton and Pencroft were to return in their boat to the shore and
proceed towards the threatened spot.

Before starting to occupy their posts, the colonists for the last time wrung
each other's hands.

Pencroft succeeded in controlling himself sufficiently to suppress his
emotion when he embraced Herbert, his boy! and then they separated.

In a few moments Harding and Herbert on one side, the reporter and Neb on
the other, had disappeared behind the rocks, and five minutes later Ayrton and
Pencroft, having without difficulty crossed the channel, disembarked on the islet
and concealed themselves in the clefts of its eastern shore.

None of them could have been seen, for they themselves could scarcely
distinguish the brig in the fog.

It was half-past six in the morning.

Soon the fog began to clear away, and the topmasts of the brig issued from
the vapor. For some minutes great masses rolled over the surface of the sea, then
a breeze sprang up, which rapidly dispelled the mist.

The "Speedy" now appeared in full view, with a spring on her cable, her head
to the north, presenting her larboard side to the island. Just as Harding had
calculated, she was not more than a mile and a quarter from the coast.

The sinister black flag floated from the peak.

The engineer, with his telescope, could see that the four guns on board were
pointed at the island. They were evidently ready to fire at a moment's notice.

In the meanwhile the "Speedy" remained silent. About thirty pirates could be
seen moving on the deck. A few more on the poop; two others posted in the
shrouds, and armed with spyglasses, were attentively surveying the island.

Certainly, Bob Harvey and his crew would not be able easily to give an
account of what had happened during the night on board the brig. Had this half-


naked man, who had forced the door of the powder-magazine, and with whom
they had struggled, who had six times discharged his revolver at them, who had
killed one and wounded two others, escaped their shot? Had he been able to
swim to shore? Whence did he come? What had been his object? Had his design
really been to blow up the brig, as Bob Harvey had thought? All this must be
confused enough to the convicts’ minds. But what they could no longer doubt
was that the unknown island before which the "Speedy" had cast anchor was
inhabited, and that there was, perhaps, a numerous colony ready to defend it.
And yet no one was to be seen, neither on the shore, nor on the heights. The
beach appeared to be absolutely deserted. At any rate, there was no trace of
dwellings. Had the inhabitants fled into the interior? Thus probably the pirate
captain reasoned, and doubtless, like a prudent man, he wished to reconnoiter the
locality before he allowed his men to venture there.

During an hour and a half, no indication of attack or landing could be
observed on board the brig. Evidently Bob Harvey was hesitating. Even with his
strongest telescopes he could not have perceived one of the settlers crouched
among the rocks. It was not even probable that his attention had been awakened
by the screen of green branches and creepers hiding the windows of Granite
House, and showing rather conspicuously on the bare rock. Indeed, how could
he imagine that a dwelling was hollowed out, at that height, in the solid granite?
From Claw Cape to the Mandible Capes, in all the extent of Union Bay, there
was nothing to lead him to suppose that the island was or could be inhabited.

At eight o'clock, however, the colonists observed a movement on board the
"Speedy." A boat was lowered, and seven men jumped into her. They were
armed with muskets; one took the yoke-lines, four others the oars, and the two
others, kneeling in the bows, ready to fire, reconnoitered the island. Their object
was no doubt to make an examination but not to land, for in the latter case they
would have come in larger numbers. The pirates from their lookout could have
seen that the coast was sheltered by an islet, separated from it by a channel half a
mile in width. However, it was soon evident to Cyrus Harding, on observing the
direction followed by the boat, that they would not attempt to penetrate into the
channel, but would land on the islet.

Pencroft and Ayrton, each hidden in a narrow cleft of the rock, saw them
coming directly towards them, and waited till they were within range.

The boat advanced with extreme caution. The oars only dipped into the water
at long intervals. It could now be seen that one of the convicts held a lead-line in
his hand, and that he wished to fathom the depth of the channel hollowed out by
the current of the Mercy. This showed that it was Bob Harvey's intention to bring
his brig as near as possible to the coast. About thirty pirates, scattered in the


rigging, followed every movement of the boat, and took the bearings of certain
landmarks which would allow them to approach without danger. The boat was
not more than two cables-lengths off the islet when she stopped. The man at the
tiller stood up and looked for the best place at which to land.

At that moment two shots were heard. Smoke curled up from among the
rocks of the islet. The man at the helm and the man with the lead-line fell
backwards into the boat. Ayrton's and Pencroft's balls had struck them both at the
same moment.

Almost immediately a louder report was heard, a cloud of smoke issued from
the brig's side, and a ball, striking the summit of the rock which sheltered Ayrton
and Pencroft, made it fly in splinters, but the two marksmen remained unhurt.

Horrible imprecations burst from the boat, which immediately continued its
way. The man who had been at the tiller was replaced by one of his comrades,
and the oars were rapidly plunged into the water. However, instead of returning
on board as might have been expected, the boat coasted along the islet, so as to
round its southern point. The pirates pulled vigorously at their oars that they
might get out of range of the bullets.

They advanced to within five cables-lengths of that part of the shore
terminated by Flotsam Point, and after having rounded it in a semicircular line,
still protected by the brig's guns, they proceeded towards the mouth of the
Mercy.

Their evident intention was to penetrate into the channel, and cut off the
colonists posted on the islet, in such a way, that whatever their number might be,
being placed between the fire from the boat and the fire from the brig, they
would find themselves in a very disadvantageous position.

A quarter of an hour passed while the boat advanced in this direction.
Absolute silence, perfect calm reigned in the air and on the water.

Pencroft and Ayrton, although they knew they ran the risk of being cut off,
had not left their post, both that they did not wish to show themselves as yet to
their assailants, and expose themselves to the "Speedy's" guns, and that they
relied on Neb and Gideon Spilett, watching at the mouth of the river, and on
Cyrus Harding and Herbert, in ambush among the rocks at the Chimneys.

Twenty minutes after the first shots were fired, the boat was less than two
cables-lengths off the Mercy. As the tide was beginning to rise with its
accustomed violence, caused by the narrowness of the straits, the pirates were
drawn towards the river, and it was only by dint of hard rowing that they were
able to keep in the middle of the channel. But, as they were passing within good
range of the mouth of the Mercy, two balls saluted them, and two more of their
number were laid in the bottom of the boat. Neb and Spilett had not missed their


aim.

The brig immediately sent a second ball on the post betrayed by the smoke,
but without any other result than that of splintering the rock.

The boat now contained only three able men. Carried on by the current, it
shot through the channel with the rapidity of an arrow, passed before Harding
and Herbert, who, not thinking it within range, withheld their fire, then, rounding
the northern point of the islet with the two remaining oars, they pulled towards
the brig.

Hitherto the settlers had nothing to complain of. Their adversaries had
certainly had the worst of it. The latter already counted four men seriously
wounded if not dead; they, on the contrary, unwounded, had not missed a shot. If
the pirates continued to attack them in this way, if they renewed their attempt to
land by means of a boat, they could be destroyed one by one.

It was now seen how advantageous the engineer's arrangements had been.
The pirates would think that they had to deal with numerous and well-armed
adversaries, whom they could not easily get the better of.

Half an hour passed before the boat, having to pull against the current, could
get alongside the "Speedy." Frightful cries were heard when they returned on
board with the wounded, and two or three guns were fired with no results.

But now about a dozen other convicts, maddened with rage, and possibly by
the effect of the evening's potations, threw themselves into the boat. A second
boat was also lowered, in which eight men took their places, and while the first
pulled straight for the islet, to dislodge the colonists from thence the second
maneuvered so as to force the entrance of the Mercy.

The situation was evidently becoming very dangerous for Pencroft and
Ayrton, and they saw that they must regain the mainland.

However, they waited till the first boat was within range, when two well-
directed balls threw its crew into disorder. Then, Pencroft and Ayrton,
abandoning their posts, under fire from the dozen muskets, ran across the islet at
full speed, jumped into their boat, crossed the channel at the moment the second
boat reached the southern end, and ran to hide themselves in the Chimneys.

They had scarcely rejoined Cyrus Harding and Herbert, before the islet was
overrun with pirates in every direction. Almost at the same moment, fresh
reports resounded from the Mercy station, to which the second boat was rapidly
approaching. Two, out of the eight men who manned her, were mortally
wounded by Gideon Spilett and Neb, and the boat herself, carried irresistibly
onto the reefs, was stove in at the mouth of the Mercy. But the six survivors,
holding their muskets above their heads to preserve them from contact with the
water, managed to land on the right bank of the river. Then, finding they were


exposed to the fire of the ambush there, they fled in the direction of Flotsam
Point, out of range of the balls.

The actual situation was this: on the islet were a dozen convicts, of whom
some were no doubt wounded, but who had still a boat at their disposal; on the
island were six, but who could not by any possibility reach Granite House, as
they could not cross the river, all the bridges being raised.

"Hallo," exclaimed Pencroft as he rushed into the Chimneys, "hallo, captain!
What do you think of it, now?"

"T think," answered the engineer, "that the combat will now take a new form,
for it cannot be supposed that the convicts will be so foolish as to remain in a
position so unfavorable for them!"

"They won't cross the channel," said the sailor. "Ayrton and Mr. Spilett's
rifles are there to prevent them. You know that they carry more than a mile!"

"No doubt," replied Herbert; "but what can two rifles do against the brig's
guns?"

"Well, the brig isn't in the channel yet, I fancy!" said Pencroft.

"But suppose she does come there?" said Harding.

"That's impossible, for she would risk running aground and being lost!"

"It is possible," said Ayrton. "The convicts might profit by the high tide to
enter the channel, with the risk of grounding at low tide, it is true; but then,
under the fire from her guns, our posts would be no longer tenable."

"Confound them!" exclaimed Pencroft, "it really seems as if the blackguards
were preparing to weigh anchor."

"Perhaps we shall be obliged to take refuge in Granite House!" observed
Herbert.

"We must wait!" answered Cyrus Harding.

"But Mr. Spilett and Neb?" said Pencroft.

"They will know when it is best to rejoin us. Be ready, Ayrton. It is yours and
Spilett's rifles which must speak now."

It was only too true. The "Speedy" was beginning to weigh her anchor, and
her intention was evidently to approach the islet. The tide would be rising for an
hour and a half, and the ebb current being already weakened, it would be easy
for the brig to advance. But as to entering the channel, Pencroft, contrary to
Ayrton's opinion, could not believe that she would dare to attempt it.

In the meanwhile, the pirates who occupied the islet had gradually advanced
to the opposite shore, and were now only separated from the mainland by the
channel.

Being armed with muskets alone, they could do no harm to the settlers, in
ambush at the Chimneys and the mouth of the Mercy; but, not knowing the latter


to be supplied with long-range rifles, they on their side did not believe
themselves to be exposed. Quite uncovered, therefore, they surveyed the islet,
and examined the shore.

Their illusion was of short duration. Ayrton's and Gideon Spilett's rifles then
spoke, and no doubt imparted some very disagreeable intelligence to two of the
convicts, for they fell backwards.

Then there was a general helter-skelter. The ten others, not even stopping to
pick up their dead or wounded companions, fled to the other side of the islet,
tumbled into the boat which had brought them, and pulled away with all their
strength.

"Eight less!" exclaimed Pencroft. "Really, one would have thought that Mr.
Spilett and Ayrton had given the word to fire together!"

"Gentlemen," said Ayrton, as he reloaded his gun, "this is becoming more
serious. The brig is making sail!"

"The anchor is weighed!" exclaimed Pencroft.

"Yes, and she is already moving."

In fact, they could distinctly hear the creaking of the windlass. The "Speedy"
was at first held by her anchor; then, when that had been raised, she began to
drift towards the shore. The wind was blowing from the sea; the jib and the
foretopsail were hoisted, and the vessel gradually approached the island.

From the two posts of the Mercy and the Chimneys they watched her without
giving a sign of life, but not without some emotion. What could be more terrible
for the colonists than to be exposed, at a short distance, to the brig's guns,
without being able to reply with any effect? How could they then prevent the
pirates from landing?

Cyrus Harding felt this strongly, and he asked himself what it would be
possible to do. Before long, he would be called upon for his determination. But
what was it to be? To shut themselves up in Granite House, to be besieged there,
to remain there for weeks, for months even, since they had an abundance of
provisions? So far good! But after that? The pirates would not the less be
masters of the island, which they would ravage at their pleasure, and in time,
they would end by having their revenge on the prisoners in Granite House.

However, one chance yet remained; it was that Bob Harvey, after all, would
not venture his ship into the channel, and that he would keep outside the islet. He
would be still separated from the coast by half a mile, and at that distance his
shot could not be very destructive.

"Never!" repeated Pencroft, "Bob Harvey will never, if he is a good seaman,
enter that channel! He knows well that it would risk the brig, if the sea got up
ever so little! And what would become of him without his vessel?"


In the meanwhile the brig approached the islet, and it could be seen that she
was endeavoring to make the lower end. The breeze was light, and as the current
had then lost much of its force, Bob Harvey had absolute command over his
vessel.

The route previously followed by the boats had allowed her to reconnoiter
the channel, and she boldly entered it.

The pirate's design was now only too evident; he wished to bring her
broadside to bear on the Chimneys and from there to reply with shell and ball to
the shot which had till then decimated her crew.

Soon the "Speedy" reached the point of the islet; she rounded it with ease;
the mainsail was braced up, and the brig hugging the wind, stood across the
mouth of the Mercy.

"The scoundrels! they are coming!" said Pencroft.

At that moment, Cyrus Harding, Ayrton, the sailor, and Herbert, were
rejoined by Neb and Gideon Spilett.

The reporter and his companion had judged it best to abandon the post at the
Mercy, from which they could do nothing against the ship, and they had acted
wisely. It was better that the colonists should be together at the moment when
they were about to engage in a decisive action. Gideon Spilett and Neb had
arrived by dodging behind the rocks, though not without attracting a shower of
bullets, which had not, however, reached them.

"Spilett! Neb!" cried the engineer. "You are not wounded?"

"No," answered the reporter, "a few bruises only from the ricochet! But that
cursed brig has entered the channel!"

"Yes," replied Pencroft, "and in ten minutes she will have anchored before
Granite House!"

"Have you formed any plan, Cyrus?" asked the reporter.

"We must take refuge in Granite House while there is still time, and the
convicts cannot see us."

"That is, my opinion, too," replied Gideon Spilett, "but once shut up--"

"We must be guided by circumstances," said the engineer.

"Let us be off, then, and make haste!" said the reporter.

"Would you not wish, captain, that Ayrton and I should remain here?" asked
the sailor.

"What would be the use of that, Pencroft?" replied Harding. "No. We will not
separate!"

There was not a moment to be lost. The colonists left the Chimneys. A bend
of the cliff prevented them from being seen by those in the brig, but two or three
reports, and the crash of bullets on the rock, told them that the "Speedy" was at


no great distance.

To spring into the lift, hoist themselves up to the door of Granite House,
where Top and Jup had been shut up since the evening before, to rush into the
large room, was the work of a minute only.

It was quite time, for the settlers, through the branches, could see the
"Speedy," surrounded with smoke, gliding up the channel. The firing was
incessant, and shot from the four guns struck blindly, both on the Mercy post,
although it was not occupied, and on the Chimneys. The rocks were splintered,
and cheers accompanied each discharge. However, they were hoping that Granite
House would be spared, thanks to Harding's precaution of concealing the
windows when a shot, piercing the door, penetrated into the passage.

"We are discovered!" exclaimed Pencroft.

The colonists had not, perhaps, been seen, but it was certain that Bob Harvey
had thought proper to send a ball through the suspected foliage which concealed
that part of the cliff. Soon he redoubled his attack, when another ball having torn
away the leafy screen, disclosed a gaping aperture in the granite.

The colonists' situation was desperate. Their retreat was discovered. They
could not oppose any obstacle to these missiles, nor protect the stone, which
flew in splinters around them. There was nothing to be done but to take refuge in
the upper passage of Granite House, and leave their dwelling to be devastated,
when a deep roar was heard, followed by frightful cries!

Cyrus Harding and his companions rushed to one of the windows--

The brig, irresistibly raised on a sort of waterspout, had just split in two, and
in less than ten seconds she was swallowed up with all her criminal crew!


Chapter 4


"She has blown up!" cried Herbert.

"Yes! blown up, just as if Ayrton had set fire to the powder!" returned
Pencroft, throwing himself into the lift together with Neb and the lad.

"But what has happened?" asked Gideon Spilett, quite stunned by this
unexpected catastrophe.

"Oh! this time, we shall know--" answered the engineer quickly.

"What shall we know?--"

"Later! later! Come, Spilett. The main point is that these pirates have been
exterminated!"

And Cyrus Harding, hurrying away the reporter and Ayrton, joined Pencroft,
Neb, and Herbert on the beach.

Nothing could be seen of the brig, not even her masts. After having been
raised by the waterspout, she had fallen on her side, and had sunk in that
position, doubtless in consequence of some enormous leak. But as in that place
the channel was not more than twenty feet in depth, it was certain that the sides
of the submerged brig would reappear at low water.

A few things from the wreck floated on the surface of the water, a raft could
be seen consisting of spare spars, coops of poultry with their occupants still
living, boxes and barrels, which gradually came to the surface, after having
escaped through the hatchways, but no pieces of the wreck appeared, neither
planks from the deck, nor timber from the hull,--which rendered the sudden
disappearance of the "Speedy" perfectly inexplicable.

However, the two masts, which had been broken and escaped from the
shrouds and stays came up, and with their sails, some furled and the others
spread. But it was not necessary to wait for the tide to bring up these riches, and
Ayrton and Pencroft jumped into the boat with the intention of towing the pieces
of wreck either to the beach or to the islet. But just as they were shoving off, an
observation from Gideon Spilett arrested them.

"What about those six convicts who disembarked on the right bank of the
Mercy?" said he.

In fact, it would not do to forget that the six men whose boat had gone to
pieces on the rocks had landed at Flotsam Point.

They looked in that direction. None of the fugitives were visible. It was
probable that, having seen their vessel engulfed in the channel, they had fled into
the interior of the island.


"We will deal with them later," said Harding. "As they are armed, they will
still be dangerous; but as it is six against six, the chances are equal. To the most
pressing business first."

Ayrton and Pencroft pulled vigorously towards the wreck.

The sea was calm and the tide very high, as there had been a new moon but
two days before. A whole hour at least would elapse before the hull of the brig
could emerge from the water of the channel.

Ayrton and Pencroft were able to fasten the masts and spars by means of
ropes, the ends of which were carried to the beach. There, by the united efforts
of the settlers the pieces of wreck were hauled up. Then the boat picked up all
that was floating, coops, barrels, and boxes, which were immediately carried to
the Chimneys.

Several bodies floated also. Among them, Ayrton recognized that of Bob
Harvey, which he pointed out to his companion, saying with some emotion,--

"That is what I have been, Pencroft."

"But what you are no longer, brave Ayrton!" returned the sailor warmly.

It was singular enough that so few bodies floated. Only five or six were
counted, which were already being carried by the current towards the open sea.
Very probably the convicts had not had time to escape, and the ship lying over
on her side, the greater number of them had remained below. Now the current,
by carrying the bodies of these miserable men out to sea, would spare the
colonists the sad task of burying them in some corner of their island.

For two hours, Cyrus Harding and his companions were solely occupied in
hauling up the spars on to the sand, and then in spreading the sails which were
perfectly uninjured, to dry. They spoke little, for they were absorbed in their
work, but what thoughts occupied their minds!

The possession of this brig, or rather all that she contained, was a perfect
mine of wealth. In fact, a ship is like a little world in miniature, and the stores of
the colony would be increased by a large number of useful articles. It would be,
on a large scale, equivalent to the chest found at Flotsam Point.

"And besides," thought Pencroft, "why should it be impossible to refloat the
brig? If she has only a leak, that may be stopped up; a vessel from three to four
hundred tons, why she is a regular ship compared to our 'Bonadventure'! And we
could go a long distance in her! We could go anywhere we liked! Captain
Harding, Ayrton and I must examine her! She would be well worth the trouble!"

In fact, if the brig was still fit to navigate, the colonists' chances of returning
to their native land were singularly increased. But, to decide this important
question, it was necessary to wait until the tide was quite low, so that every part
of the brig's hull might be examined.


When their treasures had been safely conveyed on shore, Harding and his
companions agreed to devote some minutes to breakfast. They were almost
famished; fortunately, the larder was not far off, and Neb was noted for being an
expeditious cook. They breakfasted, therefore, near the Chimneys, and during
their repast, as may be supposed, nothing was talked of but the event which had
so miraculously saved the colony.

"Miraculous is the word," repeated Pencroft, "for it must be acknowledged
that those rascals blew up just at the right moment! Granite House was
beginning to be uncomfortable as a habitation!"

"And can you guess, Pencroft," asked the reporter, "how it happened, or what
can have occasioned the explosion?"

"Oh! Mr. Spilett, nothing is more simple," answered Pencroft. "A convict
vessel is not disciplined like a man-of-war! Convicts are not sailors. Of course
the powder-magazine was open, and as they were firing incessantly, some
careless or clumsy fellow just blew up the vessel!"

"Captain Harding," said Herbert, "what astonishes me is that the explosion
has not produced more effect. The report was not loud, and besides there are so
few planks and timbers torn out. It seems as if the ship had rather foundered than
blown up."

"Does that astonish you, my boy?" asked the engineer.

"Yes, captain."

"And it astonishes me also, Herbert," replied he, "but when we visit the hull
of the brig, we shall no doubt find the explanation of the matter."

"Why, captain,” said Pencroft, "you don't suppose that the 'Speedy' simply
foundered like a ship which has struck on a rock?"

"Why not," observed Neb, "if there are rocks in the channel?"

"Nonsense, Neb," answered Pencroft, "you did not look at the right moment.
An instant before she sank, the brig, as I saw perfectly well, rose on an enormous
wave, and fell back on her larboard side. Now, if she had only struck, she would
have sunk quietly and gone to the bottom like an honest vessel."

"It was just because she was not an honest vessel!" returned Neb.

"Well, we shall soon see, Pencroft," said the engineer.

"We shall soon see," rejoined the sailor, "but I would wager my head there
are no rocks in the channel. Look here, captain, to speak candidly, do you mean
to say that there is anything marvelous in the occurrence?"

Cyrus Harding did not answer.

"At any rate," said Gideon Spilett, "whether rock or explosion, you will
agree, Pencroft, that it occurred just in the nick of time!"

"Yes! yes!" replied the sailor, "but that is not the question. I ask Captain


Harding if he sees anything supernatural in all this."

"I cannot say, Pencroft," said the engineer. "That is all the answer I can
make."

A reply which did not satisfy Pencroft at all. He stuck to "an explosion," and
did not wish to give it up. He would never consent to admit that in that channel,
with its fine sandy bed, just like the beach, which he had often crossed at low
water, there could be an unknown rock.

And besides, at the time the brig foundered, it was high water, that is to say,
there was enough water to carry the vessel clear over any rocks which would not
be uncovered at low tide. Therefore, there could not have been a collision.
Therefore, the vessel had not struck. So she had blown up.

And it must be confessed that the sailor's arguments were reasonable.

Towards half-past one, the colonists embarked in the boat to visit the wreck.
It was to be regretted that the brig's two boats had not been saved; but one, as has
been said, had gone to pieces at the mouth of the Mercy, and was absolutely
useless; the other had disappeared when the brig went down, and had not again
been seen, having doubtless been crushed.

The hull of the "Speedy" was just beginning to issue from the water. The brig
was lying right over on her side, for her masts being broken, pressed down by
the weight of the ballast displaced by the shock, the keel was visible along her
whole length. She had been regularly turned over by the inexplicable but
frightful submarine action, which had been at the same time manifested by an
enormous waterspout.

The settlers rowed round the hull, and in proportion as the tide went down,
they could ascertain, if not the cause which had occasioned the catastrophe, at
least the effect produced.

Towards the bows, on both sides of the keel, seven or eight feet from the
beginning of the stem, the sides of the brig were frightfully torn. Over a length
of at least twenty feet there opened two large leaks, which would be impossible
to stop up. Not only had the copper sheathing and the planks disappeared,
reduced, no doubt, to powder, but also the ribs, the iron bolts, and treenalls
which united them. From the entire length of the hull to the stern the false keel
had been separated with an unaccountable violence, and the keel itself, torn from
the carline in several places, was split in all its length.

"T've a notion!" exclaimed Pencroft, "that this vessel will be difficult to get
afloat again."

"Tt will be impossible," said Ayrton.

"At any rate," observed Gideon Spilett to the sailor, "the explosion, if there
has been one, has produced singular effects! It has split the lower part of the hull,


instead of blowing up the deck and topsides! These great rents appear rather to
have been made by a rock than by the explosion of a powder-magazine."

"There is not a rock in the channel!" answered the sailor. "I will admit
anything you like, except the rock."

"Let us try to penetrate into the interior of the brig," said the engineer;
"perhaps we shall then know what to think of the cause of her destruction."

This was the best thing to be done, and it was agreed, besides, to take an
inventory of all the treasures on board, and to arrange their preservation.

Access to the interior of the brig was now easy. The tide was still going
down and the deck was practicable. The ballast, composed of heavy masses of
iron, had broken through in several places. The noise of the sea could be heard
as it rushed out at the holes in the hull.

Cyrus Harding and his companions, hatchets in hand, advanced along the
shattered deck. Cases of all sorts encumbered it, and, as they had been but a very
short time in the water, their contents were perhaps uninjured.

They then busied themselves in placing all this cargo in safety. The water
would not return for several hours, and these hours must be employed in the
most profitable way. Ayrton and Pencroft had, at the entrance made in the hull,
discovered tackle, which would serve to hoist up the barrels and chests. The boat
received them and transported them to the shore. They took the articles as they
came, intending to sort them afterwards.

At any rate, the settlers saw at once, with extreme satisfaction, that the brig
possessed a very varied cargo--an assortment of all sorts of articles, utensils,
manufactured goods, and tools--such as the ships which make the great coasting-
trade of Polynesia are usually laden with. It was probable that they would find a
little of everything, and they agreed that it was exactly what was necessary for
the colony of Lincoln Island.

However--and Cyrus Harding observed it in silent astonishment--not only, as
has been said, had the hull of the brig enormously suffered from the shock,
whatever it was, that had occasioned the catastrophe, but the interior
arrangements had been destroyed, especially towards the bows. Partitions and
stanchions were smashed, as if some tremendous shell had burst in the interior of
the brig. The colonists could easily go fore and aft, after having removed the
cases as they were extricated. They were not heavy bales, which would have
been difficult to remove, but simple packages, of which the stowage, besides,
was no longer recognizable.

The colonists then reached the stern of the brig--the part formerly
surmounted by the poop. It was there that, following Ayrton's directions, they
must look for the powder-magazine. Cyrus Harding thought that it had not


exploded; that it was possible some barrels might be saved, and that the powder,
which is usually enclosed in metal coverings might not have suffered from
contact with the water.

This, in fact, was just what had happened. They extricated from among a
large number of shot twenty barrels, the insides of which were lined with copper.
Pencroft was convinced by the evidence of his own eyes that the destruction of
the "Speedy" could not be attributed to an explosion. That part of the hull in
which the magazine was situated was, moreover, that which had suffered least.

"It may be so," said the obstinate sailor; "but as to a rock, there is not one in
the channel!"

"Then, how did it happen?" asked Herbert.

"IT don't know," answered Pencroft, "Captain Harding doesn't know, and
nobody knows or ever will know!"

Several hours had passed during these researches, and the tide began to flow.
Work must be suspended for the present. There was no fear of the brig being
carried away by the sea, for she was already fixed as firmly as if moored by her
anchors.

They could, therefore, without inconvenience, wait until the next day to
resume operations; but, as to the vessel itself, she was doomed, and it would be
best to hasten to save the remains of her hull, as she would not be long in
disappearing in the quicksands of the channel.

It was now five o'clock in the evening. It had been a hard day's work for the
men. They ate with good appetite, and notwithstanding their fatigue, they could
not resist, after dinner, their desire of inspecting the cases which composed the
cargo of the "Speedy."

Most of them contained clothes, which, as may be believed, was well
received. There were enough to clothe a whole colony--linen for every one's use,
shoes for every one's feet.

"We are too rich!" exclaimed Pencroft, "But what are we going to do with all
this?"

And every moment burst forth the hurrahs of the delighted sailor when he
caught sight of the barrels of gunpowder, firearms and sidearms, balls of cotton,
implements of husbandry, carpenter's, joiner's, and blacksmith's tools, and boxes
of all kinds of seeds, not in the least injured by their short sojourn in the water.
Ah, two years before, how these things would have been prized! And now, even
though the industrious colonists had provided themselves with tools, these
treasures would find their use.

There was no want of space in the storerooms of Granite House, but that
daytime would not allow them to stow away the whole. It would not do also to


forget that the six survivors of the "Speedy's" crew had landed on the island, for
they were in all probability scoundrels of the deepest dye, and it was necessary
that the colonists should be on their guard against them. Although the bridges
over the Mercy were raised, the convicts would not be stopped by a river or a
stream and, rendered desperate, these wretches would be capable of anything.

They would see later what plan it would be best to follow; but in the
meantime it was necessary to mount guard over cases and packages heaped up
near the Chimneys, and thus the settlers employed themselves in turn during the
night.

The morning came, however, without the convicts having attempted any
attack. Master Jup and Top, on guard at the foot of Granite House, would have
quickly given the alarm. The three following day--the 19th, 20th, and 21st of
October--were employed in saving everything of value, or of any use whatever,
either from the cargo or rigging of the brig. At low tide they overhauled the
hold--at high tide they stowed away the rescued articles. A great part of the
copper sheathing had been torn from the hull, which every day sank lower. But
before the sand had swallowed the heavy things which had fallen through the
bottom, Ayrton and Pencroft, diving to the bed of the channel, recovered the
chains and anchors of the brig, the iron of her ballast, and even four guns, which,
floated by means of empty casks, were brought to shore.

It may be seen that the arsenal of the colony had gained by the wreck, as well
as the storerooms of Granite House. Pencroft, always enthusiastic in his projects,
already spoke of constructing a battery to command the channel and the mouth
of the river. With four guns, he engaged to prevent any fleet, "however powerful
it might be," from venturing into the waters of Lincoln Island!

In the meantime, when nothing remained of the brig but a useless hulk, bad
weather came on, which soon finished her. Cyrus Harding had intended to blow
her up, so as to collect the remains on the shore, but a strong gale from the
northeast and a heavy sea compelled him to economize his powder.

In fact, on the night of the 23rd, the hull entirely broke up, and some of the
wreck was cast up on the beach.

As to the papers on board, it is useless to say that, although he carefully
searched the lockers of the poop, Harding did not discover any trace of them.
The pirates had evidently destroyed everything that concerned either the captain
or the owners of the "Speedy," and, as the name of her port was not painted on
her counter, there was nothing which would tell them her nationality. However,
by the shape of her boats Ayrton and Pencroft believed that the brig was of
English build.

A week after the castrophe--or, rather, after the fortunate, though


inexplicable, event to which the colony owed its preservation--nothing more
could be seen of the vessel, even at low tide. The wreck had disappeared, and
Granite House was enriched by nearly all it had contained.

However, the mystery which enveloped its strange destruction would
doubtless never have been cleared away if, on the 30th of November, Neb,
strolling on the beach, had not found a piece of a thick iron cylinder, bearing
traces of explosion. The edges of this cylinder were twisted and broken, as if
they had been subjected to the action of some explosive substance.

Neb brought this piece of metal to his master, who was then occupied with
his companions in the workshop of the Chimneys.

Cyrus Harding examined the cylinder attentively, then, turning to Pencroft,--

"You persist, my friend," said he, "in maintaining that the 'Speedy' was not
lost in consequence of a collision?"

"Yes, captain,” answered the sailor. "You know as well as I do that there are
no rocks in the channel."

"But suppose she had run against this piece of iron?" said the engineer,
showing the broken cylinder.

"What, that bit of pipe!" exclaimed Pencroft in a tone of perfect incredulity.

"My friends," resumed Harding, "you remember that before she foundered
the brig rose on the summit of a regular waterspout?"

"Yes, captain," replied Herbert.

"Well, would you like to know what occasioned that waterspout? It was this,"
said the engineer, holding up the broken tube.

"That?" returned Pencroft.

"Yes! This cylinder is all that remains of a torpedo!"

"A torpedo!" exclaimed the engineer's companions.

"And who put the torpedo there?" demanded Pencroft, who did not like to
yield.

"All that I can tell you is, that it was not I," answered Cyrus Harding; "but it
was there, and you have been able to judge of its incomparable power!"


Chapter 5


So, then, all was explained by the submarine explosion of this torpedo. Cyrus
Harding could not be mistaken, as, during the war of the Union, he had had
occasion to try these terrible engines of destruction. It was under the action of
this cylinder, charged with some explosive substance, nitro-glycerine, picrate, or
some other material of the same nature, that the water of the channel had been
raised like a dome, the bottom of the brig crushed in, and she had sunk instantly,
the damage done to her hull being so considerable that it was impossible to
refloat her. The "Speedy" had not been able to withstand a torpedo that would
have destroyed an ironclad as easily as a fishing-boat!

Yes! all was explained, everything--except the presence of the torpedo in the
waters of the channel!

"My friends, then," said Cyrus Harding, "we can no longer be in doubt as to
the presence of a mysterious being, a castaway like us, perhaps, abandoned on
our island, and I say this in order that Ayrton may be acquainted with all the
strange events which have occurred during these two years. Who this beneficent
stranger is, whose intervention has, so fortunately for us, been manifested on
many occasions, I cannot imagine. What his object can be in acting thus, in
concealing himself after rendering us so many services, I cannot understand: But
his services are not the less real, and are of such a nature that only a man
possessed of prodigious power, could render them. Ayrton is indebted to him as
much as we are, for, if it was the stranger who saved me from the waves after the
fall from the balloon, evidently it was he who wrote the document, who placed
the bottle in the channel, and who has made known to us the situation of our
companion. I will add that it was he who guided that chest, provided with
everything we wanted, and stranded it on Flotsam Point; that it was he who
lighted that fire on the heights of the island, which permitted you to land; that it
was he who fired that bullet found in the body of the peccary; that it was he who
plunged that torpedo into the channel, which destroyed the brig; in a word, that
all those inexplicable events, for which we could not assign a reason, are due to
this mysterious being. Therefore, whoever he may be, whether shipwrecked, or
exiled on our island, we shall be ungrateful, if we think ourselves freed from
gratitude towards him. We have contracted a debt, and I hope that we shall one
day pay it."

"You are right in speaking thus, my dear Cyrus," replied Gideon Spilett.
"Yes, there is an almost all-powerful being, hidden in some part of the island,


and whose influence has been singularly useful to our colony. I will add that the
unknown appears to possess means of action which border on the supernatural, if
in the events of practical life the supernatural were recognizable. Is it he who is
in secret communication with us by the well in Granite House, and has he thus a
knowledge of all our plans? Was it he who threw us that bottle, when the vessel
made her first cruise? Was it he who threw Top out of the lake, and killed the
dugong? Was it he, who as everything leads us to believe, saved you from the
waves, and that under circumstances in which any one else would not have been
able to act? If it was he, he possesses a power which renders him master of the
elements."


The reporter's reasoning was just, and every one felt it to be so.

"Yes," rejoined Cyrus Harding, "if the intervention of a human being is not
more questionable for us, I agree that he has at his disposal means of action
beyond those possessed by humanity. There is a mystery still, but if we discover
the man, the mystery will be discovered also. The question, then, is, ought we to
respect the incognito of this generous being, or ought we to do everything to find
him out? What is your opinion on the matter?"

"My opinion," said Pencroft, "is that, whoever he may be, he is a brave man,
and he has my esteem!"

"Be it so," answered Harding, "but that is not an answer, Pencroft."

"Master," then said Neb, "my idea is, that we may search as long as we like
for this gentleman whom you are talking about, but that we shall not discover
him till he pleases."

"That's not bad, what you say, Neb," observed Pencroft.

"IT am of Neb's opinion," said Gideon Spilett, "but that is no reason for not
attempting the adventure. Whether we find this mysterious being or not, we shall
at least have fulfilled our duty towards him."

"And you, my boy, give us your opinion," said the engineer, turning to
Herbert.

"Oh," cried Herbert, his countenance full of animation, "how I should like to
thank him, he who saved you first, and who has now saved us!"

"Of course, my boy," replied Pencroft, "so would I and all of us. I am not
inquisitive, but I would give one of my eyes to see this individual face to face! It
seems to me that he must be handsome, tall, strong, with a splendid beard,
radiant hair, and that he must be seated on clouds, a great ball in his hands!"

"But, Pencroft," answered Spilett, "you are describing a picture of the
Creator."

"Possibly, Mr. Spilett," replied the sailor, "but that is how I imagine him!"

"And you, Ayrton?" asked the engineer.

"Captain Harding," replied Ayrton, "I can give you no better advice in this
matter. Whatever you do will be best; when you wish me to join you in your
researches, I am ready to follow you.

"I thank you, Ayrton," answered Cyrus Harding, "but I should like a more
direct answer to the question I put to you. You are our companion; you have
already endangered your life several times for us, and you, as well as the rest,
ought to be consulted in the matter of any important decision. Speak, therefore."

"Captain Harding," replied Ayrton, "I think that we ought to do everything to
discover this unknown benefactor. Perhaps he is alone. Perhaps he is suffering.
Perhaps he has a life to be renewed. I, too, as you said, have a debt of gratitude


to pay him. It was he, it could be only he who must have come to Tabor Island,
who found there the wretch you knew, and who made known to you that there
was an unfortunate man there to be saved. Therefore it is, thanks to him, that I
have become a man again. No, I will never forget him!"

"That is settled, then," said Cyrus Harding. "We will begin our researches as
soon as possible. We will not leave a corner of the island unexplored. We will
search into its most secret recesses, and will hope that our unknown friend will
pardon us in consideration of our intentions!"

For several days the colonists were actively employed in haymaking and the
harvest. Before putting their project of exploring the yet unknown parts of the
island into execution, they wished to get all possible work finished. It was also
the time for collecting the various vegetables from the Tabor Island plants. All
was stowed away, and happily there was no want of room in Granite House, in
which they might have housed all the treasures of the island. The products of the
colony were there, methodically arranged, and in a safe place, as may be
believed, sheltered as much from animals as from man.

There was no fear of damp in the middle of that thick mass of granite. Many
natural excavations situated in the upper passage were enlarged either by pick-
axe or mine, and Granite House thus became a general warehouse, containing all
the provisions, arms, tools, and spare utensils--in a word, all the stores of the
colony.

As to the guns obtained from the brig, they were pretty pieces of ordnance,
which, at Pencroft's entreaty, were hoisted by means of tackle and pulleys, right
up into Granite House; embrasures were made between the windows, and the
shining muzzles of the guns could soon be seen through the granite cliff. From
this height they commanded all Union Bay. It was like a little Gibraltar, and any
vessel anchored off the islet would inevitably be exposed to the fire of this aerial
battery.

"Captain," said Pencroft one day, it was the 8th of November, "now that our
fortifications are finished, it would be a good thing if we tried the range of our
guns."

"Do you think that is useful?" asked the engineer.

"It is more than useful, it is necessary! Without that how are we to know to
what distance we can send one of those pretty shot with which we are provided?"

"Try them, Pencroft," replied the engineer. "However, I think that in making
the experiment, we ought to employ, not the ordinary powder, the supply of
which, I think, should remain untouched, but the pyroxyle which will never fail
us."

"Can the cannon support the shock of the pyroxyle?" asked the reporter, who


was not less anxious than Pencroft to try the artillery of Granite House.

"I believe so. However," added the engineer, "we will be prudent." The
engineer was right in thinking that the guns were of excellent make. Made of
forged steel, and breech-loaders, they ought consequently to be able to bear a
considerable charge, and also have an enormous range. In fact, as regards
practical effect, the transit described by the ball ought to be as extended as
possible, and this tension could only be obtained under the condition that the
projectile should be impelled with a very great initial velocity.

"Now," said Harding to his companions, "the initial velocity is in proportion
to the quantity of powder used. In the fabrication of these pieces, everything
depends on employing a metal with the highest possible power of resistance, and
steel is incontestably that metal of all others which resists the best. I have,
therefore, reason to believe that our guns will bear without risk the expansion of
the pyroxyle gas, and will give excellent results."

"We shall be a great deal more certain of that when we have tried them!"
answered Pencroft.

It is unnecessary to say that the four cannons were in perfect order. Since
they had been taken from the water, the sailor had bestowed great care upon
them. How many hours he had spent, in rubbing, greasing, and polishing them,
and in cleaning the mechanism! And now the pieces were as brilliant as if they
had been on board a frigate of the United States Navy.

On this day, therefore, in presence of all the members of the colony,
including Master Jup and Top, the four cannon were successively tried. They
were charged with pyroxyle, taking into consideration its explosive power,
which, as has been said, is four times that of ordinary powder: the projectile to
be fired was cylindroconic.

Pencroft, holding the end of the quick-match, stood ready to fire.

At Harding's signal, he fired. The shot, passing over the islet, fell into the sea
at a distance which could not be calculated with exactitude.

The second gun was pointed at the rocks at the end of Flotsam Point, and the
shot striking a sharp rock nearly three miles from Granite House, made it fly into
splinters. It was Herbert who had pointed this gun and fired it, and very proud he
was of his first shot. Pencroft only was prouder than he! Such a shot, the honor
of which belonged to his dear boy.

The third shot, aimed this time at the downs forming the upper side of Union
Bay, struck the sand at a distance of four miles, then having ricocheted: was lost
in the sea in a cloud of spray.

For the fourth piece Cyrus Harding slightly increased the charge, so as to try
its extreme range. Then, all standing aside for fear of its bursting, the match was


lighted by means of a long cord.

A tremendous report was heard, but the piece had held good, and the
colonists rushing to the windows, saw the shot graze the rocks of Mandible
Cape, nearly five miles from Granite House, and disappear in Shark Gulf.

"Well, captain,” exclaimed Pencroft, whose cheers might have rivaled the
reports themselves, "what do you say of our battery? All the pirates in the Pacific
have only to present themselves before Granite House! Not one can land there
now without our permission!"

"Believe me, Pencroft," replied the engineer, "it would be better not to have
to make the experiment."

"Well," said the sailor, "what ought to be done with regard to those six
villains who are roaming about the island? Are we to leave them to overrun our
forests, our fields, our plantations? These pirates are regular jaguars, and it
seems to me we ought not to hesitate to treat them as such! What do you think,
Ayrton?" added Pencroft, turning to his companion.

Ayrton hesitated at first to reply, and Cyrus Harding regretted that Pencroft
had so thoughtlessly put this question. And he was much moved when Ayrton
replied in a humble tone,--

"I have been one of those jaguars, Mr. Pencroft. I have no right to speak."

And with a slow step he walked away.

Pencroft understood.

"What a brute I am!" he exclaimed. "Poor Ayrton! He has as much right to
speak here as any one!"

"Yes," said Gideon Spilett, "but his reserve does him honor, and it is right to
respect the feeling which he has about his sad past."

"Certainly, Mr. Spilett," answered the sailor, "and there is no fear of my
doing so again. I would rather bite my tongue off than cause Ayrton any pain!
But to return to the question. It seems to me that these ruffians have no right to
any pity, and that we ought to rid the island of them as soon as possible."

"Is that your opinion, Pencroft?" asked the engineer.

"Quite my opinion."

"And before hunting them mercilessly, you would not wait until they had
committed some fresh act of hostility against us?"

"Isn't what they have done already enough?" asked Pencroft, who did not
understand these scruples.

"They may adopt other sentiments!" said Harding, "and perhaps repent."

"They repent!" exclaimed the sailor, shrugging his shoulders.

"Pencroft, think of Ayrton!" said Herbert, taking the sailor's hand. "He
became an honest man again!"


Pencroft looked at his companions one after the other. He had never thought
of his proposal being met with any objection. His rough nature could not allow
that they ought to come to terms with the rascals who had landed on the island
with Bob Harvey's accomplices, the murderers of the crew of the "Speedy," and
he looked upon them as wild beasts which ought to be destroyed without delay
and without remorse.

"Come!" said be. "Everybody is against me! You wish to be generous to
those villains! Very well; I hope we mayn't repent it!"

"What danger shall we run," said Herbert, "if we take care to be always on
our guard?"

"Hum!" observed the reporter, who had not given any decided opinion.
"They are six and well armed. If they each lay hid in a corner, and each fired at
one of us, they would soon be masters of the colony!"

"Why have they not done so?" said Herbert. "No doubt because it was not
their interest to do it. Besides, we are six also."

"Well, well!" replied Pencroft, whom no reasoning could have convinced.
"Let us leave these good people to do what they like, and don't think anything
more about them!"

"Come, Pencroft," said Neb, "don't make yourself out so bad as all that!
Suppose one of these unfortunate men were here before you, within good range
of your guns, you would not fire."

"I would fire on him as I would on a mad dog, Neb," replied Pencroft coldly.

"Pencroft," said the engineer, "you have always shown much deference to
my advice; will you, in this matter, yield to me?"

"I will do as you please, Captain Harding," answered the sailor, who was not
at all convinced.

"Very well, wait, and we will not attack them unless we are attacked first."

Thus their behavior towards the pirates was agreed upon, although Pencroft
augured nothing good from it. They were not to attack them, but were to be on
their guard. After all, the island was large and fertile. If any sentiment of honesty
yet remained in the bottom of their hearts, these wretches might perhaps be
reclaimed. Was it not their interest in the situation in which they found
themselves to begin a new life? At any rate, for humanity's sake alone, it would
be right to wait. The colonists would no longer as before, be able to go and come
without fear. Hitherto they had only wild beasts to guard against, and now six
convicts of the worst description, perhaps, were roaming over their island. It was
serious, certainly, and to less brave men, it would have been security lost! No
matter! At present, the colonists had reason on their side against Pencroft. Would
they be right in the future? That remained to be seen.


Chapter 6


However, the chief business of the colonists was to make that complete
exploration of the island which had been decided upon, and which would have
two objects: to discover the mysterious being whose existence was now
indisputable, and at the same time to find out what had become of the pirates,
what retreat they had chosen, what sort of life they were leading, and what was
to be feared from them. Cyrus Harding wished to set out without delay; but as
the expedition would be of some days duration, it appeared best to load the cart
with different materials and tools in order to facilitate the organization of the
encampments. One of the onagers, however, having hurt its leg, could not be
harnessed at present, and a few days' rest was necessary. The departure was,
therefore, put off for a week, until the 20th of November. The month of
November in this latitude corresponds to the month of May in the northern
zones. It was, therefore, the fine season. The sun was entering the tropic of
Capricorn, and gave the longest days in the year. The time was, therefore, very
favorable for the projected expedition, which, if it did not accomplish its
principal object, would at any rate be fruitful in discoveries, especially of natural
productions, since Harding proposed to explore those dense forests of the Far
West, which stretched to the extremity of the Serpentine Peninsula.

During the nine days which preceded their departure, it was agreed that the
work on Prospect Heights should be finished off.

Moreover, it was necessary for Ayrton to return to the corral, where the
domesticated animals required his care. It was decided that he should spend two
days there, and return to Granite House after having liberally supplied the
stables.

As he was about to start, Harding asked him if he would not like one of them
to accompany him, observing that the island was less safe than formerly. Ayrton
replied that this was unnecessary, as he was enough for the work, and that
besides he apprehended no danger. If anything occurred at the corral, or in the
neighborhood, he could instantly warn the colonists by sending a telegram to
Granite House.

Ayrton departed at dawn on the 9th, taking the cart drawn by one onager, and
two hours after, the electric wire announced that he had found all in order at the
corral.

During these two days Harding busied himself in executing a project which
would completely guard Granite House against any surprise. It was necessary to


completely conceal the opening of the old outlet, which was already walled up
and partly hidden under grass and plants, at the southern angle of Lake Grant.
Nothing was easier, since if the level of the lake was raised two or three feet, the
opening would be quite beneath it. Now, to raise this level they had only to
establish a dam at the two openings made by the lake, and by which were fed
Creek Glycerine and Falls River.

The colonists worked with a will, and the two dams which besides did not
exceed eight feet in width by three in height, were rapidly erected by means of
well-cemented blocks of stone.

This work finished, it would have been impossible to guess that at that part
of the lake, there existed a subterranean passage through which the overflow of
the lake formerly escaped.

Of course the little stream which fed the reservoir of Granite House and
worked the lift, had been carefully preserved, and the water could not fail. The
lift once raised, this sure and comfortable retreat would be safe from any
surprise.

This work had been so quickly done, that Pencroft, Gideon Spilett, and
Herbert found time to make an expedition to Port Balloon, The sailor was very
anxious to know if the little creek in which the "Bonadventure" was moored, had
been visited by the convicts.

"These gentlemen," he observed, "landed on the south coast, and if they
followed the shore, it is to be feared that they may have discovered the little
harbor, and in that case, I wouldn't give half-a-dollar for our 'Bonadventure.""

Pencroft's apprehensions were not without foundation, and a visit to Port
Balloon appeared to be very desirable. The sailor and his companions set off on
the 10th of November, after dinner, well armed. Pencroft, ostentatiously slipping
two bullets into each barrel of his rifle, shook his head in a way which betokened
nothing good to any one who approached too near him, whether "man or beast,"
as he said. Gideon Spilett and Herbert also took their guns, and about three
o'clock all three left Granite House.

Neb accompanied them to the turn of the Mercy, and after they had crossed,
he raised the bridge. It was agreed that a gunshot should announce the colonists’
return, and that at the signal Neb should return and reestablish the
communication between the two banks of the river.

The little band advanced directly along the road which led to the southern
coast of the island. This was only a distance of three miles and a half, but Gideon
Spilett and his companions took two hours to traverse it. They examined all the
border of the road, the thick forest, as well as Tabor Marsh. They found no trace
of the fugitives who, no doubt, not having yet discovered the number of the


colonists, or the means of defense which they had at their disposal, had gained
the less accessible parts of the island.

Arrived at Port Balloon, Pencroft saw with extreme satisfaction that the
"Bonadventure" was tranquilly floating in the narrow creek. However, Port
Balloon was so well hidden among high rocks, that it could scarcely be
discovered either from the land or the sea.

"Come," said Pencroft, "the blackguards have not been there yet. Long grass
suits reptiles best, and evidently we shall find them in the Far West."

"And it's very lucky, for if they had found the 'Bonadventure'," added
Herbert, "they would have gone off in her, and we should have been prevented
from returning to Tabor Island."

"Indeed," remarked the reporter, "it will be important to take a document
there which will make known the situation of Lincoln Island, and Ayrton's new
residence, in case the Scotch yacht returns to fetch him."

"Well, the 'Bonadventure' is always there, Mr. Spilett," answered the sailor.
"She and her crew are ready to start at a moment's notice!"

"IT think, Pencroft, that that is a thing to be done after our exploration of the
island is finished. It is possible after all that the stranger, if we manage to find
him, may know as much about Tabor Island as about Lincoln Island. Do not
forget that he is certainly the author of the document, and he may, perhaps, know
how far we may count on the return of the yacht!"

"But!" exclaimed Pencroft, "who in the world can he be? The fellow knows
us and we know nothing about him! If he is a simple castaway, why should he
conceal himself! We are honest men, I suppose, and the society of honest men
isn't unpleasant to any one. Did he come here voluntarily? Can he leave the
island if he likes? Is he here still? Will he remain any longer?"

Chatting thus, Pencroft, Gideon Spilett, and Herbert got on board and looked
about the deck of the "Bonadventure." All at once, the sailor having examined
the bitts to which the cable of the anchor was secured,--

"Hallo," he cried, "this is queer!"

"What is the matter, Pencroft?" asked the reporter.

"The matter is, that it was not I who made this knot!"

And Pencroft showed a rope which fastened the cable to the bitt itself.

"What, it was not you?" asked Gideon Spilett.

"No! I can swear to it. This is a reef knot, and I always make a running
bowline."

"You must be mistaken, Pencroft."

"IT am not mistaken!" declared the sailor. "My hand does it so naturally, and
one's hand is never mistaken!"


"Then can the convicts have been on board?" asked Herbert.

"I know nothing about that," answered Pencroft, "but what is certain, is that
some one has weighed the 'Bonadventure's' anchor and dropped it again! And
look here, here is another proof! The cable of the anchor has been run out, and
its service is no longer at the hawse-hole. I repeat that some one has been using
our vessel!"

"But if the convicts had used her, they would have pillaged her, or rather
gone off with her."

"Gone off! where to--to Tabor Island?" replied Pencroft. "Do you think, they
would risk themselves in a boat of such small tonnage?"

"We must, besides, be sure that they know of the islet," rejoined the reporter.

"However that may be," said the sailor, "as sure as my name is Bonadventure
Pencroft, of the Vineyard, our 'Bonadventure' has sailed without us!"

The sailor was positive that neither Gideon Spilett nor Herbert could dispute
his statement. It was evident that the vessel had been moved, more or less, since
Pencroft had brought her to Port Balloon. As to the sailor, he had not the
slightest doubt that the anchor had been raised and then dropped again. Now,
what was the use of these two maneuvers, unless the vessel had been employed
in some expedition?

"But how was it we did not see the 'Bonadventure' pass in the sight of the
island?" observed the reporter, who was anxious to bring forward every possible
objection.

"Why, Mr. Spilett," replied the sailor, "they would only have to start in the
night with a good breeze, and they would be out of sight of the island in two
hours."

"Well," resumed Gideon Spilett, "I ask again, what object could the convicts
have had in using the 'Bonadventure,' and why, after they had made use of her,
should they have brought her back to port?"

"Why, Mr. Spilett," replied the sailor, "we must put that among the
unaccountable things, and not think anything more about it. The chief thing is
that the 'Bonadventure' was there, and she is there now. Only, unfortunately, if
the convicts take her a second time, we shall very likely not find her again in her
place!"

"Then, Pencroft," said Herbert, "would it not be wisest to bring the
‘Bonadventure' off to Granite House?"

"Yes and no," answered Pencroft, "or rather no. The mouth of the Mercy is a
bad place for a vessel, and the sea is heavy there."

"But by hauling her up on the sand, to the foot of the Chimneys?"

"Perhaps yes," replied Pencroft. "At any rate, since we must leave Granite


House for a long expedition, I think the "Bonadventure' will be safer here during
our absence, and we shall do best to leave her here until the island is rid of these
blackguards."

"That is exactly my opinion," said the reporter. "At any rate in the event of
bad weather, she will not be exposed here as she would be at the mouth of the
Mercy."

"But suppose the convicts pay her another visit," said Herbert.

"Well, my boy," replied Pencroft, "not finding her here, they would not be
long in finding her on the sands of Granite House, and, during our absence,
nothing could hinder them from seizing her! I agree, therefore, with Mr. Spilett,
that she must be left in Port Balloon. But, if on our return we have not rid the
island of those rascals, it will be prudent to bring our boat to Granite House,
until the time when we need not fear any unpleasant visits."

"That's settled. Let us be off," said the reporter.

Pencroft, Herbert, and Gideon Spilett, on their return to Granite House, told
the engineer all that had passed, and the latter approved of their arrangements
both for the present and the future. He also promised the sailor that he would
study that part of the channel situated between the islet and the coast, so as to
ascertain if it would not be possible to make an artificial harbor there by means
of dams. In this way, the "Bonadventure" would be always within reach, under
the eyes of the colonists, and if necessary, under lock and key.

That evening a telegram was sent to Ayrton, requesting him to bring from the
corral a couple of goats, which Neb wished to acclimatize to the plateau.
Singularly enough, Ayrton did not acknowledge the receipt of the despatch, as he
was accustomed to do. This could not but astonish the engineer. But it might be
that Ayrton was not at that moment in the corral, or even that he was on his way
back to Granite House. In fact, two days had already passed since his departure,
and it had been decided that on the evening of the 10th or at the latest the
morning of the 11th, he should return. The colonists waited, therefore, for Ayrton
to appear on Prospect Heights. Neb and Herbert even watched at the bridge so as
to be ready to lower it the moment their companion presented himself.

But up to ten in the evening, there were no signs of Ayrton. It was, therefore,
judged best to send a fresh despatch, requiring an immediate reply.

The bell of the telegraph at Granite House remained mute.

The colonists' uneasiness was great. What had happened? Was Ayrton no
longer at the corral, or if he was still there, had he no longer control over his
movements? Could they go to the corral in this dark night?

They consulted. Some wished to go, the others to remain.

"But," said Herbert, "perhaps some accident has happened to the telegraphic


apparatus, so that it works no longer?"

"That may be," said the reporter.

"Wait till tomorrow," replied Cyrus Harding. "It is possible, indeed, that
Ayrton has not received our despatch, or even that we have not received his."

They waited, of course not without some anxiety.

At dawn of day, the 11th of November, Harding again sent the electric
current along the wire and received no reply.

He tried again: the same result.

"Off to the corral," said he.

"And well armed!" added Pencroft.

It was immediately decided that Granite House should not be left alone and
that Neb should remain there. After having accompanied his friends to Creek
Glycerine, he raised the bridge; and waiting behind a tree he watched for the
return of either his companions or Ayrton.

In the event of the pirates presenting themselves and attempting to force the
passage, he was to endeavor to stop them by firing on them, and as a last
resource he was to take refuge in Granite House, where, the lift once raised, he
would be in safety.

Cyrus Harding, Gideon Spilett, Herbert, and Pencroft were to repair to the
corral, and if they did not find Ayrton, search the neighboring woods.

At six o'clock in the morning, the engineer and his three companions had
passed Creek Glycerine, and Neb posted himself behind a small mound crowned
by several dragon trees, on the left bank of the stream.

The colonists, after leaving the plateau of Prospect Heights, immediately
took the road to the corral. They shouldered their guns, ready to fire on the
slightest hostile demonstration. The two rifles and the two guns had been loaded
with ball.

The wood was thick on each side of the road and might easily have
concealed the convicts, who owing to their weapons would have been really
formidable.

The colonists walked rapidly and in silence. Top preceded them, sometimes
running on the road, sometimes taking a ramble into the wood, but always quiet
and not appearing to fear anything unusual. And they could be sure that the
faithful dog would not allow them to be surprised, but would bark at the least
appearance of danger.

Cyrus Harding and his companions followed beside the road the wire which
connected the corral with Granite House. After walking for nearly two miles,
they had not as yet discovered any explanation of the difficulty. The posts were
in good order, the wire regularly extended. However, at that moment the


engineer observed that the wire appeared to be slack, and on arriving at post No.
74, Herbert, who was in advance stopped, exclaiming,--

"The wire is broken!"

His companions hurried forward and arrived at the spot where the lad was
standing. The post was rooted up and lying across the path. The unexpected
explanation of the difficulty was here, and it was evident that the despatches
from Granite House had not been received at the corral, nor those from the corral
at Granite House.

"Tt wasn't the wind that blew down this post," observed Pencroft.

"No," replied Gideon Spilett. "The earth has been dug up round its foot, and
it has been torn up by the hand of man."

"Besides, the wire is broken," added Herbert, showing that the wire had been
snapped.

"Is the fracture recent?" asked Harding.

"Yes," answered Herbert, "it has certainly been done quite lately."

"To the corral! to the corral!" exclaimed the sailor.

The colonists were now half way between Granite House and the corral,
having still two miles and a half to go. They pressed forward with redoubled
speed.

Indeed, it was to be feared that some serious accident had occurred in the
corral. No doubt, Ayrton might have sent a telegram which had not arrived, but
this was not the reason why his companions were so uneasy, for, a more
unaccountable circumstance, Ayrton, who had promised to return the evening
before, had not reappeared. In short, it was not without a motive that all
communication had been stopped between the corral and Granite House, and
who but the convicts could have any interest in interrupting this communication?

The settlers hastened on, their hearts oppressed with anxiety. They were
sincerely attached to their new companion. Were they to find him struck down
by the hands of those of whom he was formerly the leader?

Soon they arrived at the place where the road led along the side of the little
stream which flowed from the Red Creek and watered the meadows of the
corral. They then moderated their pace so that they should not be out of breath at
the moment when a struggle might be necessary. Their guns were in their hands
ready cocked. The forest was watched on every side. Top uttered sullen groans
which were rather ominous.

At last the palisade appeared through the trees. No trace of any damage could
be seen. The gate was shut as usual. Deep silence reigned in the corral. Neither
the accustomed bleating of the sheep nor Ayrton's voice could be heard.

"Let us enter," said Cyrus Harding.


And the engineer advanced, while his companions, keeping watch about
twenty paces behind him, were ready to fire at a moment's notice.

Harding raised the inner latch of the gate and was about to push it back,
when Top barked loudly. A report sounded and was responded to by a cry of
pain.

Herbert, struck by a bullet, lay stretched on the ground.


Chapter 7


At Herbert's cry, Pencroft, letting his gun fall, rushed towards him.

"They have killed him!" he cried. "My boy! They have killed him!"

Cyrus Harding and Gideon Spilett ran to Herbert.

The reporter listened to ascertain if the poor lad's heart was still beating.

"He lives," said he, "but he must be carried--"

"To Granite House? that is impossible!" replied the engineer.

"Into the corral, then!" said Pencroft.

"In a moment," said Harding.

And he ran round the left corner of the palisade. There he found a convict,
who aiming at him, sent a ball through his hat. In a few seconds, before he had
even time to fire his second barrel, he fell, struck to the heart by Harding's
dagger, more sure even than his gun.

During this time, Gideon Spilett and the sailor hoisted themselves over the
palisade, leaped into the enclosure, threw down the props which supported the
inner door, ran into the empty house, and soon, poor Herbert was lying on
Ayrton's bed. In a few moments, Harding was by his side.

On seeing Herbert senseless, the sailor's grief was terrible.

He sobbed, he cried, he tried to beat his head against the wall.

Neither the engineer nor the reporter could calm him. They themselves were
choked with emotion. They could not speak.

However, they knew that it depended on them to rescue from death the poor
boy who was suffering beneath their eyes. Gideon Spilett had not passed through
the many incidents by which his life had been checkered without acquiring some
slight knowledge of medicine. He knew a little of everything, and several times
he had been obliged to attend to wounds produced either by a sword-bayonet or
shot. Assisted by Cyrus Harding, he proceeded to render the aid Herbert
required.

The reporter was immediately struck by the complete stupor in which
Herbert lay, a stupor owing either to the hemorrhage, or to the shock, the ball
having struck a bone with sufficient force to produce a violent concussion.

Herbert was deadly pale, and his pulse so feeble that Spilett only felt it beat
at long intervals, as if it was on the point of stopping.

These symptoms were very serious.

Herbert's chest was laid bare, and the blood having been stanched with
handkerchiefs, it was bathed with cold water.


The contusion, or rather the contused wound appeared,--an oval below the
chest between the third and fourth ribs. It was there that Herbert had been hit by
the bullet.

Cyrus Harding and Gideon Spilett then turned the poor boy over; as they did
so, he uttered a moan so feeble that they almost thought it was his last sigh.

Herberts back was covered with blood from another contused wound, by
which the ball had immediately escaped.

"God be praised!" said the reporter, "the ball is not in the body, and we shall
not have to extract it."

"But the heart?" asked Harding.

"The heart has not been touched; if it had been, Herbert would be dead!"

"Dead!" exclaimed Pencroft, with a groan.

The sailor had only heard the last words uttered by the reporter.

"No, Pencroft," replied Cyrus Harding, "no! He is not dead. His pulse still
beats. He has even uttered a moan. But for your boy's sake, calm yourself. We
have need of all our self-possession."

"Do not make us lose it, my friend."

Pencroft was silent, but a reaction set in, and great tears rolled down his
cheeks.

In the meanwhile, Gideon Spilett endeavored to collect his ideas, and
proceed methodically. After his examination he had no doubt that the ball,
entering in front, between the seventh and eighth ribs, had issued behind
between the third and fourth. But what mischief had the ball committed in its
passage? What important organs had been reached? A professional surgeon
would have had difficulty in determining this at once, and still more so the
reporter.

However, he knew one thing, this was that he would have to prevent the
inflammatory strangulation of the injured parts, then to contend with the local
inflammation and fever which would result from the wound, perhaps mortal!
Now, what styptics, what antiphiogistics ought to be employed? By what means
could inflammation be prevented?

At any rate, the most important thing was that the two wounds should be
dressed without delay. It did not appear necessary to Gideon Spilett that a fresh
flow of blood should be caused by bathing them in tepid water, and compressing
their lips. The hemorrhage had been very abundant, and Herbert was already too
much enfeebled by the loss of blood.

The reporter, therefore, thought it best to simply bathe the two wounds with
cold water.

Herbert was placed on his left side, and was maintained in that position.


"He must not be moved." said Gideon Spilett. "He is in the most favorable
position for the wounds in his back and chest to suppurate easily, and absolute
rest is necessary."

"What! can't we carry him to Granite House?" asked Pencroft.

"No, Pencroft," replied the reporter.

"T'll pay the villains off!" cried the sailor, shaking his fist in a menacing
manner.

"Pencroft!" said Cyrus Harding.

Gideon Spilett had resumed his examination of the wounded boy. Herbert
was still so frightfully pale, that the reporter felt anxious.

"Cyrus," said he, "I am not a surgeon. I am in terrible perplexity. You must
aid me with your advice, your experience!"

"Take courage, my friend," answered the engineer, pressing the reporter's
hand. "Judge coolly. Think only of this: Herbert must be saved!"

These words restored to Gideon Spilett that self-possession which he had lost
in a moment of discouragement on feeling his great responsibility. He seated
himself close to the bed. Cyrus Harding stood near. Pencroft had torn up his
shirt, and was mechanically making lint.

Spilett then explained to Cyrus Harding that he thought he ought first of all
to stop the hemorrhage, but not close the two wounds, or cause their immediate
cicatrization, for there had been internal perforation, and the suppuration must
not be allowed to accumulate in the chest.

Harding approved entirely, and it was decided that the two wounds should be
dressed without attempting to close them by immediate coaptation.

And now did the colonists possess an efficacious agent to act against the
inflammation which might occur?

Yes. They had one, for nature had generously lavished it. They had cold
water, that is to say, the most powerful sedative that can be employed against
inflammation of wounds, the most efficacious therapeutic agent in grave cases,
and the one which is now adopted by all physicians. Cold water has, moreover,
the advantage of leaving the wound in absolute rest, and preserving it from all
premature dressing, a considerable advantage, since it has been found by
experience that contact with the air is dangerous during the first days.

Gideon Spilett and Cyrus Harding reasoned thus with their simple good
sense, and they acted as the best surgeon would have done. Compresses of linen
were applied to poor Herbert's two wounds, and were kept constantly wet with
cold water.

The sailor had at first lighted a fire in the hut, which was not wanting in
things necessary for life. Maple sugar, medicinal plants, the same which the lad


had gathered on the banks of Lake Grant, enabled them to make some refreshing
drinks, which they gave him without his taking any notice of it. His fever was
extremely high, and all that day and night passed without his becoming
conscious.

Herbert's life hung on a thread, and this thread might break at any moment.
The next day, the 12th of November, the hopes of Harding and his companions
slightly revived. Herbert had come out of his long stupor. He opened his eyes, he
recognized Cyrus Harding, the reporter, and Pencroft. He uttered two or three
words. He did not know what had happened. They told him, and Spilett begged
him to remain perfectly still, telling him that his life was not in danger, and that
his wounds would heal in a few days. However, Herbert scarcely suffered at all,
and the cold water with which they were constantly bathed, prevented any
inflammation of the wounds. The suppuration was established in a regular way,
the fever did not increase, and it might now be hoped that this terrible wound
would not involve any catastrophe. Pencroft felt the swelling of his heart
gradually subside. He was like a sister of mercy, like a mother by the bed of her
child.

Herbert dozed again, but his sleep appeared more natural.

"Tell me again that you hope, Mr. Spilett," said Pencroft. "Tell me again that
you will save Herbert!"

"Yes, we will save him!" replied the reporter. "The wound is serious, and,
perhaps, even the ball has traversed the lungs, but the perforation of this organ is
not fatal."

"God bless you!" answered Pencroft.

As may be believed, during the four-and-twenty hours they had been in the
corral, the colonists had no other thought than that of nursing Herbert. They did
not think either of the danger which threatened them should the convicts return,
or of the precautions to be taken for the future.

But on this day, while Pencroft watched by the sick-bed, Cyrus Harding and
the reporter consulted as to what it would be best to do.

First of all they examined the corral. There was not a trace of Ayrton. Had
the unhappy man been dragged away by his former accomplices? Had he
resisted, and been overcome in the struggle? This last supposition was only too
probable. Gideon Spilett, at the moment he scaled the palisade, had clearly seen
some one of the convicts running along the southern spur of Mount Franklin,
towards whom Top had sprung. It was one of those whose object had been so
completely defeated by the rocks at the mouth of the Mercy. Besides, the one
killed by Harding, and whose body was found outside the enclosure, of course
belonged to Bob Harvey's crew.


As to the corral, it had not suffered any damage. The gates were closed, and
the animals had not been able to disperse in the forest. Nor could they see traces
of any struggle, any devastation, either in the hut, or in the palisade. The
ammunition only, with which Ayrton had been supplied, had disappeared with
him.

"The unhappy man has been surprised," said Harding, "and as he was a man
to defend himself, he must have been overpowered."

"Yes, that is to be feared!" said the reporter. "Then, doubtless, the convicts
installed themselves in the corral where they found plenty of everything, and
only fled when they saw us coming. It is very evident, too, that at this moment
Ayrton, whether living or dead, is not here!"

"We shall have to beat the forest," said the engineer, "and rid the island of
these wretches. Pencroft's presentiments were not mistaken, when he wished to
hunt them as wild beasts. That would have spared us all these misfortunes!"

"Yes," answered the reporter, "but now we have the right to be merciless!"

"At any rate," said the engineer, "we are obliged to wait some time, and to
remain at the corral until we can carry Herbert without danger to Granite
House."

"But Neb?" asked the reporter.

"Neb is in safety."

"But if, uneasy at our absence, he would venture to come?"

"He must not come!" returned Cyrus Harding quickly. "He would be
murdered on the road!"

"It is very probable, however, that he will attempt to rejoin us!"

"Ah, if the telegraph still acted, he might be warned! But that is impossible
now! As to leaving Pencroft and Herbert here alone, we could not do it! Well, I
will go alone to Granite House."

"No, no! Cyrus," answered the reporter, "you must not expose yourself! Your
courage would be of no avail. The villains are evidently watching the corral,
they are hidden in the thick woods which surround it, and if you go we shall
soon have to regret two misfortunes instead of one!"

"But Neb?" repeated the engineer. "It is now four-and-twenty hours since he
has had any news of us! He will be sure to come!"

"And as he will be less on his guard than we should be ourselves," added
Spilett, "he will be killed!"

"Is there really no way of warning him?"

While the engineer thought, his eyes fell on Top, who, going backwards and
forwards seemed to say,--

"Am not I here?"


"Top!" exclaimed Cyrus Harding.

The animal sprang at his master's call.

"Yes, Top will go," said the reporter, who had understood the engineer.

"Top can go where we cannot! He will carry to Granite House the news of
the corral, and he will bring back to us that from Granite House!"

"Quick!" said Harding. "Quick!"

Spilett rapidly tore a leaf from his note-book, and wrote these words:--

"Herbert wounded. We are at the corral. Be on your guard. Do not leave
Granite House. Have the convicts appeared in the neighborhood? Reply by Top."

This laconic note contained all that Neb ought to know, and at the same time
asked all that the colonists wished to know. It was folded and fastened to Top's
collar in a conspicuous position.

"Top, my dog," said the engineer, caressing the animal, "Neb, Top! Neb! Go,
go!"

Top bounded at these words. He understood, he knew what was expected of
him. The road to the corral was familiar to him. In less than an hour he could
clear it, and it might be hoped that where neither Cyrus Harding nor the reporter
could have ventured without danger, Top, running among the grass or in the
wood, would pass unperceived.

The engineer went to the gate of the corral and opened it.

"Neb, Top! Neb!" repeated the engineer, again pointing in the direction of
Granite House.

Top sprang forwards, then almost immediately disappeared.

"He will get there!" said the reporter.

"Yes, and he will come back, the faithful animal!"

"What o'clock is it?" asked Gideon Spilett.

"Ten."

"In an hour he may be here. We will watch for his return."

The gate of the corral was closed. The engineer and the reporter re-entered
the house. Herbert was still in a sleep. Pencroft kept the compresser always wet.
Spilett, seeing there was nothing he could do at that moment, busied himself in
preparing some nourishment, while attentively watching that part of the
enclosure against the hill, at which an attack might be expected.

The settlers awaited Top's return with much anxiety. A little before eleven
o'clock, Cyrus Harding and the reporter, rifle in hand, were behind the gate,
ready to open it at the first bark of their dog.

They did not doubt that if Top had arrived safely at Granite House, Neb
would have sent him back immediately.

They had both been there for about ten minutes, when a report was heard,


followed by repeated barks.

The engineer opened the gate, and seeing smoke a hundred feet off in the
wood, he fired in that direction.

Almost immediately Top bounded into the corral, and the gate was quickly
shut.

"Top, Top!" exclaimed the engineer, taking the dog's great honest head
between his hands.

A note was fastened to his neck, and Cyrus Harding read these words, traced
in Neb's large writing:--"No pirates in the neighborhood of Granite House. I will
not stir. Poor Mr. Herbert!"


Chapter 8


So the convicts were still there, watching the corral, and determined to kill
the settlers one after the other. There was nothing to be done but to treat them as
wild beasts. But great precautions must be taken, for just now the wretches had
the advantage on their side, seeing, and not being seen, being able to surprise by
the suddenness of their attack, yet not to be surprised themselves. Harding made
arrangements, therefore, for living in the corral, of which the provisions would
last for a tolerable length of time. Ayrton's house had been provided with all that
was necessary for existence, and the convicts, scared by the arrival of the
settlers, had not had time to pillage it. It was probable, as Gideon Spilett
observed, that things had occurred as follows:

The six convicts, disembarking on the island, had followed the southern
shore, and after having traversed the double shore of the Serpentine Peninsula,
not being inclined to venture into the Far West woods, they had reached the
mouth of Falls River. From this point, by following the right bank of the
watercourse, they would arrive at the spurs of Mount Franklin, among which
they would naturally seek a retreat, and they could not have been long in
discovering the corral, then uninhabited. There they had regularly installed
themselves, awaiting the moment to put their abominable schemes into
execution. Ayrton's arrival had surprised them, but they had managed to
overpower the unfortunate man, and--the rest may be easily imagined!

Now, the convicts,--reduced to five, it is true, but well armed,--were roaming
the woods, and to venture there was to expose themselves to their attacks, which
could be neither guarded against nor prevented.

"Wait! There is nothing else to be done!" repeated Cyrus Harding. "When
Herbert is cured, we can organize a general battle of the island, and have
satisfaction of these convicts. That will be the object of our grand expedition at
the same time--"

"As the search for our mysterious protector," added Gideon Spilett, finishing
the engineer's sentence. "And it must be acknowledged, my dear Cyrus, that this
time his protection was wanting at the very moment when it was most necessary
to us!"

"Who knows?" replied the engineer.

"What do you mean?" asked the reporter.

"That we are not at the end of our trouble yet, my dear Spilett, and that his
powerful intervention may have another opportunity of exercising itself. But that


is not the question now. Herbert's life before everything."

This was the colonists’ saddest thought. Several days passed, and the poor
boy's state was happily no worse. Cold water, always kept at a suitable
temperature, had completely prevented the inflammation of the wounds. It even
seemed to the reporter that this water, being slightly sulphurous,--which was
explained by the neighborhood of the volcano, had a more direct action on the
healing. The suppuration was much less abundant, and thanks to the incessant
care by which he was surrounded!--Herbert returned to life, and his fever abated.
He was besides subjected to a severe diet, and consequently his weakness was
and would be extreme; but there was no want of refreshing drinks, and absolute
rest was of the greatest benefit to him. Cyrus Harding, Gideon Spilett, and
Pencroft had become very skilful in dressing the lad's wounds. All the linen in
the house had been sacrificed. Herbert's wounds, covered with compresses and
lint, were pressed neither too much nor too little, so as to cause their cicatrization
without effecting any inflammatory reaction. The reporter used extreme care in
the dressing, knowing well the importance of it, and repeating to his companions
that which most surgeons willingly admit, that it is perhaps rarer to see a
dressing well done than an operation well performed.

In ten days, on the 22nd of November, Herbert was considerably better. He
had begun to take some nourishment.

The color was returning to his cheeks, and his bright eyes smiled at his
nurses. He talked a little, notwithstanding Pencroft's efforts, who talked
incessantly to prevent him from beginning to speak, and told him the most
improbable stories. Herbert had questioned him on the subject of Ayrton, whom
he was astonished not to see near him, thinking that he was at the corral. But the
sailor, not wishing to distress Herbert, contented himself by replying that Ayrton
had rejoined Neb, so as to defend Granite House.

"Humph!" said Pencroft, "these pirates! they are gentlemen who have no
right to any consideration! And the captain wanted to win them by kindness! I'll
send them some kindness, but in the shape of a good bullet!"

"And have they not been seen again?" asked Herbert.

"No, my boy," answered the sailor, "but we shall find them, and when you
are cured we shall see if the cowards who strike us from behind will dare to meet
us face to face!"

"T am still very weak, my poor Pencroft!"

"Well! your strength will return gradually! What's a ball through the chest?
Nothing but a joke! I've seen many, and I don't think much of them!"

At last things appeared to be going on well, and if no complication occurred,
Herbert's recovery might be regarded as certain. But what would have been the


condition of the colonists if his state had been aggravated,--if, for example, the
ball had remained in his body, if his arm or his leg had had to be amputated?

"No," said Spilett more than once, "I have never thought of such a
contingency without shuddering!"

"And yet, if it had been necessary to operate," said Harding one day to him,
"you would not have hesitated?"

"No, Cyrus!" said Gideon Spilett, "but thank God that we have been spared
this complication!"

As in so many other conjectures, the colonists had appealed to the logic of
that simple good sense of which they had made use so often, and once more,
thanks to their general knowledge, it had succeeded! But might not a time come
when all their science would be at fault? They were alone on the island. Now,
men in all states of society are necessary to each other. Cyrus Harding knew this
well, and sometimes he asked if some circumstance might not occur which they
would be powerless to surmount. It appeared to him besides, that he and his
companions, till then so fortunate, had entered into an unlucky period. During
the two years and a half which had elapsed since their escape from Richmond, it
might be said that they had had everything their own way. The island had
abundantly supplied them with minerals, vegetables, animals, and as Nature had
constantly loaded them, their science had known how to take advantage of what
she offered them.

The wellbeing of the colony was therefore complete. Moreover, in certain
occurrences an inexplicable influence had come to their aid!... But all that could
only be for a time.

In short, Cyrus Harding believed that fortune had turned against them.

In fact, the convicts' ship had appeared in the waters of the island, and if the
pirates had been, so to speak, miraculously destroyed, six of them, at least, had
escaped the catastrophe. They had disembarked on the island, and it was almost
impossible to get at the five who survived. Ayrton had no doubt been murdered
by these wretches, who possessed firearms, and at the first use that they had
made of them, Herbert had fallen, wounded almost mortally. Were these the first
blows aimed by adverse fortune at the colonists? This was often asked by
Harding. This was often repeated by the reporter; and it appeared to him also
that the intervention, so strange, yet so efficacious, which till then had served
them so well, had now failed them. Had this mysterious being, whatever he was,
whose existence could not be denied, abandoned the island? Had he in his turn
succumbed?

No reply was possible to these questions. But it must not be imagined that
because Harding and his companions spoke of these things, they were men to


despair. Far from that. They looked their situation in the face, they analyzed the
chances, they prepared themselves for any event, they stood firm and straight
before the future, and if adversity was at last to strike them, it would find in them
men prepared to struggle against it.


Chapter 9


The convalescence of the young invalid was regularly progressing. One thing
only was now to be desired, that his state would allow him to be brought to
Granite House. However well built and supplied the corral house was, it could
not be so comfortable as the healthy granite dwelling. Besides, it did not offer
the same security, and its tenants, notwithstanding their watchfulness, were here
always in fear of some shot from the convicts. There, on the contrary, in the
middle of that impregnable and inaccessible cliff, they would have nothing to
fear, and any attack on their persons would certainly fail. They therefore waited
impatiently for the moment when Herbert might be moved without danger from
his wound, and they were determined to make this move, although the
communication through Jacamar Wood was very difficult.

They had no news from Neb, but were not uneasy on that account. The
courageous Negro, well entrenched in the depths of Granite House, would not
allow himself to be surprised. Top had not been sent again to him, as it appeared
useless to expose the faithful dog to some shot which might deprive the settlers
of their most useful auxiliary.

They waited, therefore, although they were anxious to be reunited at Granite
House. It pained the engineer to see his forces divided, for it gave great
advantage to the pirates. Since Ayrton's disappearance they were only four
against five, for Herbert could not yet be counted, and this was not the least care
of the brave boy, who well understood the trouble of which he was the cause.

The question of knowing how, in their condition, they were to act against the
pirates, was thoroughly discussed on the 29th of November by Cyrus Harding,
Gideon Spilett, and Pencroft, at a moment when Herbert was asleep and could
not hear them.

"My friends," said the reporter, after they had talked of Neb and of the
impossibility of communicating with him, "I think,--like you, that to venture on
the road to the corral would be to risk receiving a gunshot without being able to
return it. But do you not think that the best thing to be done now is to openly
give chase to these wretches?"

"That is just what I was thinking," answered Pencroft. "I believe we're not
fellows to be afraid of a bullet, and as for me, if Captain Harding approves, I'm
ready to dash into the forest! Why, hang it, one man is equal to another!"

"But is he equal to five?" asked the engineer.

"I will join Pencroft," said the reporter, "and both of us, well-armed and


accompanied by Top--"

"My dear Spilett, and you, Pencroft," answered Harding, "let us reason
coolly. If the convicts were hid in one spot of the island, if we knew that spot,
and had only to dislodge them, I would undertake a direct attack; but is there not
occasion to fear, on the contrary, that they are sure to fire the first shot?"

"Well, captain,” cried Pencroft, "a bullet does not always reach its mark."

"That which struck Herbert did not miss, Pencroft," replied the engineer.
"Besides, observe that if both of you left the corral I should remain here alone to
defend it. Do you imagine that the convicts will not see you leave it, that they
will not allow you to enter the forest, and that they will not attack it during your
absence, knowing that there is no one here but a wounded boy and a man?"

"You are right, captain," replied Pencroft, his chest swelling with sullen
anger. "You are right; they will do all they can to retake the corral, which they
know to be well stored; and alone you could not hold it against them."

"Oh, if we were only at Granite House!"

"If we were at Granite House," answered the engineer, "the case would be
very different. There I should not be afraid to leave Herbert with one, while the
other three went to search the forests of the island. But we are at the corral, and
it is best to stay here until we can leave it together."

Cyrus Harding's reasoning was unanswerable, and his companions
understood it well.

"If only Ayrton was still one of us!" said Gideon Spilett. "Poor fellow! his
return to social life will have been but of short duration."

"If he is dead," added Pencroft, in a peculiar tone.

"Do you hope, then, Pencroft, that the villains have spared him?" asked
Gideon Spilett.

"Yes, if they had any interest in doing so."

"What! you suppose that Ayrton finding his old companions, forgetting all
that he owes us--"

"Who knows?" answered the sailor, who did not hazard this shameful
supposition without hesitating.

"Pencroft," said Harding, taking the sailor's arm, "that is a wicked idea of
yours, and you will distress me much if you persist in speaking thus. I will
answer for Ayrton's fidelity."

"And I also," added the reporter quickly.

"Yes, yes, captain, I was wrong," replied Pencroft; "it was a wicked idea
indeed that I had, and nothing justifies it. But what can I do? I'm not in my
senses. This imprisonment in the corral wearies me horribly, and I have never
felt so excited as I do now.


"Be patient, Pencroft," replied the engineer. "How long will it be, my dear
Spilett, before you think Herbert may be carried to Granite House?"

"That is difficult to say, Cyrus," answered the reporter, "for any imprudence
might involve terrible consequences. But his convalescence is progressing, and if
he continues to gain strength, in eight days from now--well, we shall see."

Eight days! That would put off the return to Granite House until the first
days of December. At this time two months of spring had already passed. The
weather was fine, and the heat began to be great. The forests of the island were
in full leaf, and the time was approaching when the usual crops ought to be
gathered. The return to the plateau of Prospect Heights would, therefore, be
followed by extensive agricultural labors, interrupted only by the projected
expedition through the island.

It can, therefore, be well understood how injurious this seclusion in the corral
must have been to the colonists.

But if they were compelled to bow before necessity, they did not do so
without impatience.

Once or twice the reporter ventured out into the road and made the tour of
the palisade. Top accompanied him, and Gideon Spilett, his gun cocked, was
ready for any emergency.

He met with no misadventure and found no suspicious traces. His dog would
have warned him of any danger, and, as Top did not bark, it might be concluded
that there was nothing to fear at the moment at least, and that the convicts were
occupied in another part of the island.

However, on his second sortie, on the 27th of November, Gideon Spilett,
who had ventured a quarter of a mile into the woods, towards the south of the
mountain, remarked that Top scented something. The dog had no longer his
unconcerned manner; he went backwards and forwards, ferreting among the
grass and bushes as if his smell had revealed some suspicious object to him.

Gideon Spilett followed Top, encouraged him, excited him by his voice,
while keeping a sharp look-out, his gun ready to fire, and sheltering himself
behind the trees. It was not probable that Top scented the presence of man, for in
that case, he would have announced it by half-uttered, sullen, angry barks. Now,
as he did not growl, it was because danger was neither near nor approaching.

Nearly five minutes passed thus, Top rummaging, the reporter following him
prudently when, all at once, the dog rushed towards a thick bush, and drew out a
rag.

It was a piece of cloth, stained and torn, which Spilett immediately brought
back to the corral. There it was examined by the colonists, who found that it was
a fragment of Ayrton's waistcoat, a piece of that felt, manufactured solely by the


Granite House factory.

"You see, Pencroft," observed Harding, "there has been resistance on the part
of the unfortunate Ayrton. The convicts have dragged him away in spite of
himself! Do you still doubt his honesty?"

"No, captain,” answered the sailor, "and I repented of my suspicion a long
time ago! But it seems to me that something may be learned from the incident."

"What is that?" asked the reporter.

"It is that Ayrton was not killed at the corral! That they dragged him away
living, since he has resisted. Therefore, perhaps, he is still living!"

"Perhaps, indeed," replied the engineer, who remained thoughtful.

This was a hope, to which Ayrton's companions could still hold. Indeed, they
had before believed that, surprised in the corral, Ayrton had fallen by a bullet, as
Herbert had fallen. But if the convicts had not killed him at first, if they had
brought him living to another part of the island, might it not be admitted that he
was still their prisoner? Perhaps, even, one of them had found in Ayrton his old
Australian companion Ben Joyce, the chief of the escaped convicts. And who
knows but that they had conceived the impossible hope of bringing back Ayrton
to themselves? He would have been very useful to them, if they had been able to
make him turn traitor!

This incident was, therefore, favorably interpreted at the corral, and it no
longer appeared impossible that they should find Ayrton again. On his side, if he
was only a prisoner, Ayrton would no doubt do all he could to escape from the
hands of the villains, and this would be a powerful aid to the settlers!

"At any rate," observed Gideon Spilett, "if happily Ayrton did manage to
escape, he would go directly to Granite House, for he could not know of the
attempted assassination of which Herbert has been a victim, and consequently
would never think of our being imprisoned in the corral."

"Oh! I wish that he was there, at Granite House!" cried Pencroft, "and that
we were there, too! For, although the rascals can do nothing to our house, they
may plunder the plateau, our plantations, our poultry-yard!"

Pencroft had become a thorough farmer, heartily attached to his crops. But it
must be said that Herbert was more anxious than any to return to Granite House,
for he knew how much the presence of the settlers was needed there. And it was
he who was keeping them at the corral! Therefore, one idea occupied his mind--
to leave the corral, and when! He believed he could bear removal to Granite
House. He was sure his strength would return more quickly in his room, with the
air and sight of the sea!

Several times he pressed Gideon Spilett, but the latter, fearing, with good
reason, that Herbert's wounds, half healed, might reopen on the way, did not give


the order to start.

However, something occurred which compelled Cyrus Harding and his two
friends to yield to the lad's wish, and God alone knew that this determination
might cause them grief and remorse.

It was the 29th of November, seven o'clock in the evening. The three settlers
were talking in Herbert's room, when they heard Top utter quick barks.

Harding, Pencroft, and Spilett seized their guns and ran out of the house.
Top, at the foot of the palisade, was jumping, barking, but it was with pleasure,
not anger.

"Some one is coming.”

"Yes."

"It is not an enemy!"

"Neb, perhaps?”

"Or Ayrton?"

These words had hardly been exchanged between the engineer and his two
companions when a body leaped over the palisade and fell on the ground inside
the corral.

It was Jup, Master Jup in person, to whom Top immediately gave a most
cordial reception.

"Jup!" exclaimed Pencroft.

"Neb has sent him to us," said the reporter.

"Then," replied the engineer, "he must have some note on him."

Pencroft rushed up to the orang. Certainly if Neb had any important matter to
communicate to his master he could not employ a more sure or more rapid
messenger, who could pass where neither the colonists could, nor even Top
himself.

Cyrus Harding was not mistaken. At Jup's neck hung a small bag, and in this
bag was found a little note traced by Neb's hand.

The despair of Harding and his companions may be imagined when they read
these words:--

"Friday, six o'clock in the morning.

"Plateau invaded by convicts.

"Neb."

They gazed at each other without uttering a word, then they re-entered the
house. What were they to do? The convicts on Prospect Heights! that was
disaster, devastation, ruin.

Herbert, on seeing the engineer, the reporter, and Pencroft re-enter, guessed
that their situation was aggravated, and when he saw Jup, he no longer doubted
that some misfortune menaced Granite House.


"Captain Harding," said he, "I must go; I can bear the journey. I must go."

Gideon Spilett approached Herbert; then, having looked at him,--

"Let us go, then!" said he.

The question was quickly decided whether Herbert should be carried on a
litter or in the cart which had brought Ayrton to the corral. The motion of the
litter would have been more easy for the wounded lad, but it would have
necessitated two bearers, that is to say, there would have been two guns less for
defense if an attack was made on the road. Would they not, on the contrary, by
employing the cart leave every arm free? Was it impossible to place the mattress
on which Herbert was lying in it, and to advance with so much care that any jolt
should be avoided? It could be done.

The cart was brought. Pencroft harnessed the onager. Cyrus Harding and the
reporter raised Herbert's mattress and placed it on the bottom of the cart. The
weather was fine. The sun's bright rays glanced through the trees.

"Are the guns ready?" asked Cyrus Harding.

They were. The engineer and Pencroft, each armed with a double-barreled
gun, and Gideon Spilett carrying his rifle, had nothing to do but start.

"Are you comfortable, Herbert?" asked the engineer.

"Ah, captain," replied the lad, "don't be uneasy, I shall not die on the road!"

While speaking thus, it could be seen that the poor boy had called up all his
energy, and by the energy of a powerful will had collected his failing strength.

The engineer felt his heart sink painfully. He still hesitated to give the signal
for departure; but that would have driven Herbert to despair--killed him perhaps.

"Forward!" said Harding.

The gate of the corral was opened. Jup and Top, who knew when to be silent,
ran in advance. The cart came out, the gate was reclosed, and the onager, led by
Pencroft, advanced at a slow pace.

Certainly, it would have been safer to have taken a different road than that
which led straight from the corral to Granite House, but the cart would have met
with great difficulties in moving under the trees. It was necessary, therefore, to
follow this way, although it was well known to the convicts.

Cyrus Harding and Gideon Spilett walked one on each side of the cart, ready
to answer to any attack. However, it was not probable that the convicts would
have yet left the plateau of Prospect Heights.

Neb's note had evidently been written and sent as soon as the convicts had
shown themselves there. Now, this note was dated six o'clock in the morning,
and the active orang, accustomed to come frequently to the corral, had taken
scarcely three quarters of an hour to cross the five miles which separated it from
Granite House. They would, therefore, be safe at that time, and if there was any


occasion for firing, it would probably not be until they were in the neighborhood
of Granite House. However, the colonists kept a strict watch. Top and Jup, the
latter armed with his club, sometimes in front, sometimes beating the wood at
the sides of the road, signalized no danger.

The cart advanced slowly under Pencroft's guidance. It had left the corral at
half-past seven. An hour after, four out of the five miles had been cleared,
without any incident having occurred. The road was as deserted as all that part of
the Jacamar Wood which lay between the Mercy and the lake. There was no
occasion for any warning. The wood appeared as deserted as on the day when
the colonists first landed on the island.

They approached the plateau. Another mile and they would see the bridge
over Creek Glycerine. Cyrus Harding expected to find it in its place; supposing
that the convicts would have crossed it, and that, after having passed one of the
streams which enclosed the plateau, they would have taken the precaution to
lower it again, so as to keep open a retreat.

At length an opening in the trees allowed the sea-horizon to be seen. But the
cart continued its progress, for not one of its defenders thought of abandoning it.

At that moment Pencroft stopped the onager, and in a hoarse voice,--

"Oh! the villains!" he exclaimed.

And he pointed to a thick smoke rising from the mill, the sheds, and the
buildings at the poultry-yard.

A man was moving about in the midst of the smoke. It was Neb.

His companions uttered a shout. He heard, and ran to meet them.

The convicts had left the plateau nearly half-an-hour before, having
devastated it!

"And Mr. Herbert?" asked Neb.

Gideon Spilett returned to the cart.

Herbert had lost consciousness!


Chapter 10


Of the convicts, the dangers which menaced Granite House, the ruins with
which the plateau was covered, the colonists thought no longer. Herbert's critical
State outweighed all other considerations. Would the removal prove fatal to him
by causing some internal injury? The reporter could not affirm it, but he and his
companions almost despaired of the result. The cart was brought to the bend of
the river. There some branches, disposed as a liner, received the mattress on
which lay the unconscious Herbert. Ten minutes after, Cyrus Harding, Spilett,
and Pencroft were at the foot of the cliff, leaving Neb to take the cart on to the
plateau of Prospect Heights. The lift was put in motion, and Herbert was soon
stretched on his bed in Granite House.

What cares were lavished on him to bring him back to life! He smiled for a
moment on finding himself in his room, but could scarcely even murmur a few
words, so great was his weakness. Gideon Spilett examined his wounds. He
feared to find them reopened, having been imperfectly healed. There was
nothing of the sort. From whence, then, came this prostration? why was Herbert
so much worse? The lad then fell into a kind of feverish sleep, and the reporter
and Pencroft remained near the bed. During this time, Harding told Neb all that
had happened at the corral, and Neb recounted to his master the events of which
the plateau had just been the theater.

It was only during the preceding night that the convicts had appeared on the
edge of the forest, at the approaches to Creek Glycerine. Neb, who was watching
near the poultry-yard, had not hesitated to fire at one of the pirates, who was
about to cross the stream; but in the darkness he could not tell whether the man
had been hit or not. At any rate, it was not enough to frighten away the band, and
Neb had only just time to get up to Granite House, where at least he was in
safety.

But what was he to do there? How prevent the devastations with which the
convicts threatened the plateau? Had Neb any means by which to warn his
master? And, besides, in what situation were the inhabitants of the corral
themselves? Cyrus Harding and his companions had left on the 11th of
November, and it was now the 29th. It was, therefore, nineteen days since Neb
had had other news than that brought by ‘Top--disastrous news: Ayrton
disappeared, Herbert severely wounded, the engineer, reporter, and sailor, as it
were, imprisoned in the corral!

What was he to do? asked poor Neb. Personally he had nothing to fear, for


the convicts could not reach him in Granite House. But the buildings, the
plantations, all their arrangements at the mercy of the pirates! Would it not be
best to let Cyrus Harding judge of what he ought to do, and to warn him, at least,
of the danger which threatened him?

Neb then thought of employing Jup, and confiding a note to him. He knew
the orang's great intelligence, which had been often put to the proof. Jup
understood the word corral, which had been frequently pronounced before him,
and it may be remembered, too, that he had often driven the cart thither in
company with Pencroft. Day had not yet dawned. The active orang would know
how to pass unperceived through the woods, of which the convicts, besides,
would think he was a native.

Neb did not hesitate. He wrote the note, he tied it to Jup's neck, he brought
the ape to the door of Granite House, from which he let down a long cord to the
ground; then, several times he repeated these words,--

"Jup Jup! corral, corral!"

The creature understood, seized the cord, glided rapidly down the beach, and
disappeared in the darkness without the convicts’ attention having been in the
least excited.

"You did well, Neb," said Harding, "but perhaps in not warning us you would
have done still better!"

And, in speaking thus, Cyrus Harding thought of Herbert, whose recovery
the removal had so seriously checked.

Neb ended his account. The convicts had not appeared at all on the beach.
Not knowing the number of the island's inhabitants, they might suppose that
Granite House was defended by a large party. They must have remembered that
during the attack by the brig numerous shot had been fired both from the lower
and upper rocks, and no doubt they did not wish to expose themselves. But the
plateau of Prospect Heights was open to them, and not covered by the fire of
Granite House. They gave themselves up, therefore, to their instinct of
destruction,--plundering, burning, devastating everything,--and only retiring half
an hour before the arrival of the colonists, whom they believed still confined in
the corral.

On their retreat, Neb hurried out. He climbed the plateau at the risk of being
perceived and fired at, tried to extinguish the fire which was consuming the
buildings of the poultry-yard, and had struggled, though in vain, against it until
the cart appeared at the edge of the wood.

Such had been these serious events. The presence of the convicts constituted
a permanent source of danger to the settlers in Lincoln Island, until then so
happy, and who might now expect still greater misfortunes.


Spilett remained in Granite House with Herbert and Pencroft, while Cyrus
Harding, accompanied by Neb, proceeded to judge for himself of the extent of
the disaster.

It was fortunate that the convicts had not advanced to the foot of Granite
House. The workshop at the Chimneys would in that case not have escaped
destruction. But after all, this evil would have been more easily reparable than
the ruins accumulated on the plateau of Prospect Heights. Harding and Neb
proceeded towards the Mercy, and ascended its left bank without meeting with
any trace of the convicts; nor on the other side of the river, in the depths of the
wood, could they perceive any suspicious indications.

Besides, it might be supposed that in all probability either the convicts knew
of the return of the settlers to Granite House, by having seen them pass on the
road from the corral, or, after the devastation of the plateau, they had penetrated
into Jacamar Wood, following the course of the Mercy, and were thus ignorant of
their return.

In the former case, they must have returned towards the corral, now without
defenders, and which contained valuable stores.

In the latter, they must have regained their encampment, and would wait on
opportunity to recommence the attack.

It was, therefore, possible to prevent them, but any enterprise to clear the
island was now rendered difficult by reason of Herbert's condition. Indeed, their
whole force would have been barely sufficient to cope with the convicts, and just
now no one could leave Granite House.

The engineer and Neb arrived on the plateau. Desolation reigned
everywhere. The fields had been trampled over; the ears of wheat, which were
nearly full-grown, lay on the ground. The other plantations had not suffered less.

The kitchen-garden was destroyed. Happily, Granite House possessed a store
of seed which would enable them to repair these misfortunes.

As to the wall and buildings of the poultry-yard and the onagers stable, the
fire had destroyed all. A few terrified creatures roamed over the plateau. The
birds, which during the fire had taken refuge on the waters of the lake, had
already returned to their accustomed spot, and were dabbling on the banks.
Everything would have to be reconstructed.

Cyrus Harding's face, which was paler than usual, expressed an internal
anger which he commanded with difficulty, but he did not utter a word. Once
more he looked at his devastated fields, and at the smoke which still rose from
the ruins, then he returned to Granite House.

The following days were the saddest of any that the colonists had passed on
the island! Herbert's weakness visibly increased. It appeared that a more serious


malady, the consequence of the profound physiological disturbance he had gone
through, threatened to declare itself, and Gideon Spilett feared such an
aggravation of his condition that he would be powerless to fight against it!

In fact, Herbert remained in an almost continuous state of drowsiness, and
symptoms of delirium began to manifest themselves. Refreshing drinks were the
only remedies at the colonists' disposal. The fever was not as yet very high, but it
soon appeared that it would probably recur at regular intervals. Gideon Spilett
first recognized this on the 6th of December.

The poor boy, whose fingers, nose, and ears had become extremely pale, was
at first seized with slight shiverings, horripilations, and tremblings. His pulse
was weak and irregular, his skin dry, his thirst intense. To this soon succeeded a
hot fit; his face became flushed; his skin reddened; his pulse quick; then a
profuse perspiration broke out after which the fever seemed to diminish. The
attack had lasted nearly five hours.

Gideon Spilett had not left Herbert, who, it was only too certain, was now
seized by an intermittent fever, and this fever must be cured at any cost before it
should assume a more serious aspect.

"And in order to cure it," said Spilett to Cyrus Harding, "we need a
febrifuge."

"A febrifuge--" answered the engineer. "We have neither Peruvian bark, nor
sulphate of quinine."

"No," said Gideon Spilett, "but there are willows on the border of the lake,
and the bark of the willow might, perhaps, prove to be a substitute for quinine."

"Let us try it without losing a moment," replied Cyrus Harding.

The bark of the willow has, indeed, been justly considered as a succedaneum
for Peruvian bark, as has also that of the horse-chestnut tree, the leaf of the holly,
the snake-root, etc. It was evidently necessary to make trial of this substance,
although not so valuable as Peruvian bark, and to employ it in its natural state,
since they had no means for extracting its essence.

Cyrus Harding went himself to cut from the trunk of a species of black
willow, a few pieces of bark; he brought them back to Granite House, and
reduced them to a powder, which was administered that same evening to
Herbert.

The night passed without any important change. Herbert was somewhat
delirious, but the fever did not reappear in the night, and did not return either
during the following day.

Pencroft again began to hope. Gideon Spilett said nothing. It might be that
the fever was not quotidian, but tertian, and that it would return next day.
Therefore, he awaited the next day with the greatest anxiety.


It might have been remarked besides that during this period Herbert
remained utterly prostrate, his head weak and giddy. Another symptom alarmed
the reporter to the highest degree. Herbert's liver became congested, and soon a
more intense delirium showed that his brain was also affected.

Gideon Spilett was overwhelmed by this new complication. He took the
engineer aside.

"It is a malignant fever," said he.

"A malignant fever!" cried Harding. "You are mistaken, Spilett. A malignant
fever does not declare itself spontaneously; its germ must previously have
existed."

"IT am not mistaken," replied the reporter. "Herbert no doubt contracted the
germ of this fever in the marshes of the island. He has already had one attack;
should a second come on and should we not be able to prevent a third, he is
lost."

"But the willow bark?"

"That is insufficient," answered the reporter, "and the third attack of a
malignant fever, which is not arrested by means of quinine, is always fatal."

Fortunately, Pencroft heard nothing of this conversation or he would have
gone mad.

It may be imagined what anxiety the engineer and the reporter suffered
during the day of the 7th of December and the following night.

Towards the middle of the day the second attack came on. The crisis was
terrible. Herbert felt himself sinking. He stretched his arms towards Cyrus
Harding, towards Spilett, towards Pencroft. He was so young to die! The scene
was heart-rending. They were obliged to send Pencroft away.

The fit lasted five hours. It was evident that Herbert could not survive a third.

The night was frightful. In his delirium Herbert uttered words which went to
the hearts of his companions. He struggled with the convicts, he called to
Ayrton, he poured forth entreaties to that mysterious being,--that powerful
unknown protector,--whose image was stamped upon his mind; then he again fell
into a deep exhaustion which completely prostrated him. Several times Gideon
Spilett thought that the poor boy was dead.

The next day, the 8th of December, was but a succession of the fainting fits.
Herbert's thin hands clutched the sheets. They had administered further doses of
pounded bark, but the reporter expected no result from it.

"If before tomorrow morning we have not given him a more energetic
febrifuge," said the reporter, "Herbert will be dead."

Night arrived--the last night, it was too much to be feared, of the good,
brave, intelligent boy, so far in advance of his years, and who was loved by all as


their own child. The only remedy which existed against this terrible malignant
fever, the only specific which could overcome it, was not to be found in Lincoln
Island.

During the night of the 8th of December, Herbert was seized by a more
violent delirium. His liver was fearfully congested, his brain affected, and
already it was impossible for him to recognize any one.

Would he live until the next day, until that third attack which must infallibly
carry him off? It was not probable. His strength was exhausted, and in the
intervals of fever he lay as one dead.

Towards three o'clock in the morning Herbert uttered a piercing cry. He
seemed to be torn by a supreme convulsion. Neb, who was near him, terrified,
ran into the next room where his companions were watching.

Top, at that moment, barked in a strange manner.

All rushed in immediately and managed to restrain the dying boy, who was
endeavoring to throw himself out of his bed, while Spilett, taking his arm, felt
his pulse gradually quicken.

It was five in the morning. The rays of the rising sun began to shine in at the
windows of Granite House. It promised to be a fine day, and this day was to be
poor Herbert's last!

A ray glanced on the table placed near the bed.

Suddenly Pencroft, uttering a cry, pointed to the table.

On it lay a little oblong box, of which the cover bore these words:--
"SULPHATE OF QUININE."


Chapter 11


Gideon Spilett took the box and opened it. It contained nearly two hundred
grains of a white powder, a few particles of which he carried to his lips. The
extreme bitterness of the substance precluded all doubt; it was certainly the
precious extract of quinine, that pre-eminent antifebrile.

This powder must be administered to Herbert without delay. How it came
there might be discussed later.

"Some coffee!" said Spilett.

In a few moments Neb brought a cup of the warm infusion. Gideon Spilett
threw into it about eighteen grains of quinine, and they succeeded in making
Herbert drink the mixture.

There was still time, for the third attack of the malignant fever had not yet
shown itself. How they longed to be able to add that it would not return!

Besides, it must be remarked, the hopes of all had now revived. The
mysterious influence had been again exerted, and in a critical moment, when
they had despaired of it.

In a few hours Herbert was much calmer. The colonists could now discuss
this incident. The intervention of the stranger was more evident than ever. But
how had he been able to penetrate during the night into Granite House? It was
inexplicable, and, in truth, the proceedings of the genius of the island were not
less mysterious than was that genius himself. During this day the sulphate of
quinine was administered to Herbert every three hours.

The next day some improvement in Herbert's condition was apparent.
Certainly, he was not out of danger, intermittent fevers being subject to frequent
and dangerous relapses, but the most assiduous care was bestowed on him. And
besides, the specific was at hand; nor, doubtless, was he who had brought it far
distant! And the hearts of all were animated by returning hope.

This hope was not disappointed. Ten days after, on the 20th of December,
Herbert's convalescence commenced.

He was still weak, and strict diet had been imposed upon him, but no access
of fever supervened. And then, the poor boy submitted with such docility to all
the prescriptions ordered him! He longed so to get well!

Pencroft was as a man who has been drawn up from the bottom of an abyss.
Fits of joy approaching delirium seized him. When the time for the third attack
had passed by, he nearly suffocated the reporter in his embrace. Since then, he
always called him Dr. Spilett.


The real doctor, however, remained undiscovered.

"We will find him!" repeated the sailor.

Certainly, this man, whoever he was, might expect a somewhat too energetic
embrace from the worthy Pencroft!

The month of December ended, and with it the year 1867, during which the
colonists of Lincoln Island had of late been so severely tried. They commenced
the year 1868 with magnificent weather, great heat, and a tropical temperature,
delightfully cooled by the sea-breeze. Herbert's recovery progressed, and from
his bed, placed near one of the windows of Granite House, he could inhale the
fresh air, charged with ozone, which could not fail to restore his health. His
appetite returned, and what numberless delicate, savory little dishes Neb
prepared for him!

"It is enough to make one wish to have a fever oneself!" said Pencroft.

During all this time, the convicts did not once appear in the vicinity of
Granite House. There was no news of Ayrton, and though the engineer and
Herbert still had some hopes of finding him again, their companions did not
doubt but that the unfortunate man had perished. However, this uncertainty could
not last, and when once the lad should have recovered, the expedition, the result
of which must be so important, would be undertaken. But they would have to
wait a month, perhaps, for all the strength of the colony must be put into
requisition to obtain satisfaction from the convicts.

However, Herbert's convalescence progressed rapidly. The congestion of the
liver had disappeared, and his wounds might be considered completely healed.

During the month of January, important work was done on the plateau of
Prospect Heights; but it consisted solely in saving as much as was possible from
the devastated crops, either of corn or vegetables. The grain and the plants were
gathered, so as to provide a new harvest for the approaching half-season. With
regard to rebuilding the poultry-yard, wall, or stables, Cyrus Harding preferred
to wait. While he and his companions were in pursuit of the convicts, the latter
might very probably pay another visit to the plateau, and it would be useless to
give them an opportunity of recommencing their work of destruction. When the
island should be cleared of these miscreants, they would set about rebuilding.
The young convalescent began to get up in the second week of January, at first
for one hour a day, then two, then three. His strength visibly returned, so
vigorous was his constitution. He was now eighteen years of age. He was tall,
and promised to become a man of noble and commanding presence. From this
time his recovery, while still requiring care,--and Dr. Spilett was very strict,--
made rapid progress. Towards the end of the month, Herbert was already
walking about on Prospect Heights, and the beach.


He derived, from several sea-baths, which he took in company with Pencroft
and Neb, the greatest possible benefit. Cyrus Harding thought he might now
settle the day for their departure, for which the 15th of February was fixed. The
nights, very clear at this time of year, would be favorable to the researches they
intended to make all over the island.

The necessary preparations for this exploration were now commenced, and
were important, for the colonists had sworn not to return to Granite House until
their twofold object had been achieved; on the one hand, to exterminate the
convicts, and rescue Ayrton, if he was still living; on the other, to discover who it
was that presided so effectually over the fortunes of the colony.

Of Lincoln Island, the settlers knew thoroughly all the eastern coast from
Claw Cape to the Mandible Capes, the extensive Tadorn Marsh, the
neighborhood of Lake Grant, Jacamar Wood, between the road to the corral and
the Mercy, the courses of the Mercy and Red Creek, and lastly, the spurs of
Mount Franklin, among which the corral had been established.

They had explored, though only in an imperfect manner, the vast shore of
Washington Bay from Claw Cape to Reptile End, the woody and marshy border
of the west coast, and the interminable downs, ending at the open mouth of
Shark Gulf. But they had in no way surveyed the woods which covered the
Serpentine Peninsula, all to the right of the Mercy, the left bank of Falls River,
and the wilderness of spurs and valleys which supported three quarters of the
base of Mount Franklin, to the east, the north, and the west, and where doubtless
many secret retreats existed. Consequently, many millions of acres of the island
had still escaped their investigations.

It was, therefore, decided that the expedition should be carried through the
Far West, so as to include all that region situated on the right of the Mercy.

It might, perhaps, be better worth while to go direct to the corral, where it
might be supposed that the convicts had again taken refuge, either to pillage or
to establish themselves there. But either the devastation of the corral would have
been an accomplished fact by this time, and it would be too late to prevent it, or
it had been the convicts' interest to entrench themselves there, and there would
be still time to go and turn them out on their return.

Therefore, after some discussion, the first plan was adhered to, and the
settlers resolved to proceed through the wood to Reptile End. They would make
their way with their hatchets, and thus lay the first draft of a road which would
place Granite House in communication with the end of the peninsula for a length
of from sixteen to seventeen miles.

The cart was in good condition. The onagers, well rested, could go a long
journey. Provisions, camp effects, a portable stove, and various utensils were


packed in the cart, as also weapons and ammunition, carefully chosen from the
now complete arsenal of Granite House. But it was necessary to remember that
the convicts were, perhaps, roaming about the woods, and that in the midst of
these thick forests a shot might quickly be fired and received. It was therefore
resolved that the little band of settlers should remain together and not separate
under any pretext whatever.

It was also decided that no one should remain at Granite House. Top and Jup
themselves were to accompany the expedition; the inaccessible dwelling needed
no guard. The 14th of February, eve of the departure, was consecrated entirely to
repose, and--thanksgiving addressed by the colonists to the Creator. A place in
the cart was reserved for Herbert, who, though thoroughly convalescent, was still
a little weak. The next moming, at daybreak, Cyrus Harding took the necessary
measures to protect Granite House from any invasion. The ladders, which were
formerly used for the ascent, were brought to the Chimneys and buried deep in
the sand, so that they might be available on the return of the colonists, for the
machinery of the lift had been taken to pieces, and nothing of the apparatus
remained. Pencroft stayed the last in Granite House in order to finish this work,
and he then lowered himself down by means of a double rope held below, and
which, when once hauled down, left no communication between the upper
landing and the beach.

The weather was magnificent.

"We shall have a warm day of it," said the reporter, laughing.

"Pooh! Dr. Spilett," answered Pencroft, "we shall walk under the shade of the
trees and shan't even see the sun!"

"Forward!" said the engineer.

The cart was waiting on the beach before the Chimneys. The reporter made
Herbert take his place in it during the first hours at least of the journey, and the
lad was obliged to submit to his doctor's orders.

Neb placed himself at the onagers' heads. Cyrus Harding, the reporter, and
the sailor, walked in front. Top bounded joyfully along. Herbert offered a seat in
his vehicle to Jup, who accepted it without ceremony. The moment for departure
had arrived, and the little band set out.

The cart first turned the angle of the mouth of the Mercy, then, having
ascended the left bank for a mile, crossed the bridge, at the other side of which
commenced the road to Port Balloon, and there the explorers, leaving this road
on their left, entered the cover of the immense woods which formed the region
of the Far West.

For the first two miles the widely scattered trees allowed the cart to pass with
ease; from time to time it became necessary to cut away a few creepers and


bushes, but no serious obstacle impeded the progress of the colonists.

The thick foliage of the trees threw a grateful shade on the ground. Deodars,
Douglas firs, casuarinas, banksias, gum-trees, dragon-trees, and other well-
known species, succeeded each other far as the eye could reach. The feathered
tribes of the island were all represented--grouse, jacamars, pheasants, lories, as
well as the chattering cockatoos, parrots, and paroquets. Agouties, kangaroos,
and capybaras fled swiftly at their approach; and all this reminded the settlers of
the first excursions they had made on their arrival at the island.

"Nevertheless," observed Cyrus Harding, "I notice that these creatures, both
birds and quadrupeds, are more timid than formerly. These woods have,
therefore, been recently traversed by the convicts, and we shall certainly find
